[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Esoteric](../../index.md) 
[Eliphas Levi](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phs10.md) 
[Next](phs12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

# Synthetic Recapitulation

## MAGIC AND MAGISM

THE name of magic, after having been so dreaded and so execrated in the
Middle Ages, has become in our days almost ridiculous. A man who
seriously occupies himself with Magic will hardly pass as a reasonable
being unless set down as a physician and a quack. Credulous folks
suppose that all magicians are workers of wonders, and being moreover
convinced that only the Saints of their Communion have the right to
perform miracles, attribute the ideas and phenomena of magic to the
influence of the Devil or evil Spirits. For our part we believe that the
miracles of the Saints, and those which are attributed to demons, are
alike the natural results of causes which are abnormally brought into
action. Nature never disturbs herself; her standing miracle is immutable
and eternal order.

*Moreover Magic must not be confounded with Magism. Magic is an occult
force, and Magism is a doctrine which changes this force into a Power .
A Magician without Magism is only a Sorcerer*. A magist without magic
*is only one who* KNOWS. The author of this work is a magist who does
not practise

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

magic; <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81.md) he is a man of study and not
a man of phenomena. <span id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82.md) He does not
claim to be either a

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

magician or a mage, and he can only shrug his shoulders when he is taken
for a sorcerer. He has studied the Kabala and the magical doctrines of
the ancient sanctuaries; he feels that he understands them, and he
sincerely believes in and admires them; to him they are the noblest and
the truest Science that the world possesses, and he deeply regrets that
they are so little known. For this it is that he seeks to make them
better known, taking only the title of Professor of the Highest Science.
The Science of Magism is contained in the books of the Kabala, in the
Symbols of Egypt and of India, <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83.md) in
the books of

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Hermes Trismegistus, in the oracles of
Zoroaster, and in the writings of some great men of the Middle Ages,
like Dante, Paracelsus, Trithemus, William Postel, Pomponaceus, Robert
Fludd, etc.

The works of Magic are divination or prescience, Thaumaturgy or the use
of exceptional powers, and Theurgy or rule over visions and spirits.

One may divine or predict, either by observations and the inductions of
wisdom, or by the intuitions of ecstasy or sleep, or by calculations of
Science, or by the visions of enthusiasm, which is a species of
intoxication. Indeed Paracelsus calls it "*ebriecatum*" or a species of
ebriety. The states which are connected with somnambulism, exaltation,
hallucination, intoxication whether by alcohol or drugs, in a word with
all classes of artificial or accidental insanity in which the
phosphorescence of the brain is increased or over-excited, are dangerous
and contrary to nature, and it is wrong to attempt to produce them,
because they derange the nervous equilibrium, and lead almost infallibly
to frenzy, catalepsy and madness.

Divination and prediction by mere sagacity demand a profound knowledge
of the laws of Nature, a constant observation of phenomena and their
correlation, the discernment of Spirits by the science of signs, the
exact nature of analogies, and the calculation, be it integral or
differential, of chances and probabilities. It is useful to divine and
foresee, but we must not allow ourselves to divine or to mix ourselves
up in predictions. A prophet

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

interested in a matter is always a false prophet, because desire
deranges sagacity; a prophet disinterested, that is to say a true
prophet, always makes himself enemies, because there is always in this
world more evil than good to predict; the occult sciences should always
be kept hidden; the Initiate who speaks, profanes; *and he who knows not
how to keep silence, knows nothing*. <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84.md)

Noah foresaw the Deluge but took good care not to predict it. He held
his tongue and built his ark. Joseph foresaw the seven years of famine
and made his arrangements which secured to the king and priests all the
wealth of Egypt. Jonah foretold the destruction of Nineveh, and fled in
despair because his prediction was not accomplished. The early
Christians predicted the burning of Rome, and Nero with some appearance
of Justice accused them of having set it on fire. The Sorcerers of
Macbeth drove him to regicide, by telling him that he would be a king.
Prophecy seems to attract evil and often

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

provokes crime. The Jews believed that the glory of God was involved in
the eternal preservation of their Temple; to predict the destruction of
this edifice was blasphemous. Jesus dared to do this, and the Jews, who
but the day before had spread their garments beneath his feet and decked
his path with branches and palms, cried all with one voice, "Let him be
crucified!" But it was not for them that the Saviour had made this
prediction, but for the small circle of his apostles and faithful
followers; unfortunately it became public and served as a pretext for
the judicial murder of the best and most divine of men. <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md)

If we can predict exactly and certainly when eclipses are to occur and
comets to return, why should we not be able to predict the periods of
the greatnesses and decadences of empires? Being given the nature of a
germ, do we not know what kind of tree it will produce? Knowing the
motor, the impact and the obstacle, can we not determine the duration
and extent of the movement? Read the book, entitled *Prognosticatio
eximii docti Theophrasti Paracelsi*, and you will be astounded at the
matters that this great man was able to foresee by combining the
calculations of Science with the intuitions of a marvellous sagacity!

One may predict with certainty by help of the calculations of science,
and with *un*certainty by help

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

of a sensitively impressionable nature, or magnetic intuition.

It is the same with miracles; these are astounding phenomena because
they are abnormal and are produced in accordance with certain natural
laws as yet unknown. When electricity was still a mystery for the
multitude, electrical phenomena were miracles. Magnetic phenomena
astonish at the present day the adepts of spiritism, because science has
not yet officially recognised and determined the forces of human
magnetism, which is distinct, according to our view, from animal
magnetism. It is not yet known to what extent the imagination and will
of man are powers. It is evident that in certain cases nature obeys
them: the sick suddenly recover health, inert objects change their
position without any apparent motive force, visible and palpable forms
are produced; *the cause of all this is God for one set, the Devil for
the other, and no one reflects that God is too great to condescend to
conjuring tricks, and that the Devil, if he exists, as portrayed in
legends, would be too intelligent and too proud to consent to be made
ridiculous*.

All exclusive religions rely on miracles, and each attributes to the
Devil the miracles of its opposing Faith. In this latter they are all to
a certain extent right. The Devil is ignorance, the demons are false
Gods. Now all false *Gods* perform miracles, the true God works only
one, which is that of the eternal Order.

The miracles of the Gospel are the wondrous operations of the Divine
Spirit, related in an enigmatical style, as is the custom of the
ancients and of

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Orientals especially. That spirit changes water
into wine, *that is to say indifference into love*; it walks on the
waters, and with a word stills tempests; it opens the eyes of the blind
and the ears of the deaf; it makes the dumb to speak, and the paralytic
to walk. *It resuscitates humanity buried for four days* (*that is for
four thousand years*); it shows it in its putrefaction like Lazarus, and
ordains that it be released from its bonds and from its shroud. Such are
the true miracles of Christ, but if they ask him for prodigies, be
replies, "An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign and
there shall no sign be given to it, but that of the prophet Jonas." Here
the Master gives us to understand that the miracles of the Bible are
also allegories. Jonas issuing alive from the fish that has swallowed
him is humanity which regenerates itself. Jesus gave to the Jews as
incontestable miracles the holiness of his doctrine and the example of
his virtues.

Jesus may certainly have healed the sick; since Vespasian, Apollonius,
Gassner, Mesmer, and the Zouave Jacob have also healed the sick; sick
people too may have been healed at Lourdes, as at the tomb of the deacon
Paris; but such cures are not miracles, they are the natural results of
a certain exaltation in Faith. Jesus Christ said so himself. "Can you
cure me?" asked a certain sick person; "If thou canst believe," said the
Master, "all things are possible to him that believeth."

Faith produces certain apparent miracles, and credulity exaggerates
them. When Jesus said that all

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

was possible to Faith, he did not mean by this to say that the
impossible could ever become the possible.

The impossible is that which is absolutely contrary to the immutable
laws of nature, and to the eternal Reason. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86.md)

Every man is a magnetic focus, which attracts and radiates. That
attraction and that projection are what are called in magic the
inspiration and respiration. The good inspire and respire good, the
wicked attract and respire evil; the good may heal the body, because
they make the souls better, the wicked do harm both to souls and bodies.
Often the wicked attract good to corrupt it, and the good attract evil
to change it into good. Thus it is that at times the wicked seem to
prosper, whilst the good are victims of their own virtues; but they
grossly deceive themselves who fancy that Tiberius at Capri was happier
than Mary at the foot of the cross of her son. What pleasure
nevertheless was wanting to Tiberius, what suffering to Mary? And yet
how happy a mother, <span id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87.md) how miserable an
Emperor!

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

Honey changes to gall <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88.md) in the mouths
of the wicked and gall into honey in the mouths of the just. The
innocent man, sacrificed, is deified by his punishment; the guilty man,
triumphant, is branded and burnt by his diadem.

Let us now touch the dangerous and darkness-shrouded coasts of magic,
the intercourse with the other world, the contact with the invisibles,
Theurgy and the evocation of spirits.

Everything proves to us that there exist other intelligent beings than
man. The Hierarchy of spirits must be infinite as that of bodies. The
mysterious ladder of Jacob is the Biblical Symbol of this Hierarchy
ascending and descending. God rests upon that ladder or rather he
sustains it. We may say that that ladder is in him, or rather that it is
He, Himself, for it is as a God, and to manifest God, that the Infinite
ascends and descends.

At each rundle the Spirit which rises is equal to the one that descends,
and can take his hand; but he still must needs follow him who ascends in
front of him. This is a law which those who make evocations should
seriously meditate.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

To ascend eternally is the hope of the blessed; to descend eternally is
the threat that weighs upon the reprobated.

*Men invoke superior spirits, but they can only evoke inferior spirits.*

*Superior spirits whom men invoke attract them upwards; inferior spirits
whom men evoke draw them downwards*. <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md)

Invocation is prayer, evocation is sacrilege, except when it is a very
dangerous devotion.

But the rash mortals who plunge into evocations have no thoughts of
making the spirit whom they call ascend with them; they want to lean on
it to rise by, and must necessarily lose their balance in leaning on
what is descending.

The spirit which descends is as a load to him who would raise it, and it
necessarily drags down him who abandons himself to it! To renounce the
reason to follow the inspirations of a phantom, this is to plunge into
the abyss of madness.

The great epoch of Theurgy was that of the fall of the ancient Gods.
Maximus of Ephesus invoked them before Julian, because men had ceased to
invoke them; they had sunk below even the reason of the common people;
also to Julian they appeared thin, poor, and decrepit. Julian,
fanaticised by the magic of the past, wished to take these infirm
immortals on his back, as Æneas saved his father from the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

conflagration of Troy, and the arrogant philosopher fell under the
burthen of his Gods.

*We cannot see the Gods without dying. This is one of the most
formidable axioms of ancient Theurgy, for the Gods are the immortals; to
see them we must Pass out of our Plane into theirs and enter into
incorporeal life, and if this be Possible without dying, it is only so
in an imaginary or fictitious manner, or by an illusion resembling that
of dreams*. We must conclude that every apparition which we survive can
only be a dream; when a vision of the other world is real, either the
seer dies, or rather is already dead when he sees it. <span
id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md) This which we

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

write has assuredly no sense for the learned materialists who do not
believe in another life, but these are compelled, in defiance of all
evidence, to deny the phenomena of magnetism and spiritism; and cannot,
therefore, be sincere-the true savants are those who believe.

The danger lies in believing without knowing; for then one believes in
the absurd, that is to say in the impossible. The old French language
had a word to express rash belief; it was the verb *cuyder*, whence is
derived our word *outrecuidance*, which signifies a ridiculous and
presumptuous confidence.

Theurgy is a dream pushed to the most terrifying realism in a man who
believes himself awake. It is attained by weakening and exciting the
brain, by fasts, meditations and watching. Asceticism is the father of
nightmares and the creator of demons, the most grotesque and deformed.
Paracelsus thought

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

that real Larvæ <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91.md) might be engendered
by the nocturnal illusions of celibates. The ancients believed in the
existence of *daimones*, a race of malicious genii who floated about in
the atmosphere. St. Paul seems to admit these when he talks of the
powers of the air against whom we have to fight; the Kabalists peopled
the four elements, and named their inhabitants Sylphs, Undines, Gnomes
and Salamanders. Young, hysterically disposed virgins in the middle ages
used to see White Ladies appear near springs; in those days they called
such phantoms fairies; nowadays when the same phenomena repeat
themselves, people are persuaded that the Virgin has shown herself on
earth, and they found churches and organise pilgrimages, which still
bring in a great deal of money despite the decline of Faith. We must not
insist in matters of Religion on enlightening the multitude too
soon. <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92.md) There are people who could no

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

longer believe in God if they ceased to believe in our Lady of Lourdes.
Let us leave the consolation of the dream to those who do not yet know
bow to apply the remedy of reason to their ills. Illusions are better
than despair; it is better to do good through a misconception than to do
evil through the weakness of a rebellious reason and anæmia of the
conscience.

Moses, in causing the construction of the Ark of Alliance, made a
concession to the idolatry of the Jewish populace, and the golden calves
of Samaria were later only counterfeits of the Keroubim of the ark;
these Keroubim or Cherubim were two-headed Sphinxes; there were two
Cherubim and four heads, one of a child, the other of a bull, the third
of a lion and the fourth of an eagle. It was a reminiscence of the Gods
of the Egyptians, Horus, Apis, Celurus, and Hermomphta; symbols of the
four elements <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93.md) and signs of the four
cardinal points of the heaven they served as emblems of the four
cardinal virtues--prudence, temperance, strength and justice. These four
hieroglyphic figures have remained in the Christian Symbology and they
have been made the insignia of the four evangelists.

The Catholic Church has condemned the breakers of images, and yet well
knew that images are but idols; the word idol in Greek signifies nothing
else but an image, and the pagans no more believed that a statue of
Jupiter was Jupiter, than we believe that an image

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

of the Virgin is the Virgin in person. *They* believed, as *we* do, in a
possible manifestation of the divinity through such images; they had
like ourselves statues that wept, that rolled their eyes, and sang at
sunrise; we have, like them, our mythology, and the *Golden Legend*
might form a sequel to the *Metamorphoses* of Ovid. Nothing destroys
itself in the universal Revelation, but everything transforms and
continues itself; *the manifestation of God produces itself in the human
genius by successive approximations and by progressive changes. God is
always the ideal of human perfection, which grows in grandeur as man
raises himself*. God did not speak once, to hold his peace ever after.
He speaks, as he creates, always.

Torquemada and Fénélon were both Christians and Catholics, and yet the
God of Fénélon resembles in nothing the God of Torquemada. St. Frances
of Sales and Father Garassus do not speak of God in at all the same
manner, and the Catholicism of Monsignor Dupanloup hardly bears any
likeness to that of Louis Venillot.

The Protestants have levelled everything. They have denied all they
could not understand, and they hardly understand what they affirm, but
Revelation does not retreat; she is not impoverished, but adds always
something to the mysterious riches of her dogma; the Rabbis, to throw
light on the obscurities of the Bible, redouble the darkness in the
Talmud, and the Christian ages have given, as a sequel to and
commentaries on the incredible accounts of the Gospels, the impossible
Legends of the Lives of the

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Saints. To those who deny the infallibility of
the Church, we reply with the infallibility of the Pope. Always the
enigma is made more complicated to prevent fools from guessing it, for
all Dogma is a philosophical enigma.

TRINITY, or the three in one, signifies UNITY. INCARNATION, or God made
man, that signifies HUMANITY. REDEMPTION, or all lost through one and
saved by one, that indicates our mutual interdependence, the SOLIDARITY
of the race.

UNITY, HUMANITY, SOLIDARITY, this will be the Trilogy of the future;
pacific solution of the Revolutionary problem LIBERTY, EQUALITY,
FRATERNITY.

Truly it is Social Unity alone that can guarantee the liberty of nations
by creating Universal Right; it is before Humanity alone and not before
Nature that men are equal; and it is the mutual interdependence or
solidarity which alone proves fraternity. But how many ages must elapse
before these Truths, simple as they are, will be understood?

Catholicism is official occultism and rests entirely upon mystery. The
secret of the sanctuaries has been profaned, but has not been explained.

Œdipus thought to kill the Sphinx, and the plague fell upon Thebes. His
hostile brothers still fight and slay each other once more. The grand
Symbols of the Past are the prophecies of the Future; mysteries and
miracles, such must be the Religion for the masses whom it is essential
to make feel keenly what they do not understand, so that they may permit
themselves to be led. This is the secret of the sanctuary, and the

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

magists of all times have understood it. The weak can only remain united
under the surveillance and responsibility of the strong; the strong
emancipate themselves. If there had never been shepherds, there would
have been no tame sheep; if dogs were free, that is to say wild, they
would have to be hunted like wolves: and truly, the vulgar are either
wolves or sheep; it is servitude alone that saves them.

The great secret of Freemasonry is nothing else than the science of
nature. It has long since been divulged, but people still swear to
preserve it eternally, thus rendering homage to the eternal principle of
occultism.

The true Initiates are shepherds and conquerors, they raise the sheep
and conquer the wolves; this was, in the beginning, the sublime mission
of the Church, but in this sheepfold of the Lord, the wolves have become
shepherds and the flocks have fled away.

The true Church must be one, and not divided into numerous sects; it
must be holy, and not hypocritical or greedy; it must be universal, and
not restricted to a privileged circle that repels almost the whole of
Humanity. In a word it must attach itself to a common centre, which in
the Roman world was Rome,. but which is no more irrevocably Rome than
Jerusalem. "The wind bloweth where it listeth," said the Master, and so
is every one that is born of the Spirit. " . . . wheresoever the body
is, thither will the eagles be gathered together."

The Catholic Church ought to be the House Mother of universal
indulgence. She does not

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

tolerate merely, she absolves; she ought to excommunicate religious
hatreds and bless even her children who have strayed. It is through the
Catholic faith that all sincere believers, no matter what creed they
profess, belong to the soul of the Church, provided they practise
natural morality and seek the truth in sincerity of heart. Let only a
Pope appear who will loudly proclaim these consolatory truths, and
invite all the nations of the earth to an universal jubilee, and a new
era will dawn for the Christian Religion.

Glory to God in all that is great, and peace and good will to men on
Earth! It was by this cry of universal love that the genius of the
Gospels, announced in old days the birth of the Saviour of the world.

The Official Church represents the Occult Church as the castes of
society represent the natural Hierarchy; the Priests, the Nobility and
the People represent the men of devotion, the men who are superior in
intelligence and the men who are inferior.

The true priests of Humanity are the sincere philanthropists; the true
kings are the men of genius; the true nobles, the men of intelligence
and lofty sentiments; the common mass is the great flock of the
voluntarily ignorant and poltroons. A simple soldier faithful to his
flag is surely greater than a Marshal of France who betrays his country.

An honest rag-picker is more noble than a vicious prince; eminent men in
all departments have risen from the people, and kings and queens have
been seen dragging themselves through the mire. Every

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

intelligent and virtuous man may deserve admission to the highest
initiation; the profane are only fools or knaves.

The initiate is a man of no party; he desires only unity, mutual
indulgence and peace. He has no opinions, for truth is not an opinion;
for him all hostilities are errors, and all curses, crimes.

Before the abuses of the Romish Church, protestation is a right and
consequently a truth; but Protestantism is a sect, and therefore a
falsehood. Catholicity, that is to say Universality, is the character of
true religion, it is therefore a truth, but Catholicism is a *party* and
consequently a falsehood. When abuses have ceased, protestation will no
longer have any reason to exist, and when Catholicity shall have been
established throughout the world, there will he no more Catholicism at
Rome.

In the meantime, as one cannot live respectably <span
id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94.md) without religion, and as it is impossible
and absurd to stand alone in religion, since the very word religion
signifies a thing that binds men to one another, <span
id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95.md) each can and ought to follow the usages
and rights of the communion in which he was born. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[3](#fn_96.md) All religions

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

have a respectable side and a defective side. Let us no more break each
other's Idols, but let us lead all men gently out of Idolatry. One must
learn to endure patiently in Catholic Churches the noise of the
ceremonial, and of the halberd of the Swiss, to weary oneself in all
gravity and respect in the Protestant temples, to keep serious in the
Synagogue and the Mosque despite the muffled heads of the Rabbis and the
contortions of the Dervishes. All this must have its time.

*One* religion passes away, but *Religion* remains one man dies, but
humanity dies not; one woman ceases to love or be lovable, but woman is
ever worthy of respect and love; one rose fades all too soon, but the
rose is an imperishable flower, and blooms anew in every spring. Let us
make use of Religions for the sake of Religion, love men for the sake of
humanity, and women for the love of woman; let us seek the rose amidst
the roses, and we shall never find deception or despair.

But because we are men, we must not insist on the children being men. We
must not beat them because

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

they fall, nor use them harshly because they do not understand things
that are above their age. We must not rob them of their Punches and
their dolls; they adore them; later they will break them; mamma will
give them others, and papa will have nothing to say.

The Sacred Books of all nations in all times have been collections of
fables; they are the books and pictures made for the instruction of
children.

They are generally collective works resuming all the knowledge and all
the highest aspirations of one people and one epoch. They are sacred as
monuments should be, and worthy of respect, as is the memory of
ancestors. The Divine Spirit has assuredly inspired them, but inspired
them to men and not to Gods.

*They reveal God, as the tree which grows reveals the seed planted in
the earth, or as the rising dough reveals the hidden leaven*. This
double comparison is borrowed from Jesus Christ Himself.

We have said that the absurdities of Dogma are enigmatic; they are even
more systematic. The great Initiates of the Ancient World never
explained their symbols except by obscure symbols. God wills to be
divined, because divination is divine, as the word itself sufficiently
indicates. The riddle of the Sphinx is the trial of all Neophytes, and
the three-headed dog watches always at the portals of the crypt of the
mysteries. In Religion, to explain is to profane; to make more obscure
is to reveal.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

Science and Religion are as the day and night. If reason be the sun,
faith is the moon. <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97.md) In the absence of
the Sun, the Moon is the sovereign of the heavens. Let us, however, not
forget that it is from the Sun that she borrows all her rays, and that
true Faith can never be absurd except in seeming.

Science, has not she too her mysteries? Escape if you can out of the
labyrinth of the Infinite. Do indivisible molecules really exist?
Endeavour to conceive substance without extension. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_98.md) If on the contrary matter is infinitely
divisible, one grain of dust may, in the infinity of time, by the
infinite number of its parts, equal the infinity of space. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[3](#fn_99.md) Absurdities on all sides! Ask Marphurius;
he desires to explain that the polychronic evolution of analytical
concepts, in the Relative, is equal to the isochronism

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

of the synthetical concept in the Absolute, and he thence concludes that
the synchretism of the Abstract is analogous to the synchretism of the
Concrete.--*Cabricias arciturane*!

The mysteries of faith are borrowed for the most part from the mysteries
of science; for instance, is not light *one*, in three rays of different
colours? In its triplicity it is blue, yellow and red, in its unity it
is white. This Trinity gives seven shades of colour; here we have the
sacred septenary. <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md) Light produces

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

As regards the little problem which E. O. invites Western Mathematicians
to explain, it is simple enough. There is no mystery in it; it is a
necessary consequence of the hypotheses involved in the

premises. First the hypothesis involved in the description, to speak
mathematically, of the figure we call a circle, the equality of all
*radii*, and second the hypothesis that we are to use only equal
circles. The proof is too long to insert, but it all proceeds from the
known geometrical facts that where two circles touch, the line joining
their centres passes through the point of contact; that where three
circles touch the three lines joning their centres compose an
equilateral and equiangular triangle; that the interior angles of a
triangle are collectively equal to one-half of the angular extension
round a point, and that each angle of an equilateral triangle is equal
to one-sixth of this, and that consequently, only six such triangles,
exactly this number and no more, can radiate from any point; that though
the first belt may look circular, the second and succeeding ones cannot
be constructed according to the terms of the problem except as hexagons,
when again the properties (also the result of the hypothesis of
construction) of the equilateral triangle come into play, and thus it is
perfectly easy to demonstrate, that, not as a matter of mystery, but as
a result following necessarily on the adopted premises, if there be *n*
belts, then the *n*’th must contain six *n* discs or circles.

It seems useless to argue with Eastern adepts--from the time of the
Gymnosophists, who taught Pythagoras, they have always, verbally at any
rate, confounded things and their symbols. There is <span
id="page_125">p. 125</span> nothing *sacred* in the *number* seven; it
is a *memoria technica* of hidden combinations, etc., which
combinations, etc., are or may be held to be sacred, but as for the
symbol *7*, or the word *seven*, there is nothing *sacred* in either,
the sanctity, if any, pertains to the mysteries they recall, and in no
way to the symbol or word. Had our language called 6+1, *pig*, or
used--as the symbol for this, then *pig* and--would have been as
*sacred* as *seven* and *7*.

On the other hand to those who ridicule and reject the facts of the
occultists on the ground that according to them the universe is built up
upon one numerical system, and that everything is in sevens or threes,
it may be useful to point out that even in this little world of ours we
have instances of the persistent adherence of nature to particular
numbers. Thus 3 and multiples of this rule the inflorescence of all
*endogens* and 4 and 5 that of all *exogens*; and thousands of other
instances can be given, so that the general rejection of occult views of
the universe, on account of a symmetry in them, which is over hastily
concluded to be unnatural, and, therefore, artificial and false, is not
really warranted, even by our little learning. And as to 3 and 7, the
latter grows necessarily out of the former, since 7 is the greatest
possible number of products of three things taken, 1, 2 or 3 together.

As for the seven impostors, *dæmons*, these were also considered, by
some, to represent the cycle of necessity, which, according to them,
beginning with Mars, ran through Jupiter and Saturn to the earth, <span
id="page_126">p. 126</span> and thence through Mercury and Venus to the
sun. But though the Tibetan Brotherhood tell us that man does pass hence
first to Mercury, they tell us that the Planet on which we lived
immediately previous to our advent on this Earth was Mars and their
account of the worlds that make up our cycle of necessity is quite
different from that above referred to. But though according to this
latter Saturn, and not Mars, was the Planet from which we last came, it
does not follow that the Planet *we call* Saturn was really meant, or
that the several Planets to which occultism has attached the sings, and
names of the Planets known to the Astronomers of old, are *really* these
very Planets. On the contrary, as a rule it may generally be concluded
that when occultism says anything, it means something else. Words, like
the names of planets, precious stones, minerals, plants, etc., always
had two meanings--one, the palpable obvious one, which; if accepted,
leads entirely astray, for the uninitiated; and the other, the
artificial one, which gives the real fact for the initiated. This is
what has, and I maintain rightly so, brought more discredit on occultism
than anything else, and which must engender disbelief in or contempt for
it, in the world at large, so long as it is persisted in. But the adepts
of all schools have always been so tied down, by the vows and spiritual
conditions (which it therefore no longer remains in a man's option to
subsequently disregard) of the successive initiations, that they can, in
many matters, not speak save in this deceptive phraseology, to' those
not initiated, and <span id="page_127">p. 127</span> these in their
turn, as they progress, become by the immutable laws of the associations
to which they belong, similarly tongue-tied and mind-bound; and, as to
many things, the only hope for the world at large lies in the gradual
development of the higher races on earth, who will, untaught in these
schools, work out anew their knowledge for themselves, and untied by
laws and conditions, now rapidly becoming an anachronism, give freely of
*all* their store to *all* men. In this direction the authors of *The
Perfect Way* have made the first important step.

Of course, as to many matters, witness the facts given in the
introduction, the adepts can speak more plainly, and are, nowadays, some
of them, not so unwilling to speak as they have always hitherto been,
but there remain the highest and most important laws of which, I am
informed, they neither *will* nor *can* speak, save only to those who
have been initiated, and are therefore for ever precluded from revealing
the truth to any non -initiated.--*Trans*.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

forms, it is incarnate in living beings, it dies to revive, and buys
back each morning our hemisphere from

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

the slavery of the night. Dupuis concluded thence that Jesus Christ was
the Sun; a fine discovery! It

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

is as though one professed that a sphere of cardboard was positively the
Universe.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

Religion is a force which escapes from the impious and against which
they break themselves. Punch will never succeed in killing the Devil,
for the Devil is a caricature of God, and this caricature belongs to

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

those who have made it. It remains in their eyes, it fascinates and
pursues them. If all the blind could coalesce to exterminate those who
can see, could they even then extinguish the Sun?

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

The masses are blind and foolish and must be led by the seers and the
sages. But when those whose duty it is to lead the blind, become blind,
when the keepers of the mad go mad themselves, there result falls and
appalling disorders. This is the history [of](errata.htm#1.md) all
revolutions.

The use of brute force to repress disorder provokes inevitable and
terrible reactions when that force has not the support of justice and
Truth: for then it becomes fateful <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101.md)
and balances, necessarily, action by reaction. War authorises reprisals,
because in war,

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

according to the cynical saying of a great German diplomatist, it is
might that makes right; and indeed despotism, whether of kings or mobs,
is war; the authority of the Law and the empire of justice is peace.
Social Unity is the end and aim of civilisation and transcendental
politics, an end at which, from the time of Nimrod, all great conquerors
and profound statesmen have aimed. The Assyrians, the Medes, the
Persians, the Greeks, the Romans, all sought to absorb the world.
Bacchus, Hercules, Alexander, Caesar, Peter the Great, Napoleon, had no
other dream; the Popes thought to realise it under the name of Religion,
and it was a grand idea; but Germany nowadays opposes mathematics to the
enthusiastic onrush of beliefs, and swells day, by day her exchequer.
The Emperor, one of the two pillars of the world, is now again erect,
and he is no longer Roman. Rome on one side, and on the other the whole
world-the balance is no longer equal; we should necessarily require a
cosmopolitan Pope, when we had an universal Emperor.

High magic is at once Religion and Science. This alone harmonises
contraries by explaining the laws of equilibrium and of analogies. This
alone can make sovereign Pontiffs infallible and Monarchs absolute; the
Sacerdotal art is also the Royal art, and Count Joseph de Maistre was
not deceived when, despairing of extinguished beliefs and enfeebled
powers, he

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

turned his glances, against his will, towards the sanctuaries of
Occultism. It is thence that salvation will come, and already it is
revealing itself to the most advanced intelligences.

Freemasonry, which has so frightened the Court of Rome, is not so
terrible as people think; it has lost its ancient lights, but has
preserved its symbols and its rites which belong to Occult Philosophy;
it still gives the titles and the ribbons of the Rosy Cross, but the
true Rosicrucians are no longer in its Lodges; they are what they have
been from the beginning--philosophers and *unknown*. Paschalis, Martines
and St. Martin have successors who do not meet in regular assemblies.
Their Lodge is said to be in the great Pyramid of Egypt, an expression,
allegorical and mystical, which the innocent and ignorant are at liberty
to take literally.

There is one thing more incontestably infallible than the Pope, and that
is mathematics. Truths rigorously demonstrated force the mind to
suppositions which we may call the necessary hypotheses. These
hypotheses, if I may so express myself, are the scientific objects of
Faith. But the imagination, exalted by an infinite want to believe and
love, draws incessantly from this rational objective paradoxical
deductions; to curb licence and mystic fantasies, there must be an
authority touching reason on the one side and mysticism on the other;
this authority, dogmatically infallible, has no need to, and *cannot*,
he so scientifically. Science and Faith are the two columns of the
Temple; they support its portico.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

If they were both on the same side, the structure must fall on the
other.

It is their separation and parallelism which should eternally maintain
equilibrium. <span id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102.md)

The comprehension of this principle would put a stop to a misconception
of too long standing and would bring peace to many souls. In truth
between science and faith no real antagonism can subsist. All that has
been demonstrated becomes unassailable, and it is impossible to believe
in what one knows positively not to be true. Galileo knew that the earth
turned, but he knew also that the authority of the Church is
unassailable because the Church is necessary. The Church has no
authority in matters

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

of science, but can oppose with all her power the dissemination of
particular scientific truths which she judges to be at the moment
prejudicial to the Faith. People very generally believed in Galileo's
time that the popularisation of the system of Copernicus would give the
lie to the Bible. Forced later to admit that system, because it was
demonstrated it became of course necessary to find means of reconciling
the difference; the earth in fact turns, but the Church remains
infallible, even when it declares that it is no longer itself, but our
Holy Father the Pope, who is infallible. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103.md)

This is not said ironically; the Pope is infallible because it is
necessary that he should be so, and he really is so, for those who
believe it, since his infallibility only extends to matters of Faith.

The work of science is to detach Faith from the letter and attach it to
the spirit; in proportion as science rises, Faith is exalted.

The eternal Evangel is like the cloud that led the Jews in the
wilderness; it has one face of shadow and one face of light; the face of
shadow is its mystery, the face of light its reason. The shadow is
spread over the letter, the light emanates from the spirit.

There is the Gospel of Faith and the Gospel of Science. Moreover Science
renders Faith impregnable; those who doubt do not know. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[2](#fn_104.md)

132

Ignorant faith only preserves itself by obstinacy, and obstinacy in
ignorance is only fanaticism.

*Whoso believes without knowing, but without fanaticism, will very soon
begin to doubt, and that doubt can only have as its result either
knowledge or indifference*.

We must learn, or cease to believe. To cease to believe is easier, but
for the soul to cease to believe is to cease to love; and to cease to
love, is to cease to live.

Fanatics are sick, but still they are living; the indifferent are dead.

Blind beliefs do not improve mankind; they may restrain them through
fear or allure them by hope, but fear and desire are not virtues. A dog
may restrain his appetite under fear of the whip, but he none the less
remains, greedy, he only adds cowardice to greed. So to believe to any
good purpose, we must know. It has been said that a little science
detaches from God, and that a great deal of science leads us back again
to Him; this saying must be explained by stating that a commencement of
Science and Philosophy detaches man *from the God of the* 

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

*foolish*, while the acquisition of much of these brings him to the *God
of the wise*.

The Magist has no need to formulate his faith in God, <span
id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105.md) he feels in himself that supreme power
of the True and the God, which animates, sustains, fortifies and
consoles him. What need have we to define the light when one can see it?
What avails it to prove life, when one is alive? When St. Paul was
converted, say the Acts of the Apostles, he felt as though scales had
fallen from his eyes.

The scales which cover the eyes of our souls are the vain conceits of a
rash theology and the unhealthy

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

sophisms of a false philosophy. The initiates are the seers and for the
thoughtful, to see is to know, to know is to will, to will is to dare;
but to dare with success, we must *will* and know how to be silent.

"Never be zealous," said Talleyrand, and the same diplomatist averred
that speech was given us to disguise our thoughts. This political
mummery is not to our taste; we do not say disguise; we say reclothe and
chastely veil that Virgin that we call thought, for *our* thought is not
a thought of personal interest and falsehood; *the Veil of the sanctuary
is not like the curtain of comedy; it is rent at times, but it never
rises*. <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106.md)

The initiate avoids with care all eccentricity; he *thinks* as do the
most enlightened, and *speaks* as do the mass. If he explores cross
roads it is only to reach more surely and quickly the grand route; he
knows that true thoughts are like running water. Those of the Past flow
in the Present, and roll on towards the Future without our needing to
toil backwards to their source to find them; and he allows himself to be
tranquilly borne onwards by the current, but he holds ever to
mid-stream, never bruising himself against the rocks that line its
banks.

Let us now sum up, laying down those unalterable principles that will
serve alike as a basis and a crown to all we have written.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

I

Man has two means of attaining certainty-mathematics and common sense.

II

*There may be truths which outrun common sense, there are none which
contradict mathematics*.

III

"He who, outside pure mathematics, pronounces the word *impossible*,
lacks prudence," (Arago), which means that outside of pure mathematics
there is no complete, universal and absolute certainty.

IV

Outside complete, universal and absolute certainty there are only
beliefs or opinions.

V

Beliefs and opinions cannot be demonstrated; men choose them as a matter
of taste or accept them as a matter of policy.

VI

Useful opinions ought to be encouraged, and dangerous or noxious ones
should be repressed. This explains the necessary struggle between
conservatives and innovators; *only conservatives become* 

136

*persecutors when they consider, or affect to believe, dangerous what is
evidently useful*. <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107.md)

VII

Pure mathematics exist by themselves; no will produces them, no power
can limit them. <span id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_108.md) They are

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

eternal Laws, that no man can infringe, and from which it is impossible
to escape.

VIII

A thing may *appear* absurd and *be* true when it is above common
sense, <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109.md) but a thing contrary to the
laws of mathematics is really and absolutely absurd, and whoso believes
in such an absurdity is a fool.

The sign of the cross, which is the intersection of two lines,
equilibrilised one by the other, has always been considered as a divine
symbol. It is the Tau of the ancient Hebrews, the Chi (*x*) of the
Greeks and Christians; in mathematics this sign + represents the
infinite, and *x* the unknown; + signifies plus or more, and the
Infinite is always more. <span id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110.md) Develop
science as you will, mark its first step with Alpha, its last with
Omega, and you will still always have

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

before you the unknown, which you must recognise, and your formula
remains Ω + x; <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111.md) all that we learn
is wound off that unknown which is never wholly unwound, it is this
which produces all things; *not knowing what it is, we personify it and
call it God*. <span id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_112.md)

Once it *seemed* as if this personification was realised on earth, *but
the God-Man* died upon the cross, that is on the eternal *x*, and the
cross alone remains, for us.

X

The hypothetical personification of the Infinite can only be infinite
and excludes, necessarily, individual unity. Every individuality is
limited by some other, unless it suppresses all others; God, on the
contrary, being the principle of all individualities, cannot be an
individual. It is on this account that he is said to be one in several
Persons. Three is a mystic number which represents the generation of all
numbers.

XI

God never speaks to men, except through men, and does nothing in nature
save through the Laws of Nature.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

XII

*The supernatural is that which outsteps our natural intelligence and
our knowledge of the Laws of Nature*.

XIII

God, even, ought not to be considered as supernatural by the
Theologians, since they reason upon the Nature of God.

XIV

The Fathers at the Council of Nice have furnished a substance to God by
affirming that the Son is of the same substance as the Father. Moreover
if it be impossible to admit, without confounding them, a finite
substance and an infinite substance, the decision of the Council of Nice
might furnish arguments to the pantheists and even to the materialists.

XV

If God, as says Catholicism, has created us to know, love, and serve
him, and by these means obtain eternal life, and if, as said Jesus
Christ, that which we do to a neighbour we do to God, it follows that
God has created men, to know, love, and serve each other and by these
means attain Eternal Life.

The true worship of God, then, must be philanthropy.

And every Religion which does not inspire, augment and perfect
philanthropy must be a false Religion.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

XVI

A Religion, the consequence of which is the reprobation and eternal
punishment of the majority of men or of some men, or even of one single
man, does not inspire Philanthropy.

This does not touch the true Catholic doctrine, which only employs
reprobation as a threat, and is in reality salvation offered to all men.

*He who loves not remains in the death*, said St. John, and those cast
away by Philanthropy are those who *will* not love.

XVII

If God were, as is ridiculously supposed, an Omnipotent Personage who
laid stress upon being honoured by certain special ceremonies, he would
have revealed those ceremonies in a manner, evident and incontestable to
all men, and there would be only one form of religious worship on earth,
but such is not the case, and what he has given to all is the need and
the duty of loving. Philanthropy is therefore the true and the only
Religion, *really* Catholic, that is to say Universal.

XVIII

Every word of blessing and love is the Word of God, and every word of
malediction and hate is the cry of Human Wickedness, which men have
personified, calling it the Devil.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

XIX

An act of Philanthropy, even the most imperfect, is more religious and
meritorious than all the fasts, all the genuflexions, and all the
prayers.

XX

The attraction which draws together the sexes is not philanthropic; on
the contrary it is often the most brutal of all egoisms.

XXI

This attraction only merits the name of Love when it is sanctified by
sentiments of self-devotion and sacrifice.

XXII

The man who kills a woman because she no longer loves him is a coward
and an assassin, which however does not justify adultery; but all that
can be said in regard to *this* has been said by Jesus Christ.

XXIII

Law should be always rigorous; justice indulgent.

XXIV

The little suffer for the great, but the great also must answer for the
little. The rich will pay the debt of the poor. <span
id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113.md)

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

XXV

The best things when corrupted become worse than the bad ones. What more
venerable than the Priesthood, yet what more contemptible than a bad
Priest? But the duties of the Priesthood are so sublime and so lifted
above human nature, that every priest who is not a saint *is* bad. This
explains the discredit that falls upon the Priesthood in periods when
the religious sentiment is feeble. *The Gospels tell its that Christ
found a good thief, but they nowhere tell its that he met with a good
priest*!

XXVI

The good Priest is self-sacrifice incarnate; he is Philanthropy raised
to a divine ideal; the bad Priest is one who sells prayers and takes the
sacred vases for his cooking pots.

XXVII

All that *does* good *is* good; all that does ill *is* bad.

XXVIII

All that gives us pleasure *seems* to as good, and all that
inconveniences or afflicts us seems bad; but we often deceive ourselves,
and these errors are "the extenuating circumstances" of sin.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

XXIX

It is impossible to love evil for its own sake, knowing what it is, and
without its having some appearance of good.

XXX

Evil has no real existence, or, to put it better, it does not exist in
an absolute manner. That which ought not to be, is not: that is certain
and incontestable. <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114.md)

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

That which we call evil exists as the shadow necessary to the
manifestation of light; metaphysical evil is error, physical evil is
pain; but error is excusable when it is involuntary. To know perfectly

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

that we are deceiving ourselves, and yet to persist is no longer
deceiving ourselves; it is seeking to deceive others. As for physical
pain, it is the preservative from, and the remedy for, the abuse of
pleasure; it exercises the patience of the wise, admonishes the
thoughtless and chastises the wicked. It is, therefore, rather a good
than an evil.

XXXI

Disorder in nature is never more than apparent, and all alleged miracles
are either exceptional phenomena or conjuring tricks.

XXXII

When you *see* a phenomenon contrary in appearance to the laws
demonstrated by Mathematics, <span id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115.md) be

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

sure either that you have observed imperfectly or that you have been
duped, or that you have been hallucinated.

XXXIII

Truth needs no miracles, and no miracles can prove a falsehood.

XXXIV

*The general laws of nature are known to science, but neither all the
Forces nor all the Agents are yet known*. A glimpse has been obtained of
animal magnetism which certainly exists, but science treats it as a
problem which it has not attempted to solve.

XXXV

People always ask why the extraordinary phenomena of magnetism are never
produced in the presence of men of learning. <span
id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116.md) It is because few men of learning who
witness a phenomenon inexplicable to themselves would have the courage
to attest its occurrence.

XXXVI

The light that we see is only one portion of the infinite light. It is
those few rays of our sun which are *en rapport* with our visual
apparatus. Our sun

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

himself is but a lamp suited to our benightedness; it is but a point
luminous in space which would be darkness to the eyes of our body, and
which is resplendent for the intuition of our souls.

XXXVII

The word magnetism expresses the action and not the nature of the great
universal agent which serves as mediator between thought and life. *This
agent is the infinite light or rather (for the Light is only a
phenomenon) is the light bearer, the great Lucifer of Nature, the
mediator between matter and spirit, <span
id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_117.md) which the ignorant and impostors call
the Devil*, and which is the first creature of God.

XXXVIII

What is more absurd and more impious than to give to the Devil, that is
to say to Evil personified, the name of Lucifer which signifies
Light-bearer?

The intellectual Lucifer is the spirit of intelligence and love; it is
the Paraclete, it is the Holy spirit, and the physical Lucifer is the
great agent of Universal Magnetism.

XXXIX

To personify evil and make of it an intelligence, a rival to God, which
can moreover understand and can no more love, this is a monstrous
fiction. *To believe that God permits this evil intelligence to
deceive* 

148

*and destroy his feeble creatures already so weak in themselves, is to
make of God a Personage more wicked even than the Devil*; for God, in
taking from the Devil the possibility of repenting and loving, himself
forces him to do evil. Moreover a spirit of error and falsehood can only
be a thinking folly, and does not even deserve the appellation of
spirit. *The Devil is the opposite of God, therefore if God defines
himself as the one who* IS, *the Devil must be he who is* NOT.

XL

We must seek the spirit of the Dogmas, while receiving in its integrity
their letter, such as the sacerdotal Sphinx transmits it to us. This
letter is obviously absurd, *in order* that we may seek further and
higher. It is certain that to *act* one must *be*, and that to sin one
must have a conscience, and that, therefore, one cannot be born guilty;
that one cannot make anything out of nothing; that God cannot be a man,
nor a man God; that God can neither suffer nor die; that a woman who
gives birth to a child cannot be a virgin, etc., etc. No one, then, can
seriously affirm the contrary of these truths, so palpable and evident,
without warning us that there is a mystery in it, that is to say *a
hidden sense which must be extracted and understood under pain of
becoming either an unbeliever or a fool*.

XLI

That which excuses the so-called Atheists is the deplorable conception
that the masses make for

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

themselves of God. Men have endowed Him with all their own vices, and
have imagined they were making Him great by exaggerating these to
paradoxical proportions. Thus for an example:

*Pride*.--God has for object only His own Glory! He looks for this glory
in the abasement of His rivals--as if He could have any; He tortures for
eternity His miserable creatures--for His glory; He has killed His
son--for His glory!

*Avarice*.--Absolute master of all good things, he gives to the larger
number of his children only misery, and distributes his favours to the
smaller number, only slowly and parsimoniously.

*Envy*.--He is the jealous God. He proscribes liberty; He leads astray
the reason of the wise, and favours by preference the ignorant and the
idiotic.

*Greed*.--He is never satiated with the flesh of His victims; under the
old law He required holocausts of bulls, under the new he sniffs the
steam of human victims burning in *auto da fés*.

*Luxury*.--He must have Virgins like the Minotaur; he has his seraglios
of languishing amorous damsels, and monks tortured by obscene
nightmares; he has invented celibacy to create phantoms, more immodest
than all the Roman orgies, and unnatural dreams.

*Anger*.--The main topic of the sacred books and collections of sermons
is the wrath of God. His fury lets loose pestilences, and in his
implacable rage he hollows out a hell for all eternity.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

*Sloth*.--After a repose of an eternity, he works during six days. <span
id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118.md) His work consisted in giving daily one
order, and after giving these six orders he felt the necessity of.
resting, and how was St. John wrong when, after having represented evil
under the form of a monster with seven heads, he tells us that men
prostrated themselves before and adored this beast? <span
id="fr_119"></span>[2](#fn_119.md)

St. John adds that Anti-Christism must animate the image of this beast,
and make it speak, and that the world will prostrate itself before this
living simulacrum of human folly. *Let us beware of thinking that this
could ever be realised in the Person of a sovereign Pontiff of
Catholicism; doubtless reference is here made to sonic Antipope or
Perhaps to the grand Lama of Tibet*!

XLII

St. Vincent de Lerius says that that alone pertains to the true Catholic
or universal Dogma, which has been admitted at all times, in all places,
and by every one. <span id="fr_120"></span>[3](#fn_120.md) This would
simplify symbology marvellously and prodigiously enlarge the Church.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

XLIII

It is customary to reply to those who take objections to the teachings
of the Theologians, are you stronger minded than St. Augustine? Have you
more genius than Bossuet? more intelligence than Fénélon? These
questions are very ridiculous, when the matter at issue is one of common
sense. I am certainly less versed in mathematics than Pascal, and yet
had I lived in the time of that great man, and had he said or allowed it
to be said before me that two and two make five, I should have reckoned
his great authority as nothing, and should have continued to believe, or
rather to know, that two and two make four.

XLIV

The great and learned men who have held their tongues, or have spoken in
a certain manner, have had assuredly their own reasons for speaking or
keeping silence. High truths are not suitable for low souls; there must
be fables for children, and threats for cowards; there must be
absurdities for folly and mysteries for credulity. It is through
blackened glasses that we can alone gaze on the sun; looked at through a
clear glass, it seems to us black, and blinds us. God is for us as a
sun; we must walk by his light with lowered eyes: if one tries to gaze
fixedly on Him our sight fails us. *The most dangerous and the saddest
of sciences is Theology, for it constitutes itself wrongly a science of
God. Rather is it a* 

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

*science of the foolishness of man* when it seeks to explain the
inscrutable mystery of the Divine.

XLV

The light of God sparkles in us all--it is our conscience. To do the
good to which this incites us and to avoid the evil against which this
warns us, these are our duties towards God.

XLVI

God sows the idea in the Infinite, and the rays of the suns bring to
birth the germs in the Planets. The animals have issued from the earth
like the trees, but no more than the trees did they issue full formed
and of full size; species have their embryotic periods as well as the
individuals of each species. To imagine that God has first moulded a
statue of clay, to blow later in its face and so make of it a man, is to
believe a story similar to that they tell little girls about babies
being dug up out of cabbage beds. Is God denied or is Glory lessened by
declining to look on him as a statuary? It is nature that produces
everything progressively and by slow degrees, operating ever through the
orderly functions of the forces inherent in the substance, but it is the
Divine word that guides the forces towards the ideal of the Form. Nature
executes, she does not invent. The thoughts which are designed in matter
come only from matter, though matter does not think. From the
development of the first living cell, to the perfection of the Human
Form, God has said to the forces of Nature,

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Let us make man," and his behest has endured
through many millions of years which, before him, were but an instant.
Genesis is not the natural history of man, it is the commencement of his
Religious Epopee. The Primitive couple is Human unity established in the
first family of believers. When God diffused over the face of man a
breath of Immortality, man had already a face; what else then was he but
one species of anthropoid animal? Certainly man does not descend from
the ape, but the ape and man perhaps descend from the same primitive
animal. Darwin's theory does not contradict the Bible, it restores to it
its character of the symbolic Lion, exclusively religious; the great
week of the creation is a series of Geological epochs <span
id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121.md) and God is said to rest when man begins
to understand that the Universe moves on alone. <span
id="fr_122"></span>[2](#fn_122.md)

XLVII

The supernatural is the eternal Paradox of the infinite desire. Man
craves to assimilate himself with God, and he does so in the Catholic
communion. From a Rationalistic point of view and considered in a purely
natural manner, this communion is a thing of colossal extravagance. In
the Catholic Communion they eat the spirit of God and the body of a man!
Eat a spirit, and an infinite Spirit! What

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

madness! Eat the body of a man! How horrible! Theophagy, and Androphagy!
What claims to immortality! And yet, <span
id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123.md) what can be more beautiful, more
soothing, more really divine than the Catholic Communion? The religious
want, innate in man, will never find more complete satisfaction; and how
vividly we feel that it is true, when we believe in it Faith to a
certain extent creates what she affirms; hope in the superhuman never
deceives, and the Love of the divine is never a deception. The First

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Communion is the coronation of the human
royalty, it is the inauguration of the serious side of life, it is the
apotheosis and the transfiguration of childhood, it is the most pure of
all joys and the most true of all happinesses.

XLVIII

There is then something above both Nature and Reason to explain,
justify, and satisfy the highest aspirations of both. From this point of
view the Supernatural is Natural, and the paradoxical formula of the
necessary hypotheses becomes perfectly reasonable. It is the human
spirit that constructs the Impossible in order to attain the Infinite.

XLIX

According to the Fathers of the Church, the Ancient Law was only an
image and a shadow of the new Law. The astonishing stories of the Bible
are but images, (they do not say allegories, the word would have been
dangerous), images of the new dogma inaugurated by Jesus Christ, and the
basis of this dogma is that God is personally united with humanity, and
that we must love and serve God in man; in a word that we must love one
another, which resumes all the Law and the prophets. There is then
nothing true in the Bible which is not in conformity with the Gospels,
and the spirit of the Gospels is the spirit of charity.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

L

To love one another and not revile, curse, excommunicate, persecute or
burn each other. To love one another and consequently to assist,
console, support and bless one another. Charity is Humanity endowed with
a Divine Principle; it is solidarity enriched by self-devotion; it is
the spirit of the saints, and consequently the true spirit of the
Catholic or Universal Church. Those possessed with a spirit opposed to
this do not belong to the Church.

But charity in the Church ought to preserve above all things the
Hierarchy and unity. <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124.md) It is
rightful to protest against the abuse of authority, but not against
authority itself. <span id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_125.md)

There exists at present a new sect of Protestants who call themselves
Old Catholics, as if the child just born could call itself old, because
it has had a grandfather? But the ancestors of these ridiculous
Protestants were no old Catholics, who would have

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

died a thousand times rather than separate themselves from the Hierarchy
and Authority. Their ancestors are the heretics of all ages, and their
great ancestor is Satan, <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126.md) that
unsubmitting old Catholic.

LI

If Religion is to be one, if it is to be holy, if it is to be universal,
if it is to preserve and continue the chain of tradition, if it is to
rest on a legitimate and hierarchical authority, if it is to realise and
give what it promises, if it is to have signs of power and consolations
for all, if it is to veil for feeble visions the eternal truths, if it
is to unite in one sheaf all the aspirations and all the hopes of the
most exacting souls, it *can* only be Catholic, <span
id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127.md) and all nations soon

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

or late will return to Catholicity when some God-enlightened Pope boldly
disavows the petty passions, full of greed and hate, of clerical
Catholicism, when a learned clergy shall be competent to reconcile the
lights of Reason with the obscurities of Faith, and when worship freed
from material interests shall be no longer an object of mercantile
enterprise. This *will* be, because it *ought* to be, and it will then
be discovered that in the Christian dogmas there are, as in the earlier
portions of the Bible, images and shadows of the religion of the future,
which already exists and might designate itself as Messianism,
Paracletism, or better still absolute Catholicity, and which will be the
light of all spirits and the life eternal of all souls.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_81"></span>[99:1](phs11.htm#fr_81.md) His incessant struggles
with the "idea" rooted in him by his unhappy Catholico-Romanism, having
occupied and wasted all his time.--E. O.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[99:2](phs11.htm#fr_82.md) It is at least
questionable whether this be not the best, wisest, and safest position.
Admitting that by a devotion to Occult Physics, two supreme gifts are
attainable,--one, the preservation of the individual memory right
through all the further lives on this and the other planets of our
cycle, throughout a complete circuit-in other words the
quasi-immortalisation of the personality; and second, the power of
controlling and directing our own future after death instead of being
drawn into the vortex and being there disposed of while still in a
passive state under the laws of affinities; yet it is at any rate
questionable whether even these, the highest gifts, which not one per
cent of adepts even attain to, really profit a man in the long run. Most
certainly to attain them, an utterly self-regarding life is needed in
the case of men of our race. A sublime selfishness it may be, but none
the less selfishness, is essential to the attainment of these highest
gifts. It is at least open to doubt whether an active life of
unselfishness and benevolence amongst our fellows is not more conducive
to happiness in the long run. In a universe governed by a mathematical
justice, we may be content to leave our future in the hands of the
Eternal Laws and the immortalisation of a necessarily imperfect
*personality* is a doubtful good. As for all other powers dependent on a
manipulation of the Astral Essence, though doubtless susceptible of
beneficial exercise on rare occasions, they hardly appear to me aims
worthy of the Man-Divine. A <span id="page_100">p. 100</span> certain
theoretical knowledge of the Physics of Occultism grows in the mind in
its progress in the Metaphysics of the "Highest Science," but in my
humble notion it is to a thorough comprehension and grasp of these
latter that our best efforts should be directed. We should not waste
time, seeking powers or power; we should lift no longing gaze even to
the two supreme accomplishments, but we should strive so to purify our
*natures* and permeate ourselves with an active love for the ALL, as to
ensure at the recast, the evolution of a higher personality, and so to
make the cognisance of the infinite unity, and all that thereby hangs a
part of ourselves, as to render it a necessary intuition of the new
personality. This is to be "*un vrai magiste qui ne pratique point la
magie*," and to my mind this is, perhaps, the nobler, though, doubtless,
the less attractive path.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[100:1](phs11.htm#fr_83.md) And above all in the
Ancient Sacred Literature of India. But E. Lévi had never studied the
*Bhagavad-Gita* and other like incarnations of the spiritual life in the
flesh of the latter, or he would have been a far truer
"Magiste".--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[102:1](phs11.htm#fr_84.md) "Keep silence all who
enter here," has from time immemorial been graved above the Portals of
Occultism, "*Gopaniyum Prayatnena*," "to be kept secret with the
greatest care" is the refrain of all the ancient Aryan writers on
Psychism. But valid as this insistence on secrecy has been in the past,
it must not be forgotten that evolution never sleeps, and that the wheel
is ever turning. A new and higher race is scintillating on the dim
horizon, and what are the highest secrets of one race, and intolerable
to its mass, become the intuitions, if not the palpable verities, of the
next.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[103:1](phs11.htm#fr_85.md) This entire paragraph
is sophistical and insincere to a degree. It savours not of "the things
which are of God but of the things which are of man"; not of occultism,
but of Éliphas Leviism.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[106:1](phs11.htm#fr_86.md) Which leaves the
question where it was, since even the highest adept can never have such
an exhaustive knowledge of those laws or that Reason, as to be able to
assert of anything that it is absolutely contrary to them, or hence to
predicate impossibility of anything outside, as Arago said, of pure
mathematics.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[106:2](phs11.htm#fr_87.md) The wretched Isiacs
wound their breasts and imitate the grief of "the INFELICISSIMA MATER
*Isis*" (*Min. Felip. c* 2 r). The return of Isis with the body of <span
id="page_107">p. 107</span> Osiris is dated December 15th, and the
search lasts seven days. (Plutarch).--E. O.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[107:1](phs11.htm#fr_88.md) In this and many other
cases it is impossible to reproduce in English that antithesis of sound
(mielfiel), which, not unfrequently at some little sacrifice of sense,
intensifies, so often, the epigrammatic character of our author's
*dicta*.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[108:1](phs11.htm#fr_89.md) Correct.--E. O.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[109:1](phs11.htm#fr_90.md)  Here he alludes to the
voluntary trance condition or Samadhi induced according to the rules of
occult science. Mediumistic trance is a mode of epilepsy--E. O.

So, for that matter, I venture to submit, if words are used in their
strict sense, is *Samādhi*. The real difference consists in the fact
that a mediumistic trance is generally the result of an abnormal and
quasi-defective organisation, undertaken or fallen into suddenly without
the preparations essential to render it innocuous to the health, and
without the mental preparations necessary to the retention of the free
exercise of the mind and will, and is only partially, often not at all,
under control, while *Samādhi* results from a long and careful series of
exercises developing abnormal capacities in a normal organisation, and
is preceded by a gradual training that protects the physical frame and
habituates the mind and will to free exercise under <span
id="page_110">p. 110</span> conditions that would normally cripple or
wholly stupefy them, and is wholly under control.

Add that from its nature the former cannot continue many days without
producing death, while the latter can continue for months without the
slightest injury, unless we reckon as an injury the grave disgust for
earthly fleshly life that haunts the adept for a longer or shorter
period after revival.

Both are epileptic in character, the one only semi-voluntary, the other
wholly voluntary; the one without, and the other with, the preliminary
physical training necessary to enable the tissues and the mind to bear,
unimpaired, subjection to the abnormal conditions.--*Trans*.

This, though *true*, is a quibble. No doubt elementaries and elementals
belong to the *Kāmaloka*, and are, therefore, not strictly speaking
apparitions of the other world, but the public thinks and talks of all
such comparatively immaterial existences as belonging to the other
world, and so here again the plain sense of the passage is at variance
with what the writer knew to be true.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[111:1](phs11.htm#fr_91.md) This word scarcely as
yet in use in English, though thoroughly Gallicised, is from the Latin,
Larva, a ghost or spectre.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[111:2](phs11.htm#fr_92.md) Sophistry.--E. O.

I quite agree, but if for "Religion" we substitute "Occultism" my friend
E. O. apparently considers that the Sophistry disappears.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[112:1](phs11.htm#fr_93.md) And of the fourfold
nature of man; the three pairs and the outer fleshy case and analogous
universal quaternions.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[117:1](phs11.htm#fr_94.md) "*Convenablentent*,"
the right word, most assuredly: respectably.--E. O.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[117:2](phs11.htm#fr_95.md) Rather it signifies
that which binds together the soul,--or if you will the highest couple,
the 6th principle, and the spirit, (or 7th principle or monad), and the
absolute, of which this is a ray.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[117:3](phs11.htm#fr_96.md) In other words we are
by silence to consent to and add currency and vitality to what we think
a falsehood. <span id="page_118">p. 118</span> There is a vast
difference between tolerance for and gentleness with what we believe to
be the errors of others, and the ease-loving timidity which shrinks from
showing by its own example that it does believe them to be errors. E.
Lévi looks forward to a reign of truth, but if men follow his advice,
and for the sake of *respectability* persistently bow to falsehood, how
is the usurper to be dethroned, how is the wrong to be conquered, and
the right to triumph?--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[120:1](phs11.htm#fr_97.md) These poetical
illustrations are misleading. Science, *real* science, and religion are
one; at most two faces of the Eternal Truth; allotropic forms of the
same everlasting verity.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[120:2](phs11.htm#fr_98.md) There *is no* such
thing; it is only nothing that has no extension; the extension of what
*we call* immaterial things may be beyond our cognisance, but *all*
things have extension, and extension is the essence of *substance*,
which both *is* and fills *space*.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[120:3](phs11.htm#fr_99.md) Of course this is all a
muddle; indivisible atoms do exist. You may say that the mind can divide
them in conception, but if you could put the division into practice, the
molecule would return into the unmanifested. Then he confuses matter,
which is transitory, concrete and manifested, with substance, its
eternal, abstract, unmanifested base.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[121:1](phs11.htm#fr_100.md) The Septenary is
sacred. not for one, but for a thousand reasons. Take any seven coins or
discs of precisely the same size. Place one in the centre and you will
find that the remaining six, when arranged round it as a belt, will
exactly occupy the whole circumscribing space, each touching its
neighbours and the original central one. Add, with other precisely
similar discs, a similar second belt outside the first, a third outside
the second, a fourth outside the third, and so on. Increase it, as you
may, each belt will only contain six more pieces than the preceding one,
with the one central piece as the seventh. The belts will contain 6, 12,
18, 24, 30 pieces and so on, the numbers being terms of an arithmetical
progression of which the increment is 6. You may continue enlarging the
circumference till it covers the whole Gobi desert, but you will he
unable to add more than 6 for each belt to the number of its
predecessor. This may seem childish, but we invite all the western
mathematicians to explain the why of it, and on this principle the
Universe both in its concrete and abstract manifestations is built up.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

Pythagoras speaks of the *Dodekahedron* as being the "Divine"--for the
first circle of *one and six* is the *central circle*, the abstract, the
*one* of nature *in abscondito*, and the most Occult. It is composed of
the ONE, the central point, and of the *six*, the "number of perfection"
of the Kabalists, having this perfection in itself, shared by no other,
that by, the assemblage of its half, its third part, and its sixth part
(one, two and three) it is made perfect. Therefore it is called "the
sign of the world," for in six rounds the group of worlds attains its
perfection, and during the seventh enjoys felicity, and neither nature
nor beings labour or toil any more, but prepare in their perfection for
Nirvana. With the Christian and Jewish Kabalists, it is the six days of
creation and their Sabbath.

And *seven* is called by Pythagoras "the vehicle of Life," etc. Seven in
short is the symbol of this Yug, and Time.

The Sabæans worshipped the *seven* sons of Sabus. The *seven* "spirits
of God" in Revelation mean simply the perfect man; so with its *seven*
stars, lamps, etc.; and the Chaldean "stages" of the seven spheres and
the *Birs Nimrud* with its *seven* stories, symbolical of the concentric
circles of the *seven* spheres.

You moderns, who laugh at the ignorance of the ancients, who *knew but
of seven planets*, you have never understood what was really meant by
this limited number; nor have you given one thought to the fact that men
who presented Callisthenes (over 2,000 years ago) with records of
celestial observations extending back from their time 1,900 years, could
not have been ignorant of the existence of other planets. <span
id="page_123">p. 123</span> And what (not *who*) is SABAOTH, and why
should have been regarded as a creator? How many Christians are there
who suspect that SABAOTH was the Demiurgic number, *seven* with the
Phœnicians, who became later the Israelites? (Read *Lydus de Mens*. IV,
38, 74, 98, p. 112.) Seek for SABAOTH. ADONAIOS in the "Sibylline
Books," *Gallacus*, 278. The *Demiurge* is *Iao* presiding over the
*seven* circles of the *seven* Ghebers, the *seven* spirits of fire,
astral light, *Fohat*, the seven Gabborim, or *kabiri*, the seven
wandering stars, and it is those wanderers who under their collective
name of *Kabar Ziv* (or Mighty Life or Light) as a Central Point
emanates and allows to cluster round itself the *seven Dæmons*.

Compare--

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="295"><p>The names of the seven Impostor Daemons in the Codex Nazaræus.</p>
<p>1. Sol.</p>
<p>2. Spiritus (Holy Spirit), Astro (Venus)or Lebbat Amamet.</p>
<p>3. Nebu (Mercury).</p>
<p>4. Sin Luna, called also Shuril and Siro.</p>
<p>5. Kiun (Kivan) Saturn.</p>
<p>6. Bel, Jupiter (life supporter).</p>
<p>7. Nerig, Mars--the son of man who despoils the other sons of man; called also "<em>Excoriatores</em>".</p>
<p>The names of the seven Skandhas or Principles.</p>
<p> </p></td>
<td width="295"><p>7. Spirit, the reflection of the ONE <em>Life</em>.</p>
<p>6. The spiritual soul (<em>Female</em>).</p>
<p>5. The Animal Soul (<em>Manas</em>).</p>
<p>4. The <em>Kama Rupa</em>--the most dangerous and treacherous of the Principles.</p>
<p>3. The Life-soul, <em>Linga sarira</em>.</p>
<p>2. The Vital principle.</p>
<p>1. The Gross body or material form--<em>per se</em> an animal and a very ferocious and wild one.</p>
<p> </p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

--E. O.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[127:1](phs11.htm#fr_101.md) There is no English
equivalent for "*fatale*," in the sense in which it is here used, and
which is not <span id="page_128">p. 128</span>"fatal," but that has
become a thing of Fate, operating therefore in a blind, unintelligent,
irresponsible manner under blind laws.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[130:1](phs11.htm#fr_102.md) Although in a certain
sense this is true, it is very misleading. *Faith*, in the ordinary
sense of the word, viz., a belief in that for which there is no
evidence, direct or indirect, has no place in true Occultism which is an
exact science, and accepts nothing which cannot either be demonstrated
or at any rate proved to accord with, or follow, necessarily or with a
high degree of probability, from what can be demonstrated. Of course,
like all sciences, Occultism has its methods, and a man must understand
these before be can understand its demonstrations; just, for instance,
as a man must understand the methods of mathematical physics, before he
can understand the proof that the poles of the moon describe in space a
certain very complicated curve. But this latter is none the less an
exactly demonstrated fact, and so too are the teachings of Occultism,
although to one ignorant of the methods of this latter science they may
seem absolute mysteries and matters of *Faith*.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[131:1](phs11.htm#fr_103.md) And thus proves again
that Human Folly is limitless as space itself.--E. O.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[131:2](phs11.htm#fr_104.md) It will be seen that
by Faith *he* means the acceptance of the teachings of Authority
(*i.e.*, of those who <span id="page_132">p. 132</span> presumably know
more of the matter than ourselves) on those subjects or points on which
we do not possess or are unable to obtain knowledge--a constantly
varying quantity altering from moment to moment with the progress of the
world and the individual, and disappearing in the sanctuary of occultism
where all mysteries, at any rate of the conditioned universe, are
explained.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[133:1](phs11.htm#fr_105.md) And the *Mage* has
not even need to believe in one.--E. O.

Quite so, he *has* no *need*. Occultism only deals with the conditioned
universe, which *to all conditioned* in it is infinite. Admittedly, *in*
that Universe only Laws, and no God, *i.e.*, no conscious, intelligent
will, the source of those laws, can be traced. So the Mage may
justifiably say, "I content myself with the manifested and conditioned
universe and believe in no God who, whether he exists somewhere
*abscondite* or not, has not seen fit to indicate himself anywhere in
manifestation, and cannot therefore, (if such a being exists) *want* men
to believe in Him."

But there are Mages and Mages, and there are some who say, granting all
this, we yet know by a *higher* intuition that the infinite to all
conditioned existence is yet not ALL, and that there is a conscious and
intelligent will, the origin of those manifested laws which alone we
creatures of manifestation can cognise. But this of course is a matter
of Faith and pertains not to occultism proper, which is either atheistic
or agnostic, but to transcendental occultism.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[134:1](phs11.htm#fr_106.md) It never *rises*, but
as race follows race, and circuit succeeds to circuit, it etherialises
more and more, destined to vanish wholly before the veil of the <span
id="page_135">p. 135</span> cosmic night, that shrouds a higher mystery
and an inner sanctuary, is drawn around us.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[135:1](phs11.htm#fr_107.md) Very feeble! who is
to be the judge? What you consider useful, I hold to be noxious, and
vice versa.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[135:2](phs11.htm#fr_108.md) Our author, borrowing
Pythagorean ideas, often speaks of pure mathematics, as if they were a
kind of superhuman existence, things, as he says existing by themselves,
or self-existent. But what are they really? Simply rigidly logical
deductions from rigidly limited and defined hypotheses. To say their
results are certain is merely to repeat with Oliver Wendell Holmes,
"Logic is logic, that's all I say." Given certain accurately and
exhaustively defined premises, then logical deductions therefrom must be
true. Mathematics are the creation of the Human mind, and depend on
meanings and values and limitations of these, which it assigns to
certain symbols. There is nothing mysterious or superhuman in them.
Change your scale of notation from the decimal to the duodecimal, and
various "eternal laws" of the *former* disappear from the latter. Pass
on to the differential calculus or the calculus of Infinity in which you
introduce hypotheses not rigidly limited, and you at once get, along
with the true ones, crowds of utterly irrelevant solutions. To say that
no will creates them and no power limits them is absurd; they were
created by the will that originated their fundamental hypotheses, and by
these are rigidly limited.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[137:1](phs11.htm#fr_109.md) Nothing is *above*
common sense, but a thing may be too ill-defined for common sense to
grasp it. All our author's sententious aphorism means, is that if the
nature, *or our knowledge*, of a thing is such that we are unable
rigorously and exhaustively to define its premises and then argue
logically from these, *look*, to our imperfect vision, as our
conclusions *may--they may* nevertheless be true-we are in no position
to decide; whereas, if we *can* rigorously and exhaustively define the
premises and we then argue strictly logically from these, our
[conclusions](errata.htm#2.md) must be correct, and no one but a fool can
doubt the fact.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[137:2](phs11.htm#fr_110.md) This seems quibbling.
Of course the usual sign for infinity in mathematics is ∞--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[138:1](phs11.htm#fr_111.md) Hence the Tibetan
cross on the Dalai Lama's headgear.--E. O.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[138:2](phs11.htm#fr_112.md) At last the cat is
out of the bag.--E. O.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[141:1](phs11.htm#fr_113.md) It is only in a very
far-fetched or else transcendental sense that this is true. Every soul
<span id="page_142">p. 142</span> pays its *own* debts, be it or they
great or small. This is the true and eternal basis alike of justice and
morality.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[143:1](phs11.htm#fr_114.md) It is neither certain
nor incontestable, and the whole paragraph deals in an unsatisfactory
and sophistical manner with the "eternal riddle"--the origin of evil.
Evil may in one sense be said to be the darkness necessary to make good
apparent, but darkness is real *for us*, all the same, and so is evil.

The occultist's explanation is that evil is merely the result of the
infringement of natural laws. The universe is the outcome of unaltering
laws. One of these laws is evolution; at one stage of this, sentient
beings are developed, and then commences, from their ignorant
transgression of the physical laws of the universe, physical evil,
bodily pain and suffering. At a later stage of evolution, intelligence
and moral responsibility are developed, and then, with the transgression
of the moral laws of the universe by evolutes who have developed a will
and moral sense of their own, moral evil commences. There is no attempt
to deny the reality--*quoad* us--of evil; *but* it is the inevitable
result of the transgression of the unchanging laws of nature. It is
quite admitted that the recuperative energies (the law of the
reconstruction of the efficient out of the effete) of <span
id="page_144">p. 144</span> nature often (perhaps always in the long
run) bring good out of evil, just as the putrefying corpse is made a
source of fertilisation: but the evil is as real as is, to *our* senses,
the loathsome odour of putrefaction.

It is, probably, mainly the reality of evil that leads one section of
occultists not merely to say "we can find no God *in* the universe," but
to affirm that there *is* no God *outside* this, no intelligent
conscious will as a source of the cognisable Laws. For, they argue, if
there were, *he* would be responsible for all the evil, and if so he
cannot be God--which means Good.

But another section argue that, conditioned as we are in the universe,
we cannot draw any conclusions in regard to, or by any possibility
realise or conceive, anything outside that universe, but that at the
same time they have a spiritual intuition, through which, though unable
to conceive Him, they *know* that there is such an intelligent conscious
will, the essence of all perfection. And they add that why the adepts of
the first class have no such intuition is simply because their peculiar
psychical self-evolution, their psycho-physical training, renders them
as incapable of spiritual intuition as the materio-physical training of
ordinary athletes render these incapable of psychical intuition. The
man, they say, who trains and develops what, for want of a more exact
terminology, I call his psychical powers, so as to guide the laws of
nature, control the elementals, and manipulate the astral light, as
effectually closes the doors on his highest spiritual perceptions, as
the man <span id="page_145">p. 145</span> who so trains and develops his
physical powers as to win the silver sculls on the Thames. or the
champion's belt, closes the doors on his psychical as well as his
spiritual perceptions. We students can only sit at the feet of our
respective masters and listen. We cannot form any conception of who is
right; and one thing is certain, that, who ever be right as to these
highest transcendental mysteries, real adepts of either class are almost
as superior to ordinary men as these are to monkeys.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[145:1](phs11.htm#fr_115.md) It is difficult to
understand what is meant here. Surely the laws of mathematics
demonstrate that two do not equal and cannot take the place of one. Yet
without any *conjuring*, the occultist doubles or reduplicates things,
and that though your observation may have been perfect, and though you
have been neither duped nor hallucinated.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[146:1](phs11.htm#fr_116.md) This, though
reasonable enough a score of years ago, has now become obsolete: plenty
of men of learning have of late years witnessed and attested
them.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[147:1](phs11.htm#fr_117.md) Astral Light, the
storehouse of Occult Electricity; the *vehicle* of the Primeval
Chaos.--E. O.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[150:1](phs11.htm#fr_118.md) Of course the six
days represent *inter alia* the six working cycles or circuits of
man--the seventh being the cycle of rest.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[150:2](phs11.htm#fr_119.md) The correct
interpretation. There was no more of a *personal* God to be found in
John's ideas than in our own heads.--E. O.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[150:3](phs11.htm#fr_120.md) We must go back a
good deal further than St. Vincent for the "*quod semper ubique et ab
omnibus*."--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[153:1](phs11.htm#fr_121.md) Or rather of cycles
of development either from zero to the monkey-man, or from the
monkey-man to Nirvana.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[153:2](phs11.htm#fr_122.md) Ingenious but-------
--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[154:1](phs11.htm#fr_123.md) These ever recurring
"yets" and "buts" sound odious! He is more than humouring public
superstition. He becomes a literary flunkey in his double dealings.--E.
O.

1 think my revered friend judges our author not only harshly, in this
case, but wrongly. The shield has two sides for the non-believer and the
believer. The cause of truth demands that both sides should he seen and
understood. Were there not to the believer something inexpressibly sweet
and comforting in this sacrament, would *billions* of men have derived
from it their greatest happiness in life, their chief consolation in
death? Such consolation, such happiness, may not be for us, but it might
almost be said "*Væ victis*" for those whom TRUTH has conquered. But, be
this as it may, the very cause of Truth demands that the court should
prove its familiarity with both sides of the case, and its verdict would
carry little weight with impartial inquirers, were this not shown. As it
is, the powerful rationalistic enunciation of the monstrous character of
the real conception, is only brought into stronger relief by the frank
admission of the ideal beauty with which Faith is able to veil it for
believers.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[156:1](phs11.htm#fr_124.md) Quite so, when the
priests, as Éliphas always repeats that they *should* be, *are* all
adepts of the highest occult mysteries, and the doctrines are those of
the eternal wisdom religion.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[156:2](phs11.htm#fr_125.md) Quite so, when
authority *really* means superiority in spiritual knowledge; but, when
leaping down at a -bound from this Utopian church and priesthood of his
hopes, into the arena of the Catholic Church as it is, he assails the
so-called Old Catholics for their schism, which after all is a step, if
a small one, towards Reason and Truth, it is *he* who becomes the child
and disciple of error.--*Trans*.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[157:1](phs11.htm#fr_126.md) Very consistent this
with what he has said above. Is this *his* charity?--E. O.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[157:2](phs11.htm#fr_127.md) Perhaps it might be
said that the foregoing neither wholly coincides with nor exhausts our
conception of the Ideal Church of the Future. But, be this as it may,
one thing is certain, viz., that on pain of losing all vitality, it must
have nothing to do with "Catholicism," or any other name already
bristling with pre-existing conceptions and constituting a cluster of
fully developed ideas, prejudices and superstitions.

What destroyed the vitality of Christ's teachings, turned his love and
blessing into hatred and curses for mankind, and now makes it necessary
to preach anew what he really taught? Simply the disregard of his
warning not to put new wine into old bottles. When the fathers of the
Christian Church took in <span id="page_158">p. 158</span> and to
disguise and dress up the occult verities of true Christism in the cast
off and tattered garbs of other dead or moribund faiths, they burked the
new born child as effectually as though they had buried it with the
corpses they despoiled, to furnish it with swaddling clothes.

Theosophy may not be absolutely irreproachable as a name for the
Religion of the Future because to scholars it is associated with
doctrines and ideas not wholly true, though having affinities with the
truth. But, to the mass of mankind the word is a blank without
associations, and scholars, unless wilfully, are not to be thus misled.
Anyhow it is preferable to any of the names Éliphas Lévi suggests,
redolent as all these are of a tyrannical and effete
dogmatism.--*Trans*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Great Secret](phs12.md)
