<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kn056)  [Next](kn058) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A.W. Budge, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 49. HOW HIS FATHER BLESSED HIS SON

And then the King of Ethiopia rose up to depart to his country, and he
came to his father that he might pray on his behalf, and he said unto
him, "Bless me, father"; and he made obeisance unto him. And the King
raised hire up, and blessed him, and embraced his head, and said,
"Blessed be the Lord my God Who blessed my father David, and Who blessed
our father Abraham. May He be with thee always, and bless thy seed even
as He blessed Jacob, and made his seed to be as many as the stars of
heaven and the sand of the sea. And as Abraham blessed Isaac my father
even so shall thy blessing be—the dew of heaven and the spaciousness of
the earth—and may all animals and all the birds of the heavens, and all
the beasts of the field, and the fish of the sea, be in subjection unto
thee. Be thou full, and not lacking in fullness; be thou perfect, and
not lacking in perfection; be gracious, and not obstinate; be in good
health, and not suffering; be generous, and not vindictive; be pure, and
not defiled; be righteous, and not a sinner; be merciful, and not
oppressive; be sincere, and not perverse; be long-suffering, and not
prone to wrath. And the enemy shall be afraid of thee, and thine
adversaries shall cast

<span id="img_pl11"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate XI. The Birth
of Christ](tn/pl11.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl11.jpg)  
Plate XI. The Birth of Christ  
</span>

<span class="small">1. The angels appearing to Mary at the birth of
Christ.  
2. The Oxen bowing before Christ.</span>

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

themselves under the sole of thy foot. And my Lady Zion, the holy and
heavenly, the Tabernacle of the Law of God, shall be a guide unto thee
at ail times, a guide in respect of what thou shouldst think in thy
heart and shouldst do with thy fingers, whether it be far or near to
thee, whether it be low or high to thee, whether it be strong or weak to
thee, whether it be outside or inside thee, whether it be to thee in the
house or in the field, whether it be visible or invisible to thee,
whether it be away from or near to thee, whether it be hidden from or
revealed to thee, whether it be secret or published abroad to thee—unto
thee our Lady Zion, the holy and heavenly, the pure Tabernacle of the
Law of God, shall be a guide." And David was blessed, and he made
obeisance, and departed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 50. How they bade farewell to his Father and how the city
mourned](kn058)

</div>
