<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kn057)  [Next](kn059) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A.W. Budge, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 50. HOW THEY BADE FAREWELL TO HIS FATHER AND HOW THE CITY MOURNED

And they bade \[the king\] farewell and departed. And first of all they
set Zion by night upon a wagon together with a mass of worthless stuff,
and dirty clothes, and stores of every sort and kind. And \[when\] all
the wagons were loaded, and the masters of the caravan rose up, and the
horn was blown, and the city became excited, and the youths shouted
loudly, awesomeness crowned it and grace surrounded it (*i.e.* Zion).
And the old men wailed, and the children cried out, and the widows wept,
and the virgins lamented, because the sons of their nobles, the mighty
men of Israel, had risen up to depart. But the city did not weep for
them alone, but because the majesty of the city had been carried off
with them. And although they did not know actually that Zion had been
taken from them, they made no mistake in their hearts and they wept
bitterly; and they were then even as they were when God slew the
firstborn of Egypt. There was not a house wherein there was not wailing,
from man even to the beast; the dogs

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

howled, and the asses screamed, and all those who were left there
mingled their tears together. It was as though the generals of a mighty
army had besieged the great city, and had captured it by assault, and
looted it, and taken its people prisoners and slain them with the edge
of the sword; even thus was that city of Zion—Jerusalem.

And King Solomon was dismayed at the weeping and outcry of the city, and
he looked out from the roof of the palace, the fort of the king's house,
and saw the whole city weeping and following them. And as a child, whom
his mother hath removed from her breast and left, followeth in her
footsteps crying out and weeping, even so did the people cry out and
weep; and they cast dust upon their heads, and they shed tears with
their eyes. And when Solomon saw the majesty of those who had departed,
he was deeply moved and he trembled, and his bowels quaked, and his
tears fell drop by drop upon his apparel, and he said, "Woe is me! for
my glory hath departed, and the crown of my splendour hath fallen, and
my belly is burned up because this my son hath departed, and the majesty
of my city and the freemen, the children of my might, are removed. From
this moment our glory hash passed away, and our kingdom hath been
carried off unto a strange people who know not God, even as the prophet
saith, 'The people who have not sought Me have found Me.' <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69) From this time forth the law, and wisdom,
and understanding shall be given unto them. And my father prophesied
concerning them, saying, 'Ethiopia shall bow before Him, and His enemies
shall eat the dust.' <span id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70) And in another
\[place\] he saith, 'Ethiopia shall stretch out her hands to God, and He
shall receive her with honour, and the kings of the earth shall praise
God.' <span id="fr_71"></span>[3](#fn_71) And in a third \[place\] he
saith, 'Behold, the Philistines, <span id="fr_72"></span>[4](#fn_72) and
the

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tyrians, and the
people of Ethiopia, who were born without the Law. The Law shall be
given unto them, and they shall say unto Zion, 'our mother <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73) because of a man who shall be born.' Will
this man then be my son who is begotten of me?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[74:1](kn058.htm#fr_69) Isaiah lxv, 1.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[74:2](kn058.htm#fr_70) Psalm lxxii, 9, 10.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[74:3](kn058.htm#fr_71) Psalm lxviii, 31.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[74:4](kn058.htm#fr_72) Psalm lxxxiii, 7 (?).

<span id="fn_73"></span>[75:1](kn058.htm#fr_73) Compare Psalm lxxxvii,
2–4; Isaiah li, 16.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 51. How he said unto Zadok the Priest, ''Go and Bring the
Covering (or, Clothing) which is upon it (i.e. Zion)''](kn059)

</div>
