<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kn064)  [Next](kn066) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A.W. Budge, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

### 57. CONCERNING THE FALL OF ZADOK THE PRIEST

And when Zadok saw this he fell forward on his face flat upon the
ground, and his spirit was poured out over him, for he was terrified;
and he became like a dead man. And when he tarried in coming out Solomon
sent to him Îyôas (Benaiah), the son of Yôdâḥê, and he found Zadok like
one dead. And he lifted up the head of Zadok, and felt his heart and his
nose to find out whether there was any sign of breath being in him; and
he fanned him, and lifted him up, and rubbed him and laid him out upon
the table. And he rose up and looked at the place where Zion had been
set, and he found her not, and he fell down upon the ground. And he cast
dust upon his head, and \[then\] rose up and went out and wailed at the
doors of the house of God; and the sound of his cries was heard as far
as the King's house. And the King rose up and commanded the crier to go
round, and the soldiers to blow the trumpets, so that the people might
go forth and pursue the men of the land of Ethiopia, and if they
overtook them they were to seize his son and bring him back with Zion,
and slay the \[other\] men with the sword. For with his mouth he spake
and said, "As the Lord God of Israel liveth, they are men of death and
not of life; for verily they deserve death because they have robbed the
house of the sanctuary of God, and have desired to pollute the
habitation of His Name in a land wherein there is not the Law."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 58. How Solomon Rose up to Slay Them](kn066)

</div>
