<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kn068)  [Next](kn070.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A.W. Budge, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 61. HOW SOLOMON RETURNED TO JERUSALEM

And then Solomon came back to the city of Jerusalem, and he wept there
with the elders of Jerusalem a great weeping in the house of God. And
after this the King and Zadok the priest embraced each other, and they
wept bitterly in the habitation of Zion, and they remained silent for a
long time. And the elders rose up and spike unto the King, saying, "Be
not thou sorrowful concerning this thing, O our Lord, for we know, from
first to last, that without the Will of God Zion will not dwell \[in any
place\], and that nothing happeneth without the Will of God. And as
concerning Zion in olden time, in the days of Eli the priest, before our

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

fathers had asked for a king, the Philistines carried Zion away captive
into \[their\] camp—God having neglected Israel in the battle, and its
priests ’Afnî (Hophni) and Pînâḥas (Phinehas) having fallen by the edge
of the sword. And the Philistines carried away the Tabernacle of the Law
of God, and brought it into their city, and set it in the house of their
god Dagon. And Dagon was broken to pieces and destroyed, and became like
dust, and their land became a desert through mice, and they ate up all
the fruit of their land, and their persons became sores and boils. And
they gathered together their priests, and magicians, and star-gazers,
and they entreated them and said unto them, 'How can we relieve
ourselves of these sores and the tribulation which have come upon us,
and upon our country?' And those magicians meditated and withdrew
themselves to be alone, and they brought their magical instruments, and
pondered, and considered, and planned how they could relieve them from
tribulation of their city and their persons. And they discovered that
this punishment had come upon them and their city because of Zion. And
they went to their kings and their governors, and they said unto them,
'All these things have befallen you through the heavenly Zion, the
Tabernacle of the Law of God. And now, know ye how ye will take her back
into her city, and her country, and her house. And we must by no means
send her away empty, but must give her an offering, so that she may
forgive you your sins, and do away your tribulation when she hath
returned to her city. And if ye will not send her to her city, no good
will come of making her to live with you, but ye shall continue to be
punished until ye are destroyed.'

"And their kings and governors said unto their priests, 'What gift now
say ye that we ought to give her, and how shall we send her back? Find
out, and tell us what we must do.' And the priests of the Philistines
took counsel together again, and they said unto their kings and

<span id="img_pl14"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate XIV. The
Virgin and Child and Joseph fleeing to Egypt](tn/pl14.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl14.jpg.md)  
Plate XIV. The Virgin and Child and Joseph fleeing to Egypt  
</span>

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

governors, 'Make for her according to the heads of your houses, sixty
figures of mice in gold, since mice have destroyed your land, and sixty
figures of the member of a man, since your own persons have suffered
from sores and boils on your members.' <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83.md) And the Philistines made as they commanded
them one hundred and twenty offerings of gold, and gave them to Zion.
And again they said unto the priests, 'How shall we send her away? And
whom do ye say shall set her in her city?' And again the magicians of
the Philistines said unto them, 'Let them bring two she-camels <span
id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84.md) that brought forth their firstborn at the
same time, and let them attach a wagons to them—and they must keep back
their young ones and shut them up in the house—and they must yoke the
two she-camels together, and then set them free and let them go where
they will. And if they march straight for Jerusalem we shall know that
peradventure God hath had compassion on our land; but if they wander
about, and go hither and thither, and wish to turn back to the place
whence they started, then we shall know that God is \[still\] wroth with
us, and that He will not remove His punishment until He hath blotted out
ourselves and our city. <span id="fr_85"></span>[3](#fn_85.md)

"And the Philistines did as the priests commanded their governors, and
they sent away Zion, and prostrated themselves before her. And those
camels made their way straight to the country of Judah, and they came to
the threshing floor and the house of thy kinsfolk received them. And
those who did not receive them were the men of the house of Dan, and
they did not do homage to Zion, for they regarded her in anger as their
destroyed (?) God. And they cut up the pieces of wood of the wagon, and
they made those camels to be sacrifices, and Zion returned to her place.
And whilst Zion was in \[her\] house Samuel the Prophet ministered

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

unto her, and vision and prophecy were revealed unto him, and he pleased
God in all his actions, and he ruled Israel for forty-eight years.

"And after him our people entreated God to give them a king like the
nations that were round about them. And Samuel the Prophet anointed Saul
king, and he reigned forty years. And he was of the tribe of Benjamin,
which was the youngest branch of the peoples of Israel. And Samuel the
Prophet also anointed thy father David. And when the Philistines fought
with Saul the King, Saul was conquered and died with \[Yô\]nâthân his
son. And those of his sons who were left wished to carry away Zion, when
they knew that their father and their brother were dead. And then when
they wished to hide her and to transfer her to the Valley of Gêlâbûḥê
(Gilboa) in order that thy father David might not carry them off, she
would not let them carry her away until thy father came and carried her
away from their city, but not with offerings, and not with incense and
burnt offerings. For it was impossible to carry Zion away unless she
wished it and God wished it. And again, when thy father reigned rightly
over Israel he took her from the city of Samaria and brought her here to
Jerusalem, dancing on his feet before her, and clapping his hands
because of joy for her; for she was taken by him that she might come to
the city of David thy father. And as for that which thou sayest
concerning the going of Zion to their city, to the country of Ethiopia,
if God willed it and she herself willed it, there is no one who could
prevent her; for of her own will she went, and of her own will she will
return if God pleaseth. And if she doth not return it will be God's good
pleasure. And as for us, if God hath willed it Jerusalem shall remain to
us wherein thou hast built for us a house of God. And now, let not thine
heart be sad, but comfort thou thyself with what we have said unto thee.
And the wisdom, which the Lord God of

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Israel hath given
thee, hath sprouted from thee. For wisdom is a strange thing. As a lamp
is not the sun, and as vinegar and aloes are neither profitable nor
useful additions to honey, even so the words of fools are not beneficial
to the wise man. And as smoke is to the eye, and unripe fruit to the
tooth, even so the words of fools are not beneficial to the wise."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[97:1](kn069.htm#fr_83.md) Five mice and five
emerods; see 1 Sam. vi, 4.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[97:2](kn069.htm#fr_84.md) "Two milch kine," 1 Sam.
vi, 7.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[97:3](kn069.htm#fr_85.md) "A new cart," 1 Sam. vi,
7.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 62. Concerning the Answer which Solomon made to them](kn070.md)

</div>
