<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kn091)  [Next](kn093) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A.W. Budge, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 84. CONCERNING THE KING OF ETHIOPIA AND HOW HE RETURNED TO HIS COUNTRY

And the King of Ethiopia returned to his country with great joy and
gladness; and marching along with their songs, and their pipes, and
their wagons, like an army of heavenly beings, the Ethiopians arrived
from

<span id="img_pl20"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate XX. The
Transfiguration. Christ in converse with Moses and Elias on Mount
Tabor](tn/pl20.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl20.jpg)  
Plate XX. The Transfiguration. Christ in converse with Moses and Elias
on Mount Tabor  
</span>

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jerusalem at the
city of Waḳêrôm in a single day. And they sent messengers in ships to
announce \[their arrival\] to Mâkĕdâ, the Queen of Ethiopia, and to
report to her how they had found every good thing, and how her son had
become king, and how they had brought the heavenly Zion. And she caused
all this glorious news to be spread abroad, and she made a herald to go
round about in all the country that was subject unto her, ordering the
people to meet her son and more particularly the heavenly Zion, the
Tabernacle of the God of Israel. And they blew horns before her, and all
the people of Ethiopia rejoiced, from the least to the greatest, men as
well as women; and the soldiers rose up with her to meet their King. And
she came to the city of the Government, which is the chief city of the
kingdom of Ethiopia; now in later times this \[city\] became the chief
city of the Christians of Ethiopia. And in it she caused to be prepared
perfumes innumerable from India, and from Bâltê to Gâltêt, and from
’Alsâfu to ’Azazat, and had them brought together there. And her son
came by the ’Azyâbâ road to Waḳêrôm, and he came forth to Masas, and
ascended to Bûr, and arrived at the city of the Government, the capital
\[city\] of Ethiopia, which the Queen herself had built and called
"Dabra Mâkĕdâ," after her own name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 85. Concerning the Rejoicing of Queen Mâkĕdâ](kn093)

</div>
