<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kn120)  [Next](kn122.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Kebra Nagast*, by E.A.W. Budge, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 113. CONCERNING THE CHARIOT AND THE VANQUISHER OF THE ENEMY

And the Archbishops (or, Patriarchs) answered and said unto Gregory, the
Worker of Wonders, "Behold now, we know well, and thou hast made us to
understand that the Kings of Ethiopia have become glorious and great
through Zion. And the Kings of Rômê also have become great because of
the nails \[of the Cross\] that Helena made into a bridle, which hath
become the vanquisher of the enemy for the King of Rômê. And the chariot
belongeth to the King of Ethiopia, and it hath vanquished his enemy. And
tell us also how long the vanquisher of the enemy shall remain with the
King of Rômê, and the chariot containing Zion with the King of Ethiopia.
Tell us, for God hath revealed unto thee what hath been, and what shall
be, vision and prophecy, like Moses and Elijah."

And Gregory answered and said unto them, "I will reveal unto you
concerning the King of Rômê when he shall transgress and shall provoke
God to wrath in the faith. This faith which we have ordered and laid
down

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

shall a king transgress who shall come in Rômê, and there shall be
associated with him a certain archbishop, and they shall change and
pervert the word of the Twelve Apostles, and they shall cast it aside in
the desire of their heart\[s\], and they shall teach what they wish, and
they shall turn the Scriptures to suit their own nature, even as the
Apostle saith, 'They have behaved themselves like \[the people of\]
Sodom and Gomorrah.' <span id="fr_305"></span>[1](#fn_305.md) And our Lord
said unto His disciples in the Gospel, 'Guard ye yourselves against
those who shall come unto you in the apparel of sheep, and who are
inwardly wolves that tear.' <span id="fr_306"></span>[2](#fn_306.md) And
when they have destroyed the faith the vanquisher of the enemy shall be
taken away from them, and there shall be none of those who have changed
our faith who shall sit upon the throne of Peter, and the bowels of
their Archbishops shall be emptied out if they have taken their seat
upon it in perverted faith. For the Angel of God hath been commanded to
protect the throne of Peter in Rômê. And God shall take away the
vanquisher of the enemy from the king who shall not guard the faith, and
the Persians shall make war upon him and defeat him, and it seemeth to
me that his name is Marcion the Apostate. And the King of Persia, whose
name is Harênêwôs (Irenaeus) shall conquer (?) him, and the king shall
carry him away, together with his horse, and by the Will of God the
horse on which is the vanquisher of the enemy shall be stirred up, and
shall go into the sea and perish therein. But the nails shall shine
there in the sea until Christ shall come again in great glory upon a
cloud of heaven, together with power.

"Now this hath God showed me in the pit. And as concerning the King of
Ethiopia, and Zion, the Bride of heaven, and her chariot whereby they
move, I will declare unto you that which my God hath revealed unto me
and hath made me to understand. \[Ethiopia\]

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

shall continue in the orthodox faith until the coming of our Lord, and
she shall in no way turn aside from the word of the Apostles, and it
shall be so even as we have ordered until the end of the world.

And one answered and said unto the Worker of Wonders (*i.e.* Gregory),
"Now when Samâlyâl cometh, who is the False Christ (Antichrist), will
the faith of the people of Ethiopia be destroyed by his attack?" And
Gregory answered and said, "Assuredly not. Hath not David prophesied
saying, 'Ethiopia shall make her hands come to God?' <span
id="fr_307"></span>[1](#fn_307.md) And this that he saith meaneth that the
Ethiopians will neither pervert nor change this our faith and what we
have ordered, and the faith of those who were before us, the teachers of
the Law of the Apostles."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_305"></span>[222:1](kn121.htm#fr_305.md) Matthew x, 15.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[222:2](kn121.htm#fr_306.md) Matthew vii, 15.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[223:1](kn121.htm#fr_307.md) Psalm lxviii, 31.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 114. Concerning the Return of Zion](kn122.md)

</div>
