<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act009)  [Next](act011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 10:0</span></span>

An angel appears to Cornelius, a centurion, and directs him to send to
Joppa, for Peter, to instruct him in the way of salvation, [Act
10:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001). He sends accordingly, [Act
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#007), [Act
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#008). While the messengers are on
their way to Joppa, Peter has a remarkable vision, by which he is taught
how he should treat the Gentiles, [Act
10:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009). The messengers arrive at the
house of Simon the tanner, and deliver their message, [Act
10:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#017). They lodge there that night,
and on the morrow Peter accompanies them to Caesarea, where they find
Cornelius and his friends assembled, waiting the coming of Peter, [Act
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#023), [Act
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#024). Peter makes an apology for his
coming, and inquires for what purpose Cornelius had sent for him, [Act
10:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#025). Cornelius answers, [Act
10:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#030). And Peter preaches unto him
Jesus, as the Savior of the world, and the Judge of quick and dead, [Act
10:34-43](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034). While he speaks the Holy
Ghost descends on Cornelius and his company; and they speak with new
tongues, and magnify God, [Act
10:44-46](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044). Peter commands them to be
baptized in the name of the Lord, [Act
10:47](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#047), [Act
10:48](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#048).

I have already observed (see the conclusion of the preceding chapter)
that hitherto the apostles confined their labors among the Jews and
circumcised proselytes, not making any offer of salvation to the
Gentiles; for they had fully imbibed the opinion that none could enter
into the kingdom of God, and be finally saved, unless they were
circumcised, and became obedient to the law of Moses. This prejudice
would have operated so as finally to prevent them from preaching the
Gospel to the Gentiles, had not God, by a particular interposition of
his mercy and goodness, convinced Peter, and through him all the other
apostles, that he had accepted the Gentiles as well as the Jews, and
would put no difference between the one and the other, purifying their
hearts by faith, and giving the Gentiles the Holy Ghost, as he had
before given it to the Jews. The means which he used to produce this
conviction in the minds of the apostles are detailed at length in the
following chapter.

[Acts 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 10:1</span></span>

There was a certain man in Caesarea - This was Caesarea of Palestine,
called also Strato's Tower, as has been already noted, and the residence
of the Roman procurator.

A centurion - Ἑκατονταρχης, The chief or captain of 100 men, as both the
Greek and Latin words imply. How the Roman armies were formed, divided,
and marshalled, see in the notes on [Mat
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016) (note). A centurion among the
Romans was about the same rank as a captain among us.

The band called the Italian band - The word σπειρα, which we translate
band, signifies the same as cohort or regiment, which sometimes
consisted of 555 infantry, and 66 cavalry; but the cohors prima, or
first cohort, consisted of 1105 infantry, and 132 cavalry, in the time
of Vegetius. But the cavalry are not to be considered as part of the
cohort, but rather a company joined to it. A Roman legion consisted of
ten cohorts; the first of which surpassed all the others, both in
numbers and in dignity. When in former times the Roman legion contained
6000, each cohort consisted of 600, and was divided into three manipuli;
but both the legions and cohorts were afterwards various in the numbers
they contained. As there were doubtless many Syrian auxiliaries, the
regiment in question was distinguished from them as consisting of
Italian, i.e. Roman, soldiers. The Italian cohort is not unknown among
the Roman writers: Gruter gives an inscription, which was found in the
Forum Sempronii, on a fine table of marble, nine feet long, four feet
broad, and four inches thick; on which are the following words: -

l\. maesio. l. f. pol.

rvfo. proc. avg.

trib. mil. leg. x.

appollinaris. trib.

coh. mil. ITALIC. volunt.

qvae. est. in. syria. praef.

fabrvm. bis.

See Gruter's Inscriptions, p. ccccxxxiii-iv.

This was probably the same cohort as that mentioned here by St. Luke;
for the tenth legion mentioned in the above inscription was certainly in
Judea, a.d. 69. Tacitus also mentions the Italica legio, the Italic
legion, lib. i. c. 59, which Junius Blaesus had under his command in the
province of Lyons. We learn, from the Roman historians, that the fifth,
tenth, and fifteenth legions were stationed in Judea; and the third,
fourth, sixth, and twelfth in Syria. The Italic legion was in the battle
of Bedriacum, fought, a.d. 69, between the troops of Vitellius and Otho;
and performed essential services to the Vitellian army. See Tacitus,
Hist. lib. ii. cap. 41. The issue of this battle was the defeat of the
Othonians, on which Otho slew himself, and the empire was confirmed to
Vitellius.

Wherever he sees it necessary, St. Luke carefully gives dates and facts,
to which any might have recourse who might be disposed to doubt his
statements: we have had several proofs of this in his Gospel. See
especially [Luk 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001) (note), etc., and
[Luk 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001) (note), etc., and the notes
there.

[Acts 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 10:2</span></span>

A devout man - Ευσεβης, from ευ, well, and σεβομαι, I worship. A person
who worships the true God, and is no idolater.

One that feared God - Φοβουμενος τον Θεον, One who was acquainted with
the true God, by means of his word and laws; who respected these laws,
and would not dare to offend his Maker and his Judge. This is
necessarily implied in the fear of God.

With all his house - He took care to instruct his family in the
knowledge which he himself had received; and to establish the worship of
God in his house.

Gave much alms - His love to God led him to love men; and this love
proved its sincerity by acts of beneficence and charity.

Prayed to God alway - Felt himself a dependent creature; knew he had no
good but what he had received; and considered God to be the fountain
whence he was to derive all his blessings. He prayed to God alway; was
ever in the spirit of prayer, and frequently in the act. What an
excellent character is this! And yet the man was a Gentile! He was what
a Jew would repute common and unclean: see [Act
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#028). He was, therefore, not
circumcised; but, as he worshipped the true God, without any idolatrous
mixtures, and was in good report among all the nation of the Jews, he
was undoubtedly what was called a proselyte of the gate, though not a
proselyte of justice, because he had not entered into the bond of the
covenant by circumcision. This was a proper person, being so much of a
Jew and so much of a Gentile, to form the connecting link between both
people; and God chose him that the salvation of the Jews might with as
little observation as possible be transmitted to the Gentiles. The
choice of such a person, through whom the door of faith was opened to
the heathen world, was a proof of the wisdom and goodness of God. The
man who was chosen to this honor was not a profligate Gentile; nor yet a
circumcised proselyte. He was a Gentile, amiable and pure in his
manners; and, for his piety and charitableness, held in high estimation
among all the nation of the Jews. Against such a person they could not,
with any grace, be envious, though God should pour out upon him the gift
of the Holy Spirit.

[Acts 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 10:3</span></span>

He saw in a vision evidently - The text is as plain as it can be, that
an angel of God did appear to Cornelius. This was in a vision, i.e. a
supernatural representation; and it was φανερως, manifestly, evidently
made; and at such a time too as precluded the possibility of his being
asleep; for it was about the ninth hour of the day, answering to our
three o'clock in the afternoon, (see note on [Act
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001) (note)), the time of public
prayer, according to the custom of the Jews, and while Peter was engaged
in that sacred duty. The angelic appearance to Cornelius was something
similar to that made to Daniel, [Dan
9:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#020), and that especially to
Zachariah, the father of John Baptist, [Luk
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#011), etc.

[Acts 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 10:4</span></span>

Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial - Being all
performed in simplicity and godly sincerity, they were acceptable to the
Most High.

Come up for a memorial: This form of speech is evidently borrowed from
the sacrificial system of the Jews. Pious and sincere prayers are high
in God's estimation; and therefore are said to ascend to him, as the
smoke and flame of the burnt-offering appeared to ascend to heaven.

These prayers and alms came up for a memorial before God: this is a
manifest allusion to the meat-offering, which, in [Lev
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#016), is said to be אזכרה azkerah, a
memorial, (speaking after the manner of men), to put God in remembrance
that such a person was his worshipper, and needed his protection and
help. So the prayers and alms of Cornelius ascended before God as an
acceptable sacrifice, and were recorded in the kingdom of heaven, that
the answers might be given in their due season.

[Acts 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 10:6</span></span>

Simon a tanner - See the note on [Act
9:43](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#043).

What thou oughtest to do - From this it appears that matters of great
moment had occupied the mind of Cornelius. He was not satisfied with the
state of his own soul, nor with the degree he possessed of religious
knowledge; and he set apart a particular time for extraordinary fasting
and prayer, that God might farther reveal to him the knowledge of his
will. Perhaps he had heard of Jesus, and had been perplexed with the
different opinions that prevailed concerning him, and now prayed to God
that he might know what part he should take; and the answer to this
prayer is, "Send to Joppa for Simon Peter, he shall tell thee what thou
oughtest to do." This clause, so explanatory, is wanting in almost every
MS. and version of note. Griesbach and some others have left it out of
the text. But see [Act 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#014), where it
stands in substance.

[Acts 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 10:7</span></span>

And a devout soldier - It has already been remarked that Cornelius had
taken care to instruct his family in Divine things; and it appears also
that he had been attentive to the spiritual interests of his regiment.
We do not find that it was then, even among the Romans, considered a
disgrace for a military officer to teach his men lessons of morality,
and piety towards God, whatever it may be in some Christian countries in
the present time.

[Acts 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 10:8</span></span>

He sent them to Joppa - It has been properly remarked, that from Joppa,
Jonah was sent to preach to the Gentiles of Nineveh; and from the same
place Peter was sent to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles at Caesarea.

[Acts 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 10:9</span></span>

On the morrow, as they went on their journey - From Joppa to Caesarea
was about twelve or fifteen leagues; the messengers could not have left
the house of Cornelius till about two hours before sunset; therefore,
they must have traveled a part of the night, in order to arrive at Joppa
the next day, towards noon. - Calmet. Cornelius sent two of his
household servants, by way of respect to Peter; probably the soldier was
intended for their defense, as the roads in Judea were by no means safe.

Peter went up upon the house-top to pray - It has often been remarked
that the houses in Judea were builded with flat roofs, on which people
walked, conversed, meditated, prayed, etc. The house-top was the place
of retirement; and thither Peter went for the purpose of praying to God.
In Bengal, some of the rich Hindoos have a room on the top of the house,
in which they perform worship daily.

[Acts 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 10:10</span></span>

He became very hungry - It seems that this happened about dinner-time;
for it appears that they were making ready, παρασκευαζοντων, dressing
the victuals for the family. The dinner among the ancients was a very
slight meal; and they had no breakfast: their supper was their principal
meal. And, in very ancient times, they ate only once in the day. Supper
was the meal at which they saw their friends, the business of the day
being then finished.

He fell into a trance - Επεπεσεν επ' αυτον εκϚασις, An ecstasy fell upon
him. A person may be said to be in an ecstasy when transported with joy
or admiration, so that he is insensible to every object but that on
which he is engaged. Peter's ecstasy is easily accounted for: he went up
to the house-top to pray: at first he felt keen hunger; but, being
earnestly engaged with God, all natural appetites became absorbed in the
intense application of his soul to his Maker. While every passion and
appetite was under this Divine influence, and the soul, without let or
hinderance, freely conversing with God, then the visionary and
symbolical representation mentioned here took place.

[Acts 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 10:11</span></span>

And saw heaven opened - His mind now entirely spiritualized, and
absorbed in heavenly contemplation, was capable of discoveries of the
spiritual world; a world which, with its πληρωμα, or plenitude of
inhabitants, surrounds us at all times; but which we are incapable of
seeing through the dense medium of flesh and blood, and their
necessarily concomitant earthly passions. Much, however, of such a world
and its economy may be apprehended by him who is purified from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and who has perfected holiness in
the fear of God. But this is a subject to which the enthusiast in vain
attempts to ascend. The turbulent working of his imagination, and the
gross earthly crudities which he wishes to obtrude on the world as
revelations from God, afford a sufficient refutation of their own
blasphemous pretensions.

A great sheet, knit at the four corners - Perhaps intended to be an
emblem of the universe, and its various nations, to the four corners of
which the Gospel was to extend, and to offer its blessings to all the
inhabitants, without distinction of nation, etc.

[Acts 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 10:12</span></span>

All manner of four-footed beasts, etc. - Every species of quadrupeds,
whether wild or domestic; all reptiles, and all fowls. Consequently,
both the clean and unclean were present in this visionary
representation: those that the Jewish law allowed to be sacrificed to
God, or proper for food; as well as those which that law had prohibited
in both cases: such as the beasts that do not chew the cud; fish which
have no scales; fowls of prey and such others as are specified in [Lev
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#001), etc., where see the notes.

[Acts 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 10:13</span></span>

Rise, Peter, kill and eat - Θυσον και φαγε, Sacrifice and eat. Though
this verb is sometimes used to signify the slaying of animals for food,
yet, as the proper notion is to slay for the purpose of sacrifice, it
appears to me to be better to preserve that meaning here. Animals that
were offered in sacrifice were considered as given to God; and, when he
received the life, the flesh was given to those who offered the
sacrifice, that they might feed upon it; and every sacrifice had in it
the nature of a covenant; and covenants were usually made by eating
together on the flesh of the sacrifice offered on the occasion, God
being supposed to be invisibly present with them, and partaking of the
feast. The Jews and Gentiles are certainly represented by the clean and
unclean animals in this large vessel: these, by the ministry of the
Gospel, were to be offered up a spiritual sacrifice to God. Peter was to
be a prime instrument in this work; he was to offer them to God, and
rejoice in the work of his hands. The spirit of the heavenly direction
seems to be this: "The middle wall of partition is now to be pulled
down; the Jews and Gentiles are called to become one flock, under one
shepherd and bishop of souls. Thou, Peter, shalt open the door of faith
to the Gentiles, and be also the minister of the circumcision. Rise up;
already a blessed sacrifice is prepared: go and offer it to God; and let
thy soul feed on the fruits of his mercy and goodness, in thus showing
his gracious design of saving both Jews and Gentiles by Christ
crucified."

[Acts 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 10:14</span></span>

Common or unclean - By common, κοινον, whatever was in general use among
the Gentiles is to be understood; by ακαθαρτον, unclean, every thing
that was forbidden by the Mosaic law. However, the one word may be
considered as explanatory of the other. The rabbins themselves, and many
of the primitive fathers, believed that by the unclean animals forbidden
by the law the Gentiles were meant.

[Acts 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 10:15</span></span>

What God hath cleansed - God, who made at first the distinction between
Jews and Gentiles, has a right to remove it, whenever and by whatever
means he pleases: he, therefore, who made the distinction, for wise
purposes, between the clean and the unclean, now pronounces all to be
clean. He had authority to do the first; he has authority to do the
last. God has purposed that the Gentiles shall have the Gospel preached
to them: what he therefore has cleansed, "that call not thou common."

[Acts 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 10:16</span></span>

This was done thrice - For the greater certainty, and to make the deeper
impression on the apostle's mind.

And the vessel was received up again into heaven - Both Jews and
Gentiles came equally from God; and to him, both, by the preaching of
the Gospel, shall again return.

[Acts 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 10:17</span></span>

While Peter doubted - the men - stood before the gate - In all this we
find an admirable display of the economy of Providence. Cornelius prays,
and has a vision which prepares him to receive instruction from Peter:
Peter prays, and has a vision which prepares and disposes him to give
instruction to Cornelius. While he is in doubts and perplexity what the
full meaning of the vision might be, the messengers, who had been
despatched under the guidance of an especial Providence, came to the
door; and the Holy Spirit gives him information that his doubts should
be all cleared up by accompanying the men who were now inquiring for
him. How exactly does every thing in the conduct of Providence occur;
and how completely is every thing adapted to time, place, and occasion!
All is in weight, measure, and number. Those simple occurrences which
men snatch at, and press into the service of their own wishes, and call
them providential openings may, indeed, be links of a providential
chain, in reference to some other matter; but unless they be found to
speak the same language in all their parts, occurrence corresponding
with occurrence, they are not to be construed as indications of the
Divine will in reference to the claimants. Many persons, through these
misapprehensions, miscarrying, have been led to charge God foolishly for
the unsuccessful issue of some business in which their passions, not his
providence, prompted them to engage.

[Acts 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 10:21</span></span>

Which were sent unto him from Cornelius - This clause is wanting in
almost every MS. of worth, and in almost all the versions.

Behold, I am he whom ye seek - A sudden, unexpected speech, like the
address of Aeneas to Dido; when the cloud in which he was involved
suddenly dissipated, and he appeared with the exclamation,

\- coram, quem quaeritis, adsum!

Aen. lib. i. 595.

What is the cause therefore ye are come? - He still did not know the
full import of the vision; but being informed by the Holy Spirit that
three men were seeking him, and that he should go with them, without
scruple, he instantly obeyed; and finding them at the door, desired to
know why they sought him.

[Acts 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 10:22</span></span>

Cornelius the centurion, etc. - They gave him the simple relation which
they had received from their master. For the character of Cornelius, see
the comment on [Act 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#002) (note).

To hear words of thee - But of what kind they could not as yet tell.

[Acts 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 10:23</span></span>

Then called he them in, etc. - They had already walked a long journey in
a short time, and needed refreshment; and it was thought expedient they
should rest that night with Simon the tanner.

Certain brethren from Joppa - They were six in number, as we learn from
[Act 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#012). It was necessary that
there should be several witnesses of the important transactions which
were about to take place; as on no slight evidence would even the
converted Jews believe that repentance unto life, and the Holy Spirit,
should be granted to the Gentiles.

[Acts 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 10:24</span></span>

His kinsmen and near friends - Συγγενεις, His, relatives, and αναγκαιους
φιλους , his necessary friends; but the Syriac makes αναγκαιους an
epithet as well as συγγενεις, and thus the passage may be read, his
kinsmen, his domestics, and his friends. It appears that he had
collected the whole circle of his intimate acquaintance, that they also
might profit by a revelation which he expected to come immediately from
heaven; and these amounted to many persons; see [Act
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#027).

[Acts 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 10:25</span></span>

Fell down at his feet, and worshipped him - As Peter's coming was
announced by an angel, Cornelius might have supposed that Peter himself
was an angel, and of a superior order; seeing he came to announce what
the first angel was not employed to declare: it was, probably, in
consequence of this thought that he prostrated himself before Peter,
offering him the highest act of civil respect; for there was nothing in
the act, as performed by Cornelius, which belonged to the worship of the
true God. Prostrations to superiors were common in all Asiatic
countries. The Codex Bezae, and the later Syriac in the margin reads
this verse differently from all other MSS. and versions; thus, But as
Peter drew nigh to Caesarea, one of the servants ran before, and told
that he was come: then Cornelius leaped up, and met him, and, falling at
his feet, he worshipped him. This is a very remarkable addition, and
relates circumstances that we may naturally suppose did actually take
place.

[Acts 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 10:26</span></span>

I myself also am a man - "I am not an angel; I am come to you simply, on
the part of God, to deliver to you the doctrine of eternal life."

[Acts 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 10:27</span></span>

And as he talked with him - Cornelius had met Peter at some short
distance from his house, and they conversed together till they went in.

[Acts 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 10:28</span></span>

Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing, etc. - He addressed the whole
company, among whom, it appears, there were persons well acquainted with
Jewish customs; probably some of them were Jewish proselytes.

But God hath showed me, etc. - He now began to understand the import of
the vision which he saw at Joppa. A Gentile is not to be avoided because
he is a Gentile; God is now taking down the partition wall which
separated them from the Jews.

[Acts 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 10:29</span></span>

I ask - for what intent ye have sent for me? - Peter had been informed
of this by the servants of Cornelius, [Act
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#022); but, as all the company might
not have been informed of the circumstances, he, as it were, invites him
to tell his story afresh, that his friends, etc., might be the better
prepared to receive the truth, which he was about to dispense, in
obedience to his Divine commission.

[Acts 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 10:30</span></span>

Four days ago I was fasting until this hour - It was then about three
o'clock in the afternoon; and it appears that Cornelius had continued
his fasts from three o'clock the preceding day to three o'clock the day
following; not that he had fasted four days together, as some supposes
for even if he did fast four days consecutively, he ate one meal on each
day. It is however necessary to remark that the word νηϚευων, fasting is
wanting in ABC, one other; the Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, and Vulgate;
but it has not been omitted in any edition of the Greek Testament.

[Acts 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 10:31</span></span>

Thy prayer is heard - See the note on [Act
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#004). Cornelius prayed, fasted, and
gave alms. It was in this way he looked for salvation; not to purchase
it: a thought of this kind does not appear to have entered into his
mind; but these were the means he used to get his soul brought to the
knowledge of the truth. The reader must recollect that in the case of
Cornelius there was no open vision; he used the light and power which
God had already given; and behold how mightily God increased his gifts!
He that hath, i.e., that uses what he has, shall receive; and no man can
expect any increase of light or life, who does not improve the grace
already given.

[Acts 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 10:33</span></span>

Are we all here present before God - Instead of before God, the Codex
Bezae, Syriac, Ethiopic, Armenian, and Vulgate, read before Thee. The
people were all waiting for the preacher, and every heart was filled
with expectation; they waited as before God, from whose messenger they
were about to hear the words of life.

[Acts 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 10:34</span></span>

God is no respecter of persons - He does God esteem a Jew, because he is
a Jew; nor does he detest a Gentile because he is a Gentile. It was a
long and deeply rooted opinion among the Jews, that God never would
extend his favor to the Gentiles; and that the descendants of Jacob only
should enjoy his peculiar favor and benediction. Of this opinion was St.
Peter, previously to the heavenly vision mentioned in this chapter. He
was now convinced that God was no respecter of persons; that as all must
stand before his judgment seat, to be judged according to the deeds done
in the body, so no one nation, or people, or individual, could expect to
find a more favorable decision than another who was precisely in the
same moral state; for the phrase, respect of persons, is used in
reference to unjust decisions in a court of justice, where, through
favor, or interest, or bribe, a culprit is acquitted, and a righteous or
innocent person condemned. See [Lev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015); [Deu
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#016), [Deu
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#017); [Deu
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019). And as there is no iniquity
(decisions contrary to equity) with God, so he could not shut out the
pious prayers, sincere fasting, and benevolent alms-giving of Cornelius;
because the very spring whence they proceeded was his own grace and
mercy. Therefore he could not receive even a Jew into his favor (in
preference to such a person) who had either abused his grace, or made a
less godly use of it than this Gentile had done.

[Acts 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 10:35</span></span>

But in every nation he that feared him, etc. - In every nation he who,
according to his light and privileges, fears God, worships him alone,
(for this is the true meaning of the word), and worketh righteousness,
abstains from all evil, gives to all their due, injures neither the
body, soul, nor reputation of his neighbor, is accepted with him. It is
not therefore the nation, kindred, profession, mode or form of worship,
that the just God regards; but the character, the state of heart, and
the moral deportment. For what are professions, etc., in the sight of
that God who trieth spirits, and by whom actions are weighed! He looks
for the grace he has given, the advantages he has afforded, and the
improvement of all these. Let it be observed farther, that no man can be
accepted with this just God who does not live up to the advantages of
the state in which providence has placed him. Why was Cornelius accepted
with God while thousands of his countrymen were passed by? Because he
did not receive the grace of God in vain; he watched, fasted, prayed,
and gave alms, which they did not. Had he not done so, would he have
been accepted? Certainly not; because it would then appear that he had
received the grace of God in vain, and had not been a worker together
with him. Many irreligious men, in order to get rid of the duties and
obligations of Christianity, quote this verse in their own favor, while
they reject all the Gospel besides; and roundly assert, as they think on
the authority of this text, that they need neither believe in Jesus
Christ, attend to his Gospel, nor use his ordinances; for, if they fear
God and work righteousness, they shall be infallibly accepted with him.
Let such know that if they had been born and still were living in a land
where the light of the Gospel had never shone, and were there
conscientiously following the glimmering ray of celestial light which
God had granted, they might, with some show of reason, speak in this
way; but, as they are born and live under the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
God, the just Judge, will require that they fear him, and work
righteousness, According to the Light afforded by that very Gospel. The
sincerity, watching, praying, fastings and alms-giving of Cornelius will
not be sufficient for them who, as it may be justly said, live in
splendours of Christianity. In such a state, God requires that a man
shall love him with all his heart, soul, mind, and strength; and his
neighbor as himself. In the face of such a requisition as this, how will
the poor heathen virtue of one born in the pale of Christianity appear?
And if God requires all this, will not a man need all the grace that has
been brought to light by the revelation of Jesus Christ to enable him to
do it?

[Acts 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 10:36</span></span>

The word which God sent, etc. - Few verses in the New Testament have
perplexed critics and divines more than this. The ancient copyists seem
also to have been puzzled with it; as the great variety in the different
MSS. sufficiently proves. A foreign critic makes a good sense by
connecting this with the preceding verse, thus: In every nation he that
feared him and worketh righteousness is accepted with him, according to
that doctrine which God sent unto the children of Israel, by which he
published peace (i.e. reconciliation between Jews and Gentiles) by Jesus
Christ, who is Lord of all; and, because Lord of all, both of Jews and
Gentiles, therefore he must be impartial; and, because impartial, or no
respecter of persons, therefore, in every nation, whether Judea, Greece,
or Italy, he that feareth God, and worketh righteousness, is accepted
with him.

I believe τον λογον, the word, in this verse, should be translated, that
doctrine; and probably ῥημα, which we translate that word in [Act
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#037), should be omitted as it is in
the Codex Bezae, and its Itala version; and if ὁν, which is in [Act
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#036), be even left out, as it is in
ABC, Coptic and Vulgate, the whole may be literally read thus: As to the
doctrine sent to the children of Israel, preaching the glad tidings of
peace (ευαγγελιζομενος ειρηνην) by Jesus Christ, he is Lord of all, ye
know what was done (το γενομενον) through all Judea, beginning after the
baptism which John preached. Jesus, who was from Nazareth, whom God
anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with mighty power (δυναμει) went about
doing good, and healing all that were tyrannically oppressed
(καταδυναϚευομενους) by the devil, for God was with him. Critics have
proposed a great variety of modes by which they suppose these verses may
be rendered intelligible; and the learned reader may see many in
Wolfius, Kypke, Rosenmuller, and others. Kypke contends that the word
Κυριος, Lord, is to be understood adjectively, and ought to be referred
to λογος, and the 36th verse will then stand thus: The word which he
sent to the children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, that
word has authority over all. This amounts nearly to the same sense with
the expositions given above; and all proclaim this truth, which the
apostle labored to establish, namely, that God intended the salvation of
all men by Jesus Christ; and therefore proclaimed reconciliation to all,
by him who is Lord, maker, preserver, redeemer, and judge of all. And of
this the apostle was now more convinced by the late vision; and his
mission from him who is Lord of all to Cornelius, a heathen, was a full
illustration of the heavenly truth; for the very meeting of Peter, once
a prejudiced Jew, and Cornelius, once an unenlightened Gentile, was a
sort of first fruits of this general reconciliation, and a proof that
Jesus was Lord of All.

[Acts 10:37](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 10:37</span></span>

That word - ye know - This account of Jesus of Nazareth ye cannot be
unacquainted with; because it has been proclaimed throughout all Judea
and Galilee, from the time that John began to preach. Ye have heard how
he was anointed with the Holy Ghost, and of the miracles which he
performed; how he went about doing good, and healing all kinds of
demoniacs and, by these mighty and beneficent acts, giving the fullest
proof that God was with him. This was the exordium of Peter's discourse;
and thus he begins, from what they knew, to teach them what they did not
know.

St. Peter does not intimate that any miracle was wrought by Christ
previously to his being baptized by John. Beginning at Galilee. Let us
review the mode of Christ's manifestation.

1\. After he had been baptized by John, he went into the desert, and
remained there forty days.

2\. He then returned to the Baptist, who was exercising his ministry at
that time at Bethany or Bethabara; and there he made certain disciples,
viz., Andrew, Bartholomew, Peter, and Philip.

3\. Thence he went to the marriage at Cana, in Galilee, where he wrought
his first miracle.

4\. And afterwards he went to Capernaum in the same country, by the sea
of Galilee, where he wrought many others. This was the manner in which
Christ manifested himself; and these are the facts of which Peter
presumes they had a perfect knowledge, because they had been for a long
time notorious through all the land.

[Acts 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 10:38</span></span>

God anointed Jesus of Nazareth - Here the apostle refers to Christ as
the promised Messiah; for, as Messiah signifies the anointed one, and
Christ has the same signification in Greek, and the Messiah, according
to the prophets, and the expectation of the Jews, was to work miracles,
Peter proclaims Jesus as the Messiah, and refers to the miracles which
he wrought as the proof of it. This delicate, but forcible allusion is
lost by most readers.

[Acts 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 10:39</span></span>

We are witnesses of all - In this speech St. Peter may refer, not only
to the twelve apostles, but to the six brethren whom he had brought with
him.

Whom they slew - As the truth of the resurrection must depend on the
reality of the death of Christ, it was necessary that this should be
stated, and shown to rest on the most indubitable evidence.

[Acts 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 10:40</span></span>

Him God raised up the third day - He lay long enough under the power of
death to prove that he was dead; and not too long, lest it should be
supposed that his disciples had time sufficient to have practiced some
deceit or imposture; and, to prevent this, the Jews took care to have
the tomb well guarded during the whole time which he lay there.

[Acts 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 10:41</span></span>

Not to all the people - In the order of Divine providence, the public
were to be no longer instructed by Jesus Christ personally; but it was
necessary that those who were to preach redemption in his name should be
thoroughly furnished to this good and great work; therefore, the time he
spent on earth, after his resurrection, was devoted to the instruction
of his disciples.

Witnesses chosen before of God - That is, God chose such men to attest
this fact as were every way best qualified to give evidence on the
subject; persons who were always to be found; who might at all times be
confronted with those, if any such should offer themselves, who could
pretend to prove that there was any imposture in this case; and persons
who, from the very circumstances in which they were placed, must appear
to have an absolute conviction of the truth of all they attested. The
first preachers of the Gospel must be the witnesses of its facts; and
these first preachers must be put in such circumstances as to
demonstrate, not only that they had no secular end in view, nor indeed
could have any, but also that they should be able to evince that they
had the fullest conviction of the reality of the eternal world, and of
their Master's existence in glory there; as they carried their lives
continually in their hands, and regarded them not, so that they might
fulfill the ministry which they had received from their Lord, and finish
their course with joy.

But why was not Christ, after his resurrection, shown to all the people!

1\. Because it was impossible that such a thing could be done without
mob and tumult. Let it only be announced, "Here is the man who was dead
three days, and who is risen from the dead!" what confusion would be the
consequence of such an exposure! Some would say, This is he; others, He
is like him; and so on; and the valid testimony must be lost in the
confusion of the multitude.

2\. God chose such witnesses whose testimony should be unimpeachable;
the men who knew him best, and who by their depositions in proof of the
fact should evidently risk their lives. And,

3\. as multitudes are never called to witness any fact, but a few
selected from the rest, whose knowledge is most accurate, and whose
veracity is unquestionable, therefore, God showed not Christ risen from
the dead to all the people, but to witnesses chosen by himself; and they
were such as perfectly knew him before, and who ate and drank with him
after his resurrection, and consequently had the fullest proof and
conviction of the truth of this fact.

[Acts 10:42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 10:42</span></span>

And he commanded us to preach - By thus assuring them that Jesus Christ
was appointed to judge the world, he at once showed them the necessity
of subjection to him, that they might stand in the day of his appearing.

The Judge of quick and dead - The word quick we retain from our ancient
mother tongue, the Saxon, to live, and from this our quicks, quick-set
hedges, fences made of living thorns, etc. By quick and dead we are to
understand:

1\. All that had lived from the foundation of the world till that time;
and all that were then alive.

2\. All that should be found alive at the day of judgment, as well as
all that had died previously.

[Acts 10:43](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 10:43</span></span>

To him give all the prophets witness - See [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006); [Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007); [Isa
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005), [Isa
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006); [Isa
59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020); [Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034); [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024); [Mic
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018), etc.; and [Zac
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001). As Jesus Christ was the sum and
substance of the law and the Mosaic dispensation, so all the prophets
bore testimony, either directly or indirectly, to him; and, indeed,
without him and the salvation he has promised, there is scarcely any
meaning in the Mosaic economy, nor in most of the allusions of the
prophets.

Remission of sins - The phrase, αφεσις ἁμαρτιων, means simply the taking
away of sins; and this does not refer to the guilt of sin merely, but
also to its power, nature, and consequences. All that is implied in
pardon of sin, destruction of its tyranny, and purification from its
pollution, is here intended; and it is wrong to restrict such operations
of mercy to pardon alone.

[Acts 10:44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">act 10:44</span></span>

While Peter yet spake - It in not very likely that the words recorded by
St. Luke are all that the apostle spoke on this occasion; but, while he
continued to discourse with them on this subject, the Holy Ghost fell on
all them that heard the word; and his descent was known by their being
enabled to speak with different kinds of tongues. In what manner this
gift was bestowed we cannot tell; probably it was in the same way in
which it had been given on the day of pentecost; for as they spake with
tongues, which was the effect of the descent of the Spirit as flaming
tongues on the heads of the disciples on the day of pentecost, it is
very likely that the same appearance now took place.

[Acts 10:45](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">act 10:45</span></span>

They of the circumcision - were astonished - Because it was a maxim with
them that the Shechinah or Divine influence could not be revealed to any
person who dwelt beyond the precincts of the promised land. Nor did any
of them believe that the Divine Spirit could be communicated to any
Gentile. It is no wonder, therefore, that they were amazed when they saw
the Spirit of God so liberally given as it was on this occasion.

[Acts 10:46](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">act 10:46</span></span>

And magnify God - They had got new hearts as well as new tongues; and,
having believed with the heart unto righteousness, their tongues made
confession unto salvation; and God was magnified for the mercy which he
had imparted.

[Acts 10:47](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">act 10:47</span></span>

Can any man forbid water - These had evidently received the Holy Ghost,
and consequently were become members of the mystical body of Christ; and
yet St. Peter requires that they shall receive baptism by water, that
they might become members of the Christian Church. In other cases, they
received baptism first, and the Spirit afterwards by the imposition of
hands: see [Act 19:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#004), where the
disciples who had received only the baptism of John were baptized again
with water in the name of the Lord Jesus; and, after even this, the
apostles prayed, and laid their hands on them, before they were made
partakers of the Holy Ghost. So we find that Jesus Christ had his water
baptism as well as John; and that even he who gave the baptism of the
Holy Ghost required the administration of water baptism also. Therefore
the baptism of the Spirit did not supersede the baptism by water; nor
indeed can it; as baptism, as well as the supper of our Lord, were
intended, not only to be means of grace, but standing, irrefragable
proofs of the truth of Christianity.

[Acts 10:48](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">act 10:48</span></span>

To be baptized in the name of the Lord - That is, in the name of Jesus
Christ; which implied their taking upon them the public profession of
Christianity, and believing on Christ Jesus as their Savior and
Sovereign; for, as they were baptized in his name, they professed
thereby to be his disciples and followers.

Then prayed they him to tarry certain days - They felt the necessity of
farther instruction, and prayed him to continue his ministry a little
longer among them; and to this he no doubt consented. This was properly
speaking, the commencement of the Christian Church, as composed of Jews
and Gentiles, partaking of the same baptism, united under the same Head,
made partakers of the same Spirit, and associated in the same aggregate
body. Now was the middle wall of partition broken down, and the Gentiles
admitted to the same privileges with the Jews.

1\. God is wonderful in all his works, whether they be works of
creation, providence, or grace. Every thing proclaims his power, his
wisdom, and his goodness. Every where we learn this truth, which is
indispensably necessary for all to know who desire to acknowledge God in
all their ways that "there is nothing which concerns their present or
eternal welfare in which God does not interest himself." We often, to
our great spiritual detriment, lose sight of this truth, because we
think that the Majesty of God is too great to be occupied with those
common occurrences by which we are often much affected, in things which
relate, not only to our present, but also to our eternal interests. This
is impossible; for God is our father, and, being every where present, he
sees our state, and his eye affects his heart.

2\. Let the reader examine the chain of Providence (composed indeed of
very minute links) brought to light in the conversion of Cornelius, the
instruction of Peter, and opening the door of faith to the Gentiles, and
he will be convinced that "God has way every where, and that all things
serve the purposes of his will." We have already seen how particularly,
both by gracious and providential workings, God prepared the mind of
Cornelius to receive instruction, and the mind of Peter to give it; so
that the receiver and giver were equally ready to be workers together
with God. This is a general economy. He who feels his want may rest
assured that, even then, God has made the necessary provisions for his
supply; and that the very sense of the want is a proof that the
provision is already made. Why then should we lose time in deploring
wretchedness, for the removal of which God has made the necessary
preparations? Mourning over our miseries will never supply the lack of
faith in Christ, and very seldom tends even to humble the heart.

3\. As the eye of God is ever upon us, he knows our trials as well as
our wants; and here, also, he makes the necessary provision for our
support. We may be called to suffer, but his grace will be sufficient
for us; and, as our troubles increase, so shall the means of our
support. And even these trials and temptations will be pressed into our
service, for all things work together for good to them that love God,
[Rom 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028).

4\. We must beware neither to despise outward rites in religion, nor to
rest in them. Most people do either the one or the other. God gives us
outward helps, because he knows we need them. But do we not sometimes
imagine ourselves to be above that which, because of our scantiness of
grace, is really above us? We certainly may over-rate ourselves, and
under-rate God's bounties. He who is taught by the Spirit of God will be
saved from both.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 11](act011)

</div>
