<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act022)  [Next](act024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 23:0</span></span>

Paul defending himself before the high priest, he commands him to be
smitten on the mouth, [Act 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001), [Act
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#002). Paul sharply reproves him, and,
being reproved for this by one of the attendants, accounts for his
conduct, [Act 23:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#003). Seeing that the
assembly was composed of Pharisees and Sadducees, and that he could
expect no justice from his judges, he asserts that it was for his belief
in the resurrection that he was called in question, on which the
Pharisees declare in his favor, [Act
23:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006). A great dissension arises, and
the chief captain, fearing lest Paul should be pulled to pieces, brings
him into the castle, [Act 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#010). He is
comforted by a dream, [Act 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011). More
than forty persons conspire his death, [Act
23:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012). Paul's sister's son, hearing
of it, informs the captain of the guard, [Act
23:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#016). He sends Paul by night,
under a strong escort of horse and foot, to Caesarea, to Felix, and with
him a letter, stating the circumstances of the case, [Act
23:23-33](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#023). They arrive at Caesarea, and
Felix promises him a hearing when his accusers shall come down, [Act
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#034), [Act
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#035).

[Acts 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 23:1</span></span>

I have lived in all good conscience - Some people seem to have been
unnecessarily stumbled with this expression. What does the apostle mean
by it? Why, that, while he was a Jew, he was one from principle of
conscience; that what he did, while he continued Jew, he did from the
same principle; that, when God opened his eyes to see the nature of
Christianity, he became a Christian, because God persuaded his
conscience that it was right for him to become one; that, in a word, he
was sincere through the whole course of his religious life, and his
conduct had borne the most unequivocal proofs of it. The apostle means,
therefore, that there was no part of his life in which he acted as a
dishonest or hypocritical man; and that he was now as fully determined
to maintain his profession of Christianity as he ever was to maintain
that of Judaism, previously to his acquaintance with the Christian
religion.

[Acts 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 23:2</span></span>

The high priest, Ananias - There was a high priest of this name, who was
sent a prisoner to Rome by Quadratus, governor of Syria, to give an
account of the part he took in the quarrel between the Jews and the
Samaritans; see Joseph. Antiq. lib. xx. cap. 6, s. 8; but whether he
ever returned again to Jerusalem, says Dr. Lightfoot, is uncertain;
still more uncertain whether he was ever restored to the office of high
priest; and most uncertain of all whether he filled the chair when Paul
pleaded his cause, which was some years after Felix was settled in the
government. But Krebs has proved that this very Ananias, on being
examined at Rome, was found innocent, returned to Jerusalem, and was
restored to the high priesthood; see Joseph. Antiq. lib. xx. cap. 9, s.
2; but of his death I find nothing certain. See Krebs on this place,
(Observat. in Nov. Testament. e Flavio Josepho), who successfully
controverts the opinion of Dr. Lightfoot, mentioned at the beginning of
this note. There was one Ananias, who is said to have perished in a
tumult raised by his own son about five years after this time; see Jos.
Antiq. lib. x. cap. 9. War, lib. ii. cap. 17.

To smite him on the mouth - Because he professed to have a good
conscience, while believing on Jesus Christ, and propagating his
doctrine.

[Acts 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 23:3</span></span>

God shall smite thee, thou whited wall - Thou hypocrite! who sittest on
the seat of judgment, pretending to hear and seriously weigh the defense
of an accused person, who must in justice and equity be presumed to be
innocent till he is proved to be guilty; and, instead of acting
according to the law, commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law,
which always has the person of the prisoner under its protection; nor
ever suffers any penalty to be inflicted but what is prescribed as the
just punishment for the offense. As if he had said: "Thinkest thou that
God will suffer such an insult on his laws, on justice, and on humanity,
to pass unpunished?"

[Acts 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 23:5</span></span>

I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest - After all the
learned labor that has been spent on this subject, the simple meaning
appears plainly to be this: -

St. Paul did not know that Ananias was high priest; he had been long
absent from Jerusalem; political changes were frequent; the high
priesthood was no longer in succession, and was frequently bought and
sold; the Romans put down one high priest, and raised up another, as
political reasons dictated. As the person of Ananias might have been
wholly unknown to him, as the hearing was very sudden, and there was
scarcely any time to consult the formalities of justice, it seems very
probable that St. Paul, if he ever had known the person of Ananias, had
forgotten him; and as, in a council or meeting of this kind, the
presence of the high priest was not indispensably necessary, he did not
know that the person who presided was not the sagan, or high priest's
deputy, or some other person put in the seat for the time being. I
therefore understand the words above in their most obvious and literal
sense. He knew not who the person was, and God's Spirit suddenly led him
to denounce the Divine displeasure against him.

Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people - If I had known he
was the high priest, I should not have publicly pronounced this
execration; for respect is due to his person for the sake of his office.
I do not see that Paul intimates that he had done any thing through
inadvertence; nor does he here confess any fault; he states two facts: -

1\. That he did not know him to be the high priest.

2\. That such a one, or any ruler of the people, should be reverenced.
But he neither recalled or made an apology for his words: he had not
committed a trespass, and he did not acknowledge one. We must beware how
we attribute either to him in the case before us.

[Acts 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 23:6</span></span>

I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee - Instead of Φαρισαιου, of a
Pharisee, ABC, some others, with the Syriac and Vulgate, have Φαρισαιων,
of the Pharisees; which, if acknowledged to be the genuine reading,
would alter the sense thus, I am a Pharisee, and a disciple of the
Pharisees, for so the word son is frequently understood.

Of the hope and resurrection - Concerning the hope of the resurrection,
the και, and, being here redundant; indeed, it is omitted by the Syriac,
all the Arabic, and Ethiopic. St. Paul had preached the resurrection of
the dead, on the foundation and evidence of the resurrection of Christ.
For this, he and the apostles were, some time before, imprisoned by the
high priest and elders, [Act 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001);
[Act 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017), because they preached,
Through Jesus, the resurrection of the dead. This they could not bear;
for, if Jesus Christ rose from the dead, their malice and wickedness, in
putting him to death, were incontrovertibly established.

[Acts 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 23:7</span></span>

And the multitude was divided - St. Paul, perceiving the assembly to
consist of Sadducees and Pharisees, and finding he was not to expect any
justice, thought it best thus to divide the council, by introducing a
question on which the Pharisees and Sadducees were at issue. He did so;
and the Pharisees immediately espoused his side of the question, because
in opposition to the Sadducees, whom they abhorred, as irreligious men.

[Acts 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 23:8</span></span>

The Sadducees say that there is no resurrection - It is strange, since
these denied a future state, that they observed the ordinances of the
law; for they also believed the five books of Moses to be a revelation
from God: yet they had nothing in view but temporal good; and they
understood the promises in the law as referring to these things alone.
In order, therefore, to procure them, they watched, fasted, prayed,
etc., and all this they did that they might obtain happiness in the
present life. See the account of the Pharisees and Sadducees, [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007); [Mat
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001).

[Acts 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 23:9</span></span>

The scribes - arose, and strove - Διεμαχοντο, They contended forcibly -
they came to an open rupture with the Sadducees; and, in order to
support their own party against them, they even admitted as truth, St.
Paul's account of his miraculous conversion, and therefore they said, if
a spirit or an angel hath spoken to him, etc. He had previously
mentioned that Jesus Christ had appeared to him, when on his way to
Damascus; and, though they might not be ready to admit the doctrine of
Christ's resurrection, yet they could, consistently with their own
principles, allow that the soul of Christ might appear to him; and they
immediately caught at this, as furnishing a strong proof against the
doctrine of the Sadducees, who neither believed in angel nor spirit,
while the Pharisees confessed both.

Let us not fight against God - These words are wanting in ABCE, several
others, with the Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, later Syriac, Vulgate, and
some of the fathers.

[Acts 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 23:10</span></span>

The chief captain - commanded the soldiers to go down - It appears that
the chief captain was present during these transactions, and that he had
a body of soldiers in readiness in the castle of Antonia; and it was
from this that he commanded them to come down; for the rescue and
preservation of Paul.

[Acts 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 23:11</span></span>

Be of good cheer, Paul - It is no wonder if, with all these trials and
difficulties, St. Paul was much dejected in mind; and especially as he
had not any direct intimation from God what the end of the present
trials would be: to comfort him and strengthen his faith, God gave him
this vision.

So must thou bear witness also at Rome - This was pleasing intelligence
to Paul, who had long desired to see that city, and preach the Gospel of
Christ there. He appears to have had an intimation that he should see
it; but how, he could not tell; and this vision satisfied him that he
should be sent thither by God himself. This would settle every fear and
scruple concerning the issue of the present persecution.

[Acts 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 23:12</span></span>

That they would neither eat nor drink, etc. - These forty Jews were no
doubt of the class of the sicarii mentioned before, (similar to those
afterwards called assassins), a class of fierce zealots, who took
justice into their own hand; and who thought they had a right to
despatch all those who, according to their views, were not orthodox in
their religious principles. If these were, in their bad way,
conscientious men, must they not all perish through hunger, as God put
it out of their power to accomplish their vow? No: for the doctrine of
sacerdotal absolution was held among the Jews as among the Papists:
hence it is said, in Hieros. Avodah Zarah, fol. 40: "He that hath made a
vow not to eat any thing, wo to him, if he eat; and wo to him, if he do
not eat. If he eat, he sinneth against his vow; and if he do not eat, he
sinneth against his life." What must such a man do in this case? Let him
go to the wise men, and they will loose him from his vow, as it is
written, [Pro 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#018) : "The tongue of
the wise is health." When vows were so easily dispensed with, they might
be readily multiplied. See Lightfoot.

[Acts 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 23:15</span></span>

And we, or ever he come near, are ready to kill him - We shall lie in
wait, and despatch him before he can reach the chief captain. The plan
was well and deeply laid; and nothing but an especial providence could
have saved Paul.

[Acts 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 23:16</span></span>

Paul's sister's son - This is all we know of Paul's family. And we know
not how this young man got to Jerusalem; the family, no doubt, still
resided at Tarsus.

[Acts 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 23:17</span></span>

Bring this young man unto the chief captain - Though St. Paul had the
most positive assurance from Divine authority that he should be
preserved, yet he knew that the Divine providence acts by reasonable and
prudent means; and that, if he neglected to use the means in his power,
he could not expect God's providence to work in his behalf. He who will
not help himself, according to the means and power he possesses, has
neither reason nor revelation to assure him that he shall receive any
assistance from God.

[Acts 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 23:23</span></span>

Two hundred soldiers - Στρατιωτας, Infantry or foot soldiers.

Horsemen threescore and ten - There was always a certain number of
horse, or cavalry, attached to the foot.

Spearmen - Δεξιολαβους, Persons who held a spear or javelin in their
hand; from εν τῃ δεξιᾳ λαβειν taking or holding a thing in the right
hand. But the Codex Alexandrinus reads δεξιοβολους, from δεξια, the
right hand, and βαλλειν, to cast or dart, persons who threw javelins.
But both words seem to mean nearly the same thing.

The third hour of the night - About nine o'clock p.m., for the greater
secrecy, and to elude the cunning, active malice of the Jews.

[Acts 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 23:24</span></span>

Provide them beasts - One for Paul, and some others for his immediate
keepers.

Felix the governor - This Felix was a freed man of the Emperor Claudius,
and brother of Pallas, chief favourite of the emperor. Tacitus calls him
Antonius Felix; and gives us to understand that he governed with all the
authority of a king, and the baseness and insolence of a quondam slave.
E libertis Antonius Felix per omnem saevitiam ac libidinem jus regium
servili ingenio exercuit. Hist. v. 9. He had, according to Suetonius, in
his life of Claudius, chap. 28, three queens to his wives; that is, he
was married thrice, and each time to the daughter or niece of a king.
Drusilla, the sister of Agrippa, was his wife at this time; see [Act
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#024). He was an unrighteous governor;
a base, mercenary, and bad man: see [Act
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#002).

[Acts 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 23:25</span></span>

He wrote a letter after this manner - It appears that this was not only
the substance of the letter, but the letter itself: the whole of it is
so perfectly formal as to prove this; and in this simple manner are all
the letters of the ancients formed. In this also we have an additional
proof of St. Luke's accuracy.

[Acts 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 23:30</span></span>

I sent straightway to thee - As the proper person before whom this
business should ultimately come, and by whom it should be decided.

Farewell - Ερῥωσο, Be in good health.

[Acts 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 23:31</span></span>

Antipatris - This place, according to Josephus, Antiq. lib. xiii. cap.
23, was anciently called Capharsaba, and is supposed to be the same
which, in 1 Maccabees 7:31, is called Capharsalama, or Carphasalama. It
was rebuilt by Herod the Great, and denominated Antipatris, in honor of
his father Antipater. It was situated between Joppa and Caesarea, on the
road from Jerusalem to this latter city. Josephus says it was fifty
stadia from Joppa. The distance between Jerusalem and Caesarea was about
seventy miles.

[Acts 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 23:32</span></span>

On the morrow they left the horsemen - Being now so far from Jerusalem,
they considered Paul in a state of safety from the Jews, and that the
seventy horse would be a sufficient guard; the four hundred foot,
therefore, returned to Jerusalem, and the horse went on to Caesarea with
Paul. We need not suppose that all this troop did reach Antipatris on
the same night in which they left Jerusalem; therefore, instead of, they
brought him by night to Antipatris, we may understand the text thus -
Then the soldiers took Paul by night, and brought him to Antipatris. And
the thirty-second verse need not to be understood as if the foot reached
the castle of Antonia the next day, (though all this was possible), but
that, having reached Antipatris, and refreshed themselves, they set out
the same day, on their march to Jerusalem; on the morrow they returned,
that is, they began their march back again to the castle. See on [Act
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#001) (note).

[Acts 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 23:33</span></span>

Who - That is, the seventy horsemen mentioned above.

[Acts 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 23:35</span></span>

I will hear thee - Διακουσομαι σου; I will give thee a fair, full, and
attentive hearing when thy accusers are come; in whose presence thou
shalt be permitted to defend thyself.

In Herod's judgment - hall - Εν τῳ πραιτωριῳ, In Herod's praetorium, so
called because it was built by Herod the Great. The praetorium was the
place where the Roman praetor had his residence; and it is probable
that, in or near this place, there was a sort of guard room, where state
prisoners were kept. Paul was lodged here till his accusers should
arrive.

On the preceeding chapter many useful observations may be made.

1\. Paul, while acting contrary to the Gospel of Christ, pleaded
conscience as his guide. Conscience is generally allowed to be the rule
of human actions; but it cannot be a right rule, unless it be well
informed. While it is unenlightened it may be a guide to the perdition
of its professor, and the cause of the ruin of others. That conscience
can alone be trusted in which the light of God's Spirit and God's truth
dwells. An ill-informed conscience may burn even the saints for God's
sake!

2\. No circumstance in which a man can be placed can excuse him from
showing respect and reverence to the authorities which God, in the
course of his providence, has instituted for the benefit of civil or
religious society. All such authorities come originally from God, and
can never lose any of their rights on account of the persons who are
invested with them. An evil can never be of use, and a good may be
abused; but it loses not its character, essential qualities, or
usefulness, because of this abuse.

3\. Paul availed himself of the discordant sentiments of his judges, who
had agreed to show him no justice, that he might rid himself out of
their hands. To take advantage of the sentiments and dispositions of an
audience, without deceiving it, and to raise dissension between the
enemies of the truth, is an impotent artifice, when truth itself is not
violated and when error is exposed thereby to public view.

4\. The Pharisees and Sadducees strove together. God frequently raises
up defenders of the principles of truth, even among those who, in
practice, are its decided enemies. "Though," says one, "I do not like
the truth, yet will I defend it." A man clothed with sovereign
authority, vicious in his heart, and immoral in his life, fostered those
principles of truth and righteousness by which error was banished from
these lands, and pure and undefiled religion established among us for
many generations.

5\. The providence of God, and his management of the world, are in many
respects great mysteries; but, as far as we are individually concerned,
all is plain. Paul had the fullest assurance, from the mouth of Christ
himself, that he should see Rome; and, consequently, that he should be
extricated from all his present difficulties. Why then did he not
quietly sit still, when his nephew informed him that forty men had
conspired to murder him? Because he knew that God made use of the
prudence with which he has endowed man as an agent in that very
providence by which he is supported; and that to neglect the natural
means of safety with which God provides us is to tempt and dishonor him,
and induce him in judgment to use those means against us, which, in his
mercy, he had designed for our comfort and salvation. Prudence is well
associated even with an apostolical spirit. Every being that God has
formed, he designs should accomplish those functions for which he has
endowed it with the requisite powers.

6\. Claudius Lysias sent Paul to Felix. "In the generality of human
events," says one, "we do not often distinguish the designs of God from
those of men. The design of Lysias, in preserving Paul from the rage of
the Jews, was to render his own conduct free from exception: the design
of God was, that he might bring Paul safely to Rome, that he might
attack idolatry in its strongest fort, and there establish the Christian
faith." God governs the world, and works by proper means; and
counterworks evil or sinister devices, so as ultimately to accomplish
the purposes of his will, and cause all things to work together for good
to them that love Him.

7\. Felix acted prudently when he would not even hear St. Paul till he
had his accusers face to face. How many false judgments, evil surmises,
and uncharitable censures would be avoided, did men always adopt this
reasonable plan! Hear either side of a complaint separately, and the
evil seems very great: hear both together, and the evil is generally
lessened by one half. Audi et alteram partem - hear the other side, says
a heathen: remember, if you have an ear for the first complainant, you
have one also for the second.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 24](act024)

</div>
