<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](joh021)  [Next](act001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the Acts of the Apostles

The book of the Acts of The Apostles forms the fifth, and last, of the
historical books of the New Testament. And on this account it has been
generally placed at the end of the four Gospels; though in several MSS.
and versions it is found at the end of St. Paul's Epistles, as many
circumstances in them are referred to by the narrative contained in this
book, which is carried down almost to the apostle's death.

This book has had a variety of names: Πραξεις των Αποστολων, the Res
Gestae, Acts or Transactions of the Apostles, is the title it bears in
the Codex Bezae. Πραξεις των Ἁγιων Αποστολων The Acts of the Holy
Apostles, is its title in the Codex Alexandrinus, and several others, as
well as in several of the ancient versions, and in the Greek and Latin
fathers. One or other form of the above title is followed by almost all
the editors of the Greek Testament, and translators and commentators in
general. By some it has been reckoned a fifth Gospel; and by Oecumenius
it is termed, The Gospel of the Holy Spirit; and by St. Chrysostom, Το
Βιβλιον, Αποδειξις αναστασεως, The Book, The Demonstration of the
Resurrection. These two last characters are peculiarly descriptive of
its contents. All the promises which Christ gave of the gifts and graces
of the Holy Spirit are shown here to have been fulfilled in the most
eminent manner; and, by the effusion of the Holy Spirit, the
resurrection of our blessed Lord has been fully demonstrated. The
calling of the Gentiles is another grand point which is here revealed
and illustrated. This miracle of miracles, as one terms it, which had
been so frequently foretold by the prophets and by Christ himself, is
here exhibited; and by this grand act of the power and goodness of God
the Christian Church has been founded and thus the tabernacle and
kingdom of God have been immutably established among men. It is truly a
fifth Gospel, as it contains the glad tidings of peace and salvation to
the whole Gentile world.

All antiquity is unanimous in ascribing this book to St. Luke as the
author; and, from the commencement of it, we see plainly that it can be
attributed to no other; and it seems plain that St. Luke intended it as
a continuation of his Gospel, being dedicated to Theophilus, to whom he
had dedicated the former; and to which, in the introduction to this, he
expressly refers: indeed he has taken up the narrative, in this book
precisely in the place where he had dropped it in the other. The former
treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do
and teach, until the day in which he was taken up, etc.; and from this
we may form a safe conjecture, that the two books were written at no
greater a distance from each other than the time of the last occurrence
recorded in this book. Some have supposed that this book was written
from Alexandria; but this does not appear to be probable. The conjecture
of Michaelis is much more likely, viz. that it was written from Rome, at
which place St. Luke mentions his arrival, in company with St. Paul,
shortly before the close of the book. See [Act
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#016).

Though the time in which the book of the Acts was written is not
recorded, yet the same writer observes that, as it is continued to the
end of the second year of St. Paul's imprisonment, it could not have
been written before the year 63; and, had it been written after that
year, it is reasonable to conclude that it would have related some
farther particulars relative to St. Paul; or would at least have
mentioned the event of his imprisonment, in which the reader is so much
interested. This argument seems conclusive, in reference to the date of
this book.

St. Luke's long attendance upon St. Paul, and his having been himself
eye-witness to many of the facts which he has recorded, independently of
his Divine inspiration, render him a most respectable and credible
historian. His medical knowledge, for he is allowed to have been a
physician, enabled him, as Professor Michaelis has properly observed,
both to form a proper judgment of the miraculous cures which were
performed by St. Paul, and to give an account and authentic detail of
them. It is worthy also of observation that St. Luke himself does not
appear to have possessed the gift of miraculous healing. Though there
can be no doubt that he was with St. Paul when shipwrecked at Malta, yet
he was not concerned in healing the father of Publius the governor; nor
of the other sick persons mentioned [Act
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#008), [Act
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#009). These were all healed by the
prayers of St. Paul, and the imposition of his hands, and consequently
miraculously; nor do we find any evidence that St. Luke was ever
employed in this way. This is another proof of the wisdom of God: had
the physician been employed to work miracles of healing, the excellence
of the power would have been attributed to the skill of the man, and not
to the power of his Maker.

The Acts of the Apostles have been generally considered in the light of
a Church History, and, consequently, the first ecclesiastical history on
record; but Professor Michaelis very properly contends that it cannot
have been intended as a general history of the Christian Church, even
for the period of time it embraces, as it passes by all the transactions
of the Church at Jerusalem, after the conversion of St. Paul; the
propagation of Christianity in Egypt; Paul's journey into Arabia; the
state of Christianity at Babylon; ([Pe1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013)); the foundation of the Christian
Church at Rome; several of St. Paul's voyages; his thrice suffering
shipwreck, etc., etc. See more particulars in Lardner and Michaelis.

The object of St. Luke appears to have been twofold:

1\. To relate in what manner the gifts of the Holy Spirit were
communicated on the day of pentecost, and the subsequent miracles
performed by the apostles, by which the truth of Christianity was
confirmed.

2\. To deliver such accounts as proved the claim of the Gentiles to
admission into the Church of Christ; a claim disputed by the Jews,
especially at the time when the Acts of the Apostles were written.

Hence we see the reason why he relates, Acts 8:1-25, the conversion of
the Samaritans; and Acts 10:1-11:18, the story of Cornelius, and the
determination of the council in Jerusalem relative to the Levitical law;
and for the same reason he is more diffuse in his account of St. Paul's
conversion, and his preaching to the Gentiles, than he is on any other
subject. In such a restricted manner has St. Luke compiled his history,
that Michaelis is of opinion that it was the intention of this apostle
to record only those facts which he had either seen himself, or heard
from eye witnesses. Introduct. vol. v. p. 326, etc.

The book of the Acts has been uniformly and universally received by the
Christian Church in all places and ages: it is mentioned and quoted by
almost every Christian writer, and its authenticity and importance
universally admitted. Arator, a subdeacon in the Church at Rome, in the
sixth century, turned it into verse. In ancient times, personal history
and important transactions, in most nations, were generally thus
preserved; as the facts, through the medium of verse, could be the more
easily committed to memory.

St. Luke's narration bears every evidence of truth and authenticity. It
is not a made up history. The language and manner of every speaker are
different; and the same speaker is different in his manner, according to
the audience he addresses. The speeches of Stephen, Peter, Cornelius,
Tertullus, and Paul, are all different, and such as we might naturally
expect from the characters in question, and the circumstances in which
they were at the time of speaking. St. Paul's speeches are also suited
to the occasion, and to the persons before whom he spoke. When his
audience was heathen, though he kept the same end steadily in view, yet
how different is his mode of address from that used when before a Jewish
audience! Several of these peculiarities, which constitute a strong
evidence of the authenticity of the work, shall be pointed out in the
notes. See some good remarks on this head, in Michaelis' Introduction,
ubi supra.

As St. Luke has not annexed any date to the transactions he records, it
is not a very easy matter to adjust the chronology of the Acts; but, as
in some places he refers to political facts, the exact times of which
are well known, the dates of several transactions in his narrative may
be settled with considerable accuracy. It is well known, for instance
that the famine mentioned [Act 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029),
[Act 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030), happened in the fourth
year of the Emperor Claudius, which answers to the forty-fourth of the
Christian aura. From facts of this nature, dates may be derived with
considerable accuracy: all such dates are carefully noted at the top of
the column, as in the preceding parts of this Commentary; and the
chronology is adjusted in the best manner possible. In some cases,
conjecture and probability are the only lights by which this obscure
passage can be illuminated. The dates of the commencement and the end of
the book are tolerably certain; as the work certainly begins with the
twenty-ninth year of the Christian era, [Act
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001) and ends probably with the
sixty-third, [Act 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030).

In the book of the Acts we see how the Church of Christ was formed and
settled. The apostles simply proclaim the truth of God relative to the
passion, death, resurrection, and ascension of Christ; and God
accompanies their testimony with the demonstration of his Spirit. What
was the consequence? Thousands acknowledge the truth, embrace
Christianity, and openly profess it at the most imminent risk of their
lives. The change is not a change of merely one religious sentiment or
mode of worship for another; but a change of tempers, passions,
prospects, and moral conduct. All before was earthly, or animal, or
devilish; or all these together; but now all is holy, spiritual, and
Divine: the heavenly influence becomes extended, and nations are born
unto God. And how was all this brought about? Not by might nor power:
not by the sword, nor by secular authority; not through worldly motives
and prospects; not by pious frauds or cunning craftiness; not by the
force of persuasive eloquence: in a word, by nothing but the sole
influence of truth itself, attested to the heart by the power of the
Holy Ghost. Wherever religious frauds and secular influence have been
used to found or support a Church; professing itself to be Christian,
there, we may rest assured, is the fullest evidence that that Church is
wholly antichristian; and where such a Church, possessing secular power,
has endeavored to support itself by persecution, and persecution unto
privation of goods, of liberty, and of life, it not only shows itself to
be antichristian, but also diabolic. The religion Of Christ stands in no
need either of human cunning or power. It is the religion of God, and is
to be propagated by his power: this the book of the Acts fully shows;
and in it we find the true model, after which every Christian Church
should be builded. As far as any Church can show that it has followed
this model, so far it is holy and apostolic. And when all Churches or
congregations of people professing Christianity, shall be founded and
regulated according to the doctrines and discipline laid down in the
book of the Acts of the Apostles, then the aggregate body may be justly
called, The Holy, Apostolic, and Catholic Church.

The simplicity of the primitive Christian worship, as laid down in the
book of the Acts, is worthy of particular notice and admiration. Here
are no expensive ceremonies: no apparatus calculated merely to impress
the senses, and produce emotions in the animal system, "to help," as has
been foolishly said, "the spirit of devotion." The heart is the subject
in which this spirit of devotion is kindled; and the Spirit of God alone
is the agent that communicates and maintains the celestial fire; and
God, who knows and searches that heart, is the object of its adoration,
and the only source whence it expects the grace that pardons,
sanctifies, and renders it happy. No strange fire can be brought to this
altar: for the God of the Christians can be worshipped only in spirit
and truth; the truth revealed, directing the worship; and the Spirit
given, applying that truth, and giving life and energy to every faculty
and power. Thus God was worshipped in his own way, and through his own
power; every religious act, thus performed, was acceptable to him; the
praises of his followers rose up as incense before the throne, and their
prayers were heard and answered. As they had but one God, so they had
but one Mediator between God and man, the Lord Jesus Christ. They
received him as the gift of God's eternal love; sought and found
redemption in his blood; and, in a holy and useful life, showed forth
the virtues of Him who had called them from darkness into his marvellous
light; for no profession of faith was then considered of any worth that
was not supported by that love to God and man which is the fulfilling of
the law, which is the life and soul of obedience to the Divine
testimonies, and the ceaseless spring of benevolence and humanity. This
is the religion of Jesus Christ, as laid down and exemplified in this
blessed book.

"Ye different sects, who all declare,

Lo! Christ is here, and Christ is there,

Your stronger proofs divinely give,

And show me where the Christians live."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 1](act001)

</div>
