<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo007)  [Next](amo009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 8:0</span></span>

This chapter begins with a fourth vision denoting the certainty and
nearness of the destruction of Israel, [Amo
8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001). The prophet then proceeds to
reprove their oppression and injustice, [Amo
8:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#004). Strong and beautiful figures,
by which is represented the complete dissolution of the Israelitish
polity, [Amo 8:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#008). The people
threatened with a most awful judgment; a Famine of the word of God, [Amo
8:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011).

[Amos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 8:1</span></span>

A basket of summer fruit - As summer fruit was not proper for
preserving, but must be eaten as soon as gathered, so the Lord intimates
by this symbol that the kingdom of Israel was now ripe for destruction,
and that punishment must descend upon it without delay. Some think the
prophet means the fruits at the end of autumn. And as after the autumn
no fruit could be expected, so Israel's summer is gone by, her autumn is
ended, and she shall yield no more fruit. Or, the autumn of her iniquity
is come, the measure is filled up, and now she shall gather the fruit of
her sin in the abundance of her punishment.

[Amos 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">amo 8:2</span></span>

A basket of summer fruit - כלוב קיץ kelub kayits, the end is come - בא
הקץ ba hakkets: here is a paronomasia or play upon the words kayits,
summer fruit, and kets, the end, both coming from similar roots. See the
note on [Eze 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#002) (note), where there
is a similar play on the same word.

I will not again pass by them any more - I will be no longer their
Guardian.

[Amos 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">amo 8:3</span></span>

The songs of the temple - Instead of שירות shiroth, songs, Houbigant
reads שורות shoroth, the singing women; and Newcome follows him: "And
the singing women of the palace shall howl in that day." Instead of
joyous songs, they shall have nothing but lamentation.

They shall cast them forth with silence - Every place shall be filled
with the dead, and a dreadful silence shall reign universally; the few
that remain being afraid either to speak or complain, or even to chant a
funeral dirge for the most respectable of the dead.

[Amos 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 8:4</span></span>

Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy - Ye that bruise the poor;
exact from them, and tread them under foot.

[Amos 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">amo 8:5</span></span>

When will the new moon be gone - This was kept as a kind of holy day,
not by Divine command, but by custom. The Sabbath was strictly holy; and
yet so covetous were they that they grudged to give to God and their own
souls this seventh portion of time! But bad and execrable as they were,
they neither set forth their corn, nor their wheat, nor any other kind
of merchandise, on the Sabbath. They were saints then, when compared to
multitudes called Christians, who keep their shops either partially or
entirely open on the Lord's day, and buy and sell without any scruples
of conscience. Conscience! alas! they have none; it is seared as with a
hot iron. The strong man armed, in them, is quiet, for all his goods are
in peace.

Making the ephah small, and the shekel great - Giving short measure, and
taking full price; or, buying with a heavy weight, and selling with one
that was light.

Falsifying the balances - Having one scale light, and the other weighty;
one end of the beam long, and the other short. A few months ago I
detected a knave with such balances; with a slip of his finger along the
beam he altered the center, which made three ounces short weight in
every pound. He did it so dexterously, that though I knew he was
cheating, or, as the prophet expresses it, was falsifying the balances
by deceit, it was some time before I could detect the fraud, and not
till I had been several times cheated by this accomplished knave. So we
find that though the knaves of ancient Israel are dead, they have left
their successors behind them.

[Amos 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">amo 8:6</span></span>

That we may buy the poor for silver - Buying their services for such a
time, with just money enough to clear them from other creditors.

And the needy for a pair of shoes - See [Amo
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#006).

And sell the refuse of the wheat! - Selling bad wheat and damaged flour
to poor people as good, knowing that such cannot afford to prosecute
them.

[Amos 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">amo 8:7</span></span>

By the excellency of Jacob - By the state of eminence to which he had
raised the descendants of Jacob; or, by the excellent One of Jacob, that
is, Himself. The meaning is: "As surely as I have raised you to such a
state of eminence, so surely will I punish you in proportion to your
advantages and your crimes."

[Amos 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">amo 8:8</span></span>

Shall not the land tremble for this - It is supposed that an earthquake
is here intended, and that the rising up and subsiding as a flood refers
to that heaving motion that takes place in an earthquake, and which the
prophet here compares to the overflowing and subsiding of the waters of
the Nile. But it may refer to commotions among the people.

[Amos 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">amo 8:9</span></span>

I will cause the sun to go down at noon - This may either refer to that
darkness which often precedes and accompanies earthquakes, or to an
eclipse. Abp. Usher has shown that about eleven years after Amos
prophesied there were two great eclipses of the sun; one at the feast of
tabernacles, and the other some time before the passover. The prophet
may refer to the darkness occasioned by those eclipses; yet I rather
think the whole may refer to the earthquake.

[Amos 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">amo 8:10</span></span>

I will turn your feasts into mourning - See on [Amo
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#003) (note).

A bitter day - A time of grievous calamity.

[Amos 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">amo 8:11</span></span>

A famine in the land - The most grievous of all famines, a famine of the
words of Jehovah; a time in which no prophet should appear, no spiritual
counsellor, no faithful reprover, none any longer who would point out
the way of salvation, or would assure them of the mercy of God on their
repentance and return to him. This is the severest of God's judgments on
this side the worm that never dieth, and the fire that is never
quenched.

[Amos 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">amo 8:12</span></span>

They shall wander front sea to sea - From the Mediterranean to the Dead
Sea or from west to east, and from north to south, to seek the word of
the Lord; to find a prophet, or any person authorized by God to show
them the end of their calamities. In this state they shall continue,
because they have rejected Him who is the bread of life.

[Amos 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">amo 8:14</span></span>

By the sin of Samaria - Baal, who was worshipped here.

Thy god, O Dan - The golden calf, or ox, the representative of the
Egyptian god Apis, or Osiris.

The manner of Beer-sheba - The worship, or object of worship. Another of
the golden calves which Jeroboam had set up there. The word דרך derech,
way, is here taken for the object and mode of worship; see [Act
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009), where way is taken for the creed
and form of Divine worship as practiced by the followers of Christ, and
by which they were distinguished from the Jews. See also [Act
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 9](amo009)

</div>
