<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](joe003)  [Next](amo001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to the Book of the Prophet Amos

Amos, the third of the minor prophets, was, it is said, of the little
town of Tekoa, in the tribe of Judah, about four leagues southward of
Jerusalem. There is no good proof, however, that he was a native of this
place; but only that he retired thither when he was driven from Beth-el,
which was in the kingdom of the ten tribes. It is very probable that he
was born within the territories of Israel, and that his mission was
directed principally to this kingdom.

As he was prophesying in Beth-el, where the golden calves were, in the
reign of Jeroboam the second, about the year of the world 3217; before
the birth of Jesus Christ, 783; before the vulgar era, 787; Amaziah, the
high priest of Beth-el, accused him before King Jeroboam, saying, "Amos
hath conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel: the
land is not able to bear all his words. For thus Amos saith, Jeroboam
shall die by the sword, and Israel shall surely be led away captive out
of their own land." Amaziah said therefore unto Amos, "O thou seer, go,
flee thee away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophesy
there: but prophesy not again any more at Beth-el; for it is the king's
chapel, and it is the king's court."

Amos answered Amaziah, "I was no prophet, neither was I a prophet's son;
but I was a herdman, and a gatherer of sycamore fruit. And the Lord took
me as I followed the flock; and the Lord said unto me, Go, prophesy unto
my people Israel. Now, therefore, hear thou the word of the Lord; Thou
sayest, Prophesy not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the
house of Isaac. Therefore thus saith the Lord, Thy wife shall be a
harlot in the city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the
sword, and thy land shall be divided by line; and thou shalt die in a
polluted land, and Israel shall surely go into captivity forth of his
land."

After this the prophet retired into the kingdom of Judah, and dwelt in
the town of Tekoa, where he continued to prophesy. He complains in many
places of the violence offered him by endeavoring to oblige him to
silence, and bitterly exclaims against the disorders of Israel.

He began to prophesy the second year before the earthquake, which
happened in the reign of King Uzziah; and which Josephus, with most of
the ancient and modern commentators, refers to this prince's usurpation
of the priest's office, when he attempted to offer incense to the Lord.

The first of his prophecies, in order of time, are those of the seventh
chapter. The others he pronounced in the town of Tekoa, whither he
retired. His two first chapters are against Damascus, the Philistines,
Tyrians, Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites, the kingdom of Judah, and that
of the ten tribes. The evils with which he threatens them refer to the
times of Shalmaneser, Tiglath-pileser, Sennacherib, and Nebuchadnezzar,
who did so much mischief to these provinces, and at last led the
Israelites into captivity.

He foretold the misfortunes into which the kingdom of Israel should fall
after the death of Jeroboam the Second, who was then living. He foretold
the death of King Zechariah; the invasion of the lands belonging to
Israel by Pul and Tiglath-pileser, kings of Assyria; and speaks of the
captivity of the ten tribes, and of their return into their own country.
He makes sharp invectives against the sins of Israel; against their
effeminacy and avarice, their harshness to the poor, the splendor of
their buildings, and the delicacy of their tables. He reproves the
people of Israel for going to Beth-el, Dan, Gilgal, and Beer-sheba,
which were the most famous pilgrimages of the country; and for swearing
by the gods of these places.

The time and manner of his death are not known. Some old authors relate
that Amaziah, priest of Beth-el, whom we have spoken of, provoked by the
discourses of the prophet, had his teeth broken in order to silence him.
Others say that Hosea, or Uzziah, the son of Amaziah, struck him with a
stake upon the temples, and knocked him down, and almost killed him;
that in this condition he was carried to Tekoa, where he died, and was
buried with his fathers. This is the account these authors give us. On
the contrary, it is the opinion of others, that he prophesied a long
time at Tekoa after the adventure he had with Amaziah: and the prophet
taking no notice of the ill treatment which he is said to have received
from Uzziah, his silence is no argument that he suffered nothing from
him.

St. Jerome observes, that there is nothing great and sublime in the
style of Amos. He applies these words of St. Paul to him, rude in
speech, though not in knowledge. He says farther, that as every one
chooses to speak of his own art, Amos generally makes use of comparisons
taken from the country life wherein he had been brought up. St. Austin
shows that there was a certain kind of eloquence in the sacred writers,
directed by the spirit of wisdom, and so proportioned to the nature of
the things they treated of, that even they who accuse them of rusticity
and unpoliteness in their way of writing, could not choose a style more
suitable, were they to have spoken on the same subject, to the same
persons, and in the same circumstances.

Bishop Lowth is not satisfied with the judgment of St. Jerome. His
authority, says the learned prelate, has occasioned many commentators to
represent this prophet as entirely rude, void of eloquence, and wanting
in all the embellishments of style; whereas any one who reads him with
due attention will find him, though a herdsman, not a whit behind the
very chiefest prophets; almost equal to the greatest in the loftiness of
his sentiments; and not inferior to any in the splendor of his diction,
and the elegance of his composition. And it, is well observed, that the
same heavenly Spirit which inspired Isaiah and Daniel in the palace,
inspired David and Amos in their shepherds' tents; always choosing
proper interpreters of his will, and sometimes perfecting praise even
out of the mouths of babes: at one time using the eloquence of some; at
another, making others eloquent to subserve his great purposes. See
Calmet and Dodd.

Archbishop Newcome speaks also justly of this prophet: "Amos borrows
many images from the scenes in which he was engaged; but he introduces
them with skill, and gives them tone and dignity by the eloquence and
grandeur of his manner. We shall find in him many affecting and
pathetic, many elegant and sublime, passages. No prophet has more
magnificently described the Deity; or more gravely rebuked the
luxurious: or reproved injustice and oppression with greater warmth, and
a more generous indignation. He is a prophet on whose model a preacher
may safely form his style and manner in luxurious and profligate times."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 1](amo001)

</div>
