<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1028)  [Next](ch2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 29:0</span></span>

David enumerates the gifts which he designed for the building of the
temple; and exhorts the princes and people to make their offerings, [Ch1
29:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#001). They offer willingly, and to a
great amount, [Ch1 29:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#006). David's
thanksgiving and prayer to God on the occasion, [Ch1
29:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#010). The princes and people
praise God, offer sacrifices and feasts before him, make Solomon King,
and do him homage, [Ch1 29:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#020). The
Lord magnifies Solomon, [Ch1 29:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#025).
Concluding account of David's reign, character, and death, [Ch1
29:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#026).

[1 Chronicles 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 29:1</span></span>

The palace is not for man - "The palace is not prepared for the name of
a son of man, but for the name of the Word of the Lord God." - T.

[1 Chronicles 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch1 29:2</span></span>

And marble stones - אבני שיש abney shayish, which the Vulgate translates
marmor Parium, Parian marble. Paros was one of the Cyclade islands, and
produced the whitest and finest marble, that of which most of the finest
works of antiquity have been made. That the word shaish means marble is
probable from the Chaldee, which has אבני מרמורייה abney marmoraiyah,
marble stones. Josephus says that the temple was built of large blocks
of white marble, beautifully polished, so as to produce a most splendid
appearance. - Jos., De Bell. Jud., lib. v., c. 5, s. 2.

[1 Chronicles 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch1 29:5</span></span>

To consecrate his service - למלאות ידו lemalloth yado, to fill his hand;
to bring an offering to the Lord.

[1 Chronicles 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch1 29:7</span></span>

Of gold five thousand talents - These, at five thousand and seventy-five
pounds, fifteen shillings, and seven pence halfpenny each, amount to
twenty-five millions, three hundred and seventy-eight thousand nine
hundred and six pounds, five shillings, sterling. If, with Dr. Prideaux,
we estimate the golden talent at upwards of seven thousand pounds
sterling, the value of these five thousand talents will be much more
considerable. See the notes on [Exo
25:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#039); [Mat
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#024); and the calculations at the end
of the notes on [Ch2 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029).

Ten thousand drams - Probably golden darics, worth each about twenty
shillings, amounting to ten thousand pounds.

Of silver ten thousand talents - These, at three hundred and fifty-three
pounds, eleven shillings, and ten-pence halfpenny, each, amount to three
millions five hundred and thirty-five thousand, nine hundred and
thirty-seven pounds, ten shillings, sterling.

Brass eighteen thousand talents - Each six hundred and fifty-seven
thousand grains, amount to one thousand and twenty-six tons, eleven
hundred weight, and one quarter.

One hundred thousand talents of iron - Each six hundred and fifty-seven
thousand grains, amount to five thousand seven hundred and three tons,
two hundred weight, and a half.

[1 Chronicles 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch1 29:11</span></span>

Thine, O Lord, is the greatness - This verse is thus paraphrased by the
Targum: "Thine, O Lord, is the magnificence; for thou hast created the
world by thy great power, and by thy might hast led our fathers out of
Egypt, and with great signs hast caused them to pass through the Red
Sea. Thou hast appeared gloriously on Mount Sinai, with troops of
angels, in giving law to thy people. Thou hast gained the victory over
Amalek; over Sihon and Og, kings of Canaan. By the splendor of thy
majesty thou hast caused the sun to stand still on Gibeon, and the moon
in the valley of Ajalon, until thy people, the house of Israel, were
avenged of their enemies. All things that are in heaven and earth are
the work of thy hands, and thou rulest over and sustainest whatsoever is
in the heavens and in the earth. Thine, O Lord, is the kingdom in the
firmament; and thou art exalted above the heavenly angels, and over all
who are constituted rulers upon earth.

[1 Chronicles 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch1 29:14</span></span>

Of thine own have we given thee - "For from thy presence all good comes,
and of the blessings of thy hands have we given thee." - Targum.

[1 Chronicles 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch1 29:15</span></span>

For we are strangers - We have here neither right nor property.

And sojourners - Lodging as it were for a night, in the mansion of
another.

As were all our fathers - These were, as we are supported by thy bounty,
and tenants at will to thee.

Our days on the earth are as a shadow - They are continually declining,
fading, and passing away. This is the place of our sojourning, and here
we have no substantial, permanent residence.

There is none abiding - However we may wish to settle and remain in this
state of things, it is impossible, because every earthly form is passing
swiftly away, all is in a state of revolution and decay, and there is no
abiding, מקוה mikveh, no expectation, that we shall be exempt from those
changes and chances to which our fathers were subjected. "As the shadow
of a bird flying in the air \[אויר avir\] of heaven, such are our days
upon the earth; nor is there any hope to any son of man that he shall
live for ever." - Targum.

[1 Chronicles 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch1 29:18</span></span>

Keep this for ever - All the good dispositions which myself and my
people have, came from thee; continue to support and strengthen them by
the same grace by which they have been inspired!

[1 Chronicles 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch1 29:19</span></span>

Give unto Solomon - a perfect heart - This he did, but Solomon abused
his mercies.

[1 Chronicles 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch1 29:20</span></span>

Worshipped the Lord, and the king - They did reverence to God as the
supreme Ruler, and to the king as his deputy.

[1 Chronicles 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch1 29:21</span></span>

With their drink-offerings - The Targum says a thousand drink-offerings,
making these libations equal in number to the other offerings.

And sacrifices - These were peace-offerings, offered for the people, and
on the flesh of which they feasted.

[1 Chronicles 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch1 29:22</span></span>

They made Solomon - king the second time - The first time of his being
anointed and proclaimed king was when his brother Adonijah affected the
throne; and Zadok, Nathan, and Benaiah anointed and proclaimed him in a
hurry, and without pomp. See [Kg1
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#039). Now that all is quiet, and David
his father dead, (for he was probably so at the time of the second
anointing), they anointed and proclaimed him afresh, with due
ceremonies, sacrifices, etc.

To be the chief governor - To be the vicegerent or deputy of Jehovah;
for God never gave up his right of king in Israel; those called kings
were only his lieutenants: hence it is said, [Ch1
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#023), "that Solomon sat on the throne
of the Lord as king instead of David his father."

[1 Chronicles 29:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ch1 29:24</span></span>

Submitted themselves - נתנו יד תחת שלמה nathenu yad tachath Shelomoh.
"They gave the hand under Solomon;" they swore fealty to him. We have
already seen that putting the hand under the thigh (super sectionem
circumcisionis) was the form of taking an oath. See the note on [Gen
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#009).

[1 Chronicles 29:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">ch1 29:28</span></span>

And he died - David, at his death, had every thing that his heart could
wish.

1\. A good old age, having lived as long as living could be desirable,
and having in the main enjoyed good health.

2\. Full of days; having lived till he saw every thing that he lived for
either accomplished or in a state of forwardness.

3\. Full of riches; witness the immense sums left for the temple.

4\. Full of honorer; having gained more renown than any crowned head
ever did, either before his time or since - laurels that are fresh to
the present hour.

[1 Chronicles 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">ch1 29:29</span></span>

The acts of David - first and last - Those which concerned him in
private life, as well as those which grew out of his regal government.
All these were written by three eminent men, personally acquainted with
him through the principal part of his life; these were Samuel and Gad
the seers, and Nathan the prophet. These writings are all lost, except
the particulars interspersed in the books of Samuel, Kings, and
Chronicles, none of which are the records mentioned here.

[1 Chronicles 29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">ch1 29:30</span></span>

The times that went over him - The transactions of his reign, and the
occurrences and vicissitudes in his own kingdom, as well as those which
were over all the kingdoms of the countries, i.e., in the surrounding
nations, in most of which David had a share during his forty years'
reign. Relative to the character of David, see a few remarks in the note
on [Kg1 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#010) (note); and see more at
the end of the Psalms.

Dr. Delaney gives a just view of his character in a few words: "To sum
up all, David was a true believer, a zealous adorer of God, teacher of
his law and worship, and inspirer of his praise. A glorious example, a
perpetual and inexhaustible fountain of true piety. A consummate and
unequalled hero; a skillful and fortunate captain; a steady patriot; a
wise ruler; a faithful, generous, and magnanimous friend; and, what is
yet rarer, a no less generous and magnanimous enemy. A true penitent, a
divine musician, a sublime poet, and an inspired prophet. By birth, a
peasant; by merit, a prince; in youth, a hero; in manhood, a monarch;
and in age, a saint." The matter of Uriah and Bath-sheba is his great
but only blot! There he sinned deeply; and no man ever suffered more in
his body, soul, and domestic affairs, than he did in consequence. His
penitence was as deep and as extraordinary as his crime; and nothing
could surpass both but that eternal mercy that took away the guilt,
assuaged the sorrow, and restored this most humbled transgressor to
character, holiness, and happiness. Let the God of David be exalted for
ever!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Introduction](ch2000)

</div>
