<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1003)  [Next](ch1005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 4:0</span></span>

A second genealogy of Judah, vv. 1-23. The account of Jabez, [Ch1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#009), [Ch1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#010). The genealogy of Simeon, [Ch1
4:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#024). Their cities, [Ch1
4:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#028). Their villages, and where
situated, [Ch1 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#032), [Ch1
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#033). The heads of families, [Ch1
4:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#034). Where they settled; and what
was their occupation, [Ch1 4:39-43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#039).

[1 Chronicles 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 4:1</span></span>

The sons of Judah - A genealogy of this tribe has already been given in
the second chapter. It is here introduced again, with some variations.
Probably there were different copies in the public registers; and the
writer of this book, finding that this second one contained some
remarkable particulars, thought proper to insert it in this place: and
no reader will regret the insertion, when he carefully considers the
matter.

[1 Chronicles 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch1 4:3</span></span>

These were of the father of Etam - "And these are the rabbins (doctors)
living at Etam, Jezreel, Ishma, and Idbash." - T.

[1 Chronicles 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch1 4:7</span></span>

And Ethnan - After this word we should, with the Targum, read Coz, whose
posterity is mentioned in the next verse. Coz was probably the same as
Kenaz.

[1 Chronicles 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch1 4:8</span></span>

The son of Harum - Jabez should be mentioned at the end of this verse,
else he is as a consequent without an antecedent.

[1 Chronicles 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch1 4:9</span></span>

And Jabez was more honorable - This whole account is variously
understood by some of the principal versions. I shall subjoin a
translation of each.

Septuagint. -

"And Igabes was more glorious than his brethren; and his mother called
his name Igabes, saying, I have brought thee forth as Gabes. And Igabes
invoked the God of Israel, saying, If in blessing thou wilt bless me,
and enlarge my borders, and thy hand be with me, and wilt give me
understanding not to depress me: and God brought about all that he
requested."

Syriac. -

"And one of these was dear to his father and to his mother; and he
called his name ainai, My Eye. And he said to him, In blessing may the
Lord bless thee, and enlarge thy boundary; and may his hand be with
thee; and may he preserve thee from evil, that it may not rule over
thee; and may he give to thee whatsoever thou shalt request of him!"

Arabic. -

"And this one (Hastahar or Harum) was beloved of his father and his
mother: and they called his name aina, My Eye; and they said unto him,
May the Lord bless thee, and multiply thy people, and may his hand be
present with thee, because thou wast born in Beth-lehem!"

These two latter versions seem to have copied each other, and the
Vulgate is nearly, like ours, a literal rendering of the Hebrew; but the
Chaldee is widely different from all the rest: -

Chaldee. -

"And Jabets also, he is Othniel, honorable and skilled in the law beyond
his brethren, whose mother called his name Jabets, because she had borne
him with sorrow. And Jabets prayed to the God of Israel, saying, O that
in blessing thou wouldest bless me with children, and enlarge my borders
with disciples; and that thy hand may be with me in business, that thou
mayest make me like to my companions, that evil concupiscence may the
less grieve me! And the Lord granted that which he prayed for."

Of this honorable person we know nothing but what is here mentioned, nor
does the name occur in any other part of Scripture except in [Ch1
2:55](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#055), where it appears to be the name
of a place, but is understood by the Chaldee to be the name of a person,
as here. Though I have noticed this particularly in the note on that
place, yet I think it right to add the Chaldee here, that all that
concerns this worthy person may be seen at one view: -

[Ch1 2:55](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#055) : "The families of the
Rechabites, the son of Eliezer, the son of Moses, the disciples of
Jabets; he was Othniel, the son of Kenaz. And he was called Jabets, יעבץ
Yabets, because in his counsel \[בעיצתיה beqtsatih, from יעץ yaats, he
counselled, advised, etc.\] he instituted a school for disciples. They
were called Tirathim, תרעתים, because in their hymns their voices were
like trumpets, \[from רע ra, to sound like a trumpet; see [Num
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#009); [Ch2
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#012)\], and Shimathim, שמעתים,
because in hearing, they lifted up their faces, i.e. in prayer, \[from
שמע shama, he heard, hearkened\], and Suchathim, שוכתים, because they
were overshadowed with the spirit of prophecy, \[from שך sach, a
tabernacle, or extended covering\]." For farther particulars, see at the
end of this chapter, [Ch1 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#043) (note).

[1 Chronicles 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch1 4:12</span></span>

These are the men of Rechah - "These are the men of the great
Sanhedrin." - T.

[1 Chronicles 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch1 4:15</span></span>

Caleb the son of Jephunneh - We have already met with this eminent
person in [Num 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#006), [Num
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#030); [Num
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#024), and elsewhere; and seen his
courageous piety and inflexible integrity. The Targum says here, "They
called him Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, because he had purged his soul
from the counsel of the spies.

[1 Chronicles 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch1 4:18</span></span>

And his wife Jehudijah - The Targum considers the names in this verse as
epithets of Moses:

"And his wife Jehuditha educated Moses after she had drawn him out of
the water: and she called his name Jered, because he caused the manna to
descend upon Israel; and Prince Gedor, because he restored the
desolations of Israel; Heber also, because he joined Israel to their
heavenly Father; and Prince Socho, because he overshadowed Israel with
his righteousness, and Jekuthiel, because the Israelites waited on the
God of heaven in his time, forty years in the desert; and prince Zanoah,
because God, on his account, had passed by the sins of Israel. These
names Bithiah, the daughter of Pharaoh, called him by the spirit of
prophecy, for she became a proselyte; and Mered took her to himself to
wife: he is Caleb, and was so called because he opposed the counsel of
the spies." - T. A similar explanation is given by Jarchi.

[1 Chronicles 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch1 4:21</span></span>

That wrought fine linen - "Of the family of those who worked in fine
flax to make garments for kings and priests." - T.

[1 Chronicles 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch1 4:22</span></span>

And Joash, and Saraph - "And the prophets and scribes which sprang from
the seed of Joshua, and the Gibeonites, whose office it was to serve in
the house of the sanctuary, because they had lied to the princes of
Israel; also Joash, who is the same as Mahlon; and Saraph, who is the
same as Chilion, who took wives of the daughters of Moab and Boaz, the
chief of the wise men of the college of Bethlehem, and of those who
existed in former days." - T.

[1 Chronicles 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ch1 4:23</span></span>

These were the potters - "These are the disciples of the law, for whose
sake the world was created; who preside in judgment, and establish the
world; and they build and perfect the fallen down house of Israel: they
dwelt there with the Shechinah of the King of the world, in the study of
the law and the intercalation or months, and determining the
commencement of years and festivals: and they computed the times from
heaven in the days of Ruth, the mother of kingdoms, to the days of
Solomon the king." - T. I am afraid this paraphrase gives us as little
light as the text itself, which speaks of potters, and those who dwelt
among plants and hedges. They were probably brickmakers; perhaps potters
also, who had their dwelling in low grounds, and fabricated the clay
into pots and bricks that was digged up in forming fences in the king's
domains.

[1 Chronicles 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ch1 4:24</span></span>

The sons of Simeon - This genealogy is very different from that given in
[Gen 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#010), and [Num
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#012). This may be occasioned by the
same person having several names, one list taking one name, another list
some other, and so on: to reconcile is impossible; to attempt it,
useless.

[1 Chronicles 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">ch1 4:27</span></span>

Neither did all their family multiply - In [Num
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#023) the number of all the families of
Simeon was fifty-nine thousand three hundred; and that of Judah was,
[Num 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#027), not less than seventy-four
thousand six hundred. When the next census was made, Num. 26, the tribe
of Judah amounted to seventy-six thousand five hundred, an increase of
one thousand nine hundred; while the tribe of Simeon amounted only to
twenty-two thousand two hundred, a decrease of thirty-seven thousand one
hundred. It was at that time the smallest tribe in Israel.

[1 Chronicles 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">ch1 4:31</span></span>

These were their cities unto the reign of David - It appears that David
took some of the cities of the Simeonites, and added them to Judah;
Ziklag for instance, [Sa1 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#006).

As the tribe of Simeon had withdrawn their allegiance from the house of
David, the kings of Judah extended their domination as far as possible
into the territories of that tribe, so that they were obliged to seek
pasture for their flocks at Gedor, and in the mountains of Seir, as we
find [Ch1 4:39-42](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#039).

[1 Chronicles 4:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">ch1 4:40</span></span>

They of Ham had dwelt there of old - These were probably either
Philistines or Egyptians, who dwelt at Gedor, which was situated in the
environs of Joppa and Samnia.

Those whom the five hundred Simeonites expelled from Seir were
Amalekites, [Ch1 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#043).

[1 Chronicles 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">ch1 4:43</span></span>

They smote the rest of the Amalekites - Those who had escaped in the war
which Saul made against them, (see [Sa1
14:48](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#048)), and from David, who had
attacked them afterwards, [Sa2 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#012).

The expedition of the Simeonites mentioned here, against Gedor and Seir,
was in the days of Hezekiah; and, as Calmet conjectures, near about the
time of the captivity of the ten tribes, when the remnant of Simeon
would feel themselves obliged to retire more southward, into Arabia
Petraea, for fear of the Jews. These may be probable conjectures. - See
Calmet.

There are several things in the account of Jabez that are very
instructive: -

1\. He appears to have been a child brought into the world with great
difficulty, at the risk of his own life and that of his mother. So much
seems to be implied in, she bare him with sorrow, i.e., with peculiar
sorrow and danger.

2\. To perpetuate the merciful interposition of God in her own and her
son's behalf, she gave him a name that must have recalled to her and his
remembrance the danger to which both their lives were exposed, and from
which they could not have been extricated but by the especial help of
God. She called his name Jabez, etc.

3\. He was brought up in the fear of God; he was no idolater; he
worshipped the God of Israel, and he showed the sincerity of his faith
by frequent and earnest prayer.

4\. His prayer was at once both enlightened and pious. He had piety
towards God, and therefore he trusted in him: he knew that he was the
fountain of all good, and therefore he sought all necessaries both for
body and soul from him. He prayed to the God of Israel.

5\. Both the matter and manner of his prayer were excellent. His heart
was deeply impressed with its wants, and therefore he was earnest and
fervent; O that thou wouldest bless me indeed; אם ברך תברכני im barech
tebarecheni; "O that in blessing thou wouldest bless me!" Let me live
under thy benediction! Do thou diligently and frequently bless me!

6\. He prays for the things necessary for the body as well as for the
soul: And enlarge my coasts - grant me as much territory as may support
my family. Let the means of living be adequate to the demands of life;
let me have the necessaries, conveniences, and, as far as they may be
safely intrusted with me, the comforts of life! O that thou wouldest
enlarge my coasts!

7\. He is conscious that without the continual support of God he must
fail; and therefore he prays to be upheld by his power: That thy hand
might be with me! May I ever walk with thee, and ever feel the hand of
thy power to support and cover me in all the trials, dangers, and
difficulties of life; and the hand of thy providence to supply all my
wants in reference to both worlds!

8\. He dreads both sin and suffering, and therefore prays against both:
O that thou wouldest keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me! Sin
and misery are in every step of the journey of life; keep me from sin,
that I grieve thee not; and keep me from sin, that I render not myself
miserable! We can never offend God without injuring ourselves; he that
sins must suffer. Thorns and scorpions are everywhere in the way to
perdition; and he that walks in it must be torn and stung. He alone is
happy who walks in the ways of God. Keep me from evil, that it may not
grieve me.

9\. Prayers that have a right aim will have a right answer; Jabez did
not pray in vain, for God granted him that which he requested. He was
continually blessed; his family was increased; the hand of God was upon
him for good. He was saved from sin, and saved from the pangs and
sufferings of a guilty conscience.

10\. If we take up the character and conduct of Jabez in the view given
by the Chaldee, we shall not only see him as a pious and careful man,
deeply interested in behalf of himself and his family, but we shall see
him as a benevolent man, laboring for the welfare of others, and
especially for the religious instruction of youth. He founded schools,
in which the young and rising generation were taught useful knowledge,
and especially the knowledge of God. He had disciples, which were
divided into three classes, who distinguished themselves by their fervor
in the worship of God, by their docility in obediently hearing and
treasuring up the advices and instructions of their teachers, and by
their deep piety to God in bringing forth the fruits of the Spirit. The
spirit of prophecy, that is, of prayer and supplication, rested upon
them.

11\. He did not do these things merely as a duty he owed to God and his
fellows, but from the abundance of a generous and loving heart: In his
counsel he erected a school of disciples. God had blessed him with
temporal things, and he secures their continuance by devoting them to
his service; he honors God with his substance, and God honors him with
his especial blessing and approbation.

12\. On these accounts he was more honorable than his brethren. He was
of the same stock and the same lineage; he had neither nobility of
birth, nor was distinguished by earthly titles; in all these respects he
was on a level with his brethren: but God tells us that he was more
honorable than them all; and why? because he prayed, because he served
his Maker, and because he lived to do good among men; therefore he
received the honor that cometh from God. Reader, imitate the conduct of
this worthy Israelite, that thou mayest be a partaker of his blessings.

The things added by the Targumist might have been derived from authentic
tradition.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 5](ch1005)

</div>
