<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2018)  [Next](ch2020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 19:0</span></span>

Jehoshaphat, on his return from Ramoth-gilead, is met by the prophet
Jehu, and reproved, [Ch2 19:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#001). He
makes a farther reformation in the land, establishing courts of justice,
and giving solemn and pertinent directions to the judges, Levites, etc.,
to do judgement and justice among the people, in the fear of God, [Ch2
19:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#004).

[2 Chronicles 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 19:1</span></span>

Returned to his house in peace - That is, in safety, notwithstanding he
had been exposed to a danger so imminent, from which only the especial
mercy of God could have saved him.

[2 Chronicles 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 19:2</span></span>

Jehu the son of Hanani - We have met with this prophet before; see the
note on [Kg1 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#007).

Therefore is wrath upon thee - That is, Thou deservest to be punished.
And who can doubt this, who knows that he did help the ungodly, and did
love them that hated Jehovah? And is not the wrath of God upon all those
alliances which his people form with the ungodly, whether they be
social, matrimonial, commercial, or political?

[2 Chronicles 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 19:4</span></span>

From Beer-sheba to Mount Ephraim - Before the separation of the ten
tribes, in speaking of the extent of the land it was said, From Dan to
Beer-sheba; but since that event, the kingdom of Judah was bounded on
the south by Beer-sheba, and on the north by the mountains of Ephraim.
This shows that Jehoshaphat had gone through all his territories to
examine every thing himself, to see that judgment and justice were
properly administered among the people.

[2 Chronicles 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 19:6</span></span>

Take heed what ye do - A very solemn and very necessary caution; judges
should feel themselves in the place of God, and judge as those who know
they shall be judged for their judgments.

[2 Chronicles 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 19:8</span></span>

And for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem - Who were they
that returned to Jerusalem? Some suppose that it means Jehoshaphat and
his courtiers, who returned to Jerusalem after the expedition mentioned
[Ch2 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#004) : but if this were so, or if
the text spoke of any person returning to Jerusalem, would not לירושלם
lirushalem, To Jerusalem, and not the simple word ירושלם Yerushalem,
without the preposition, be used?

Learned men have supposed, with great plausibility, that the word וישבו
vaiyashubu, "and they returned," should be written יושבי yoshebey, "the
inhabitants," and that the words should be read, And for the
controversies of the inhabitants of Jerusalem. That this was the
original reading is very probable from its vestiges in the Vulgate,
habitatoribus ejus, "its Inhabitants;" and in the Septuagint it is found
totidem verbis, Και κρινειν τους κατοικουντας εν Ἱερουσαλημ, And to
judge the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

There is a clause in [Ch2 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#009) where
we have a similar mistake in our version: And they returned to
Jerusalem, וישבו ירושלם where the false keri, or marginal note, directs
it, in opposition to common sense and All the versions, to be read
וישובו and they returned, which our translation has unhappily followed.

[2 Chronicles 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 19:10</span></span>

Between blood and blood - Cases of man-slaughter or accidental murder,
or cases of consanguinity, the settlement of inheritance, family claims,
etc.

Between law and commandment - Whatsoever concerns the moral precepts,
rites, and ceremonies, of the law, or whatsoever belongs to civil
affairs.

[2 Chronicles 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 19:11</span></span>

Behold, Amariah - Here was a two-fold jurisdiction, ecclesiastical and
civil: in the ecclesiastical court, Amariah the high-priest was supreme
judge, in the civil court, Zebadiah was supreme. To assist both the
Levites were a sort of counsellors.

Without good and wholesome laws, no nation can be prosperous: and vain
are the best laws if they be not judiciously and conscientiously
administered. The things of God and the things of the King should never
be confounded in the administration of justice. Amariah the priest, and
Zebadiah the ruler, should ever have their distinct places of
jurisdiction.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 20](ch2020)

</div>
