<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1000)  [Next](co1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

The salutation of Paul and Sosthenes, [Co1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001), [Co1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002). The apostolical benediction, [Co1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#003). Thanksgiving for the prosperity
of the Church at Corinth, [Co1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004). In
what that prosperity consisted, [Co1
1:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005). The apostle reproves their
dissensions, and vindicates himself from being any cause of them, [Co1
1:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010). States the simple means which
God uses to convert sinners and confound the wisdom of the wise, etc.,
18-21. Why the Jews and Greeks did not believe, [Co1
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022). The matter of the apostle's
preaching, and the reasons why that preaching was effectual to the
salvation of men, [Co1 1:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023). All
should glory in God, because all blessings are dispensed by Him through
Christ Jesus, [Co1 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030), [Co1
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031).

[1 Corinthians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 1:1</span></span>

Paul, called to be an apostle - Bishop Pearce contends that a comma
should be placed after κλητος, called, which should not be joined to
αποστολος, apostle: the first signifies being called to, the other sent
from. He reads it, therefore, Paul the called; the apostle of Jesus
Christ. The word κλητος, called, may be here used, as in some other
places, for constituted. For this, and the meaning of the word apostle,
see the note on [Rom 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001).

As the apostle had many irregularities to reprehend in the Corinthian
Church, it was necessary that he should be explicit in stating his
authority. He was called - invited to the Gospel feast; had partaken of
it, and, by the grace he received, was qualified to proclaim salvation
to others: Jesus Christ therefore made him an apostle, that is, gave him
a Divine commission to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles.

Through the will of God - By a particular appointment from God alone;
for, being an extraordinary messenger, he derived no part of his
authority from man.

Sosthenes our brother - Probably the same person mentioned [Act
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#017) (note).

[1 Corinthians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 1:2</span></span>

The Church of God which is at Corinth - This Church was planted by the
apostle himself about a.d. 52, as we learn from [Act
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001) (note), etc.

Sanctified in Christ Jesus - Ἡγιασμενοις, Separated from the corruptions
of their place and age.

Called to be saints - Κλητοις ἁγιοις, Constituted saints, or invited to
become such; this was the design of the Gospel, for Jesus Christ came to
save men from their sins.

With all that in every place, etc. - All who profess Christianity, both
in Corinth, Ephesus, and other parts of Greece or Asia Minor; and by
this we see that the apostle intended that this epistle should be a
general property of the universal Church of Christ; though there are
several matters in it that are suited to the state of the Corinthians
only.

Both theirs and ours - That is, Jesus Christ is the common Lord and
Savior of all. He is the exclusive property of no one Church, or people,
or nation. Calling on or invoking the name of the Lord Jesus, was the
proper distinguishing mark of a Christian. In those times of apostolic
light and purity no man attempted to invoke God but in the name of Jesus
Christ; this is what genuine Christians still mean when they ask any
thing from God for Christ's Sake.

[1 Corinthians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 1:3</span></span>

Grace be unto you - For a full explanation of all these terms, see the
notes on [Rom 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007).

[1 Corinthians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 1:4</span></span>

For the grace - which is given you - Not only their calling to be
saints, and to be sanctified in Christ Jesus; but for the various
spiritual gifts which they had received, as specified in the succeeding
verses.

[1 Corinthians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 1:5</span></span>

Ye are enriched - ye abound - in all utterance - Εν παντι λογῳ, In all
doctrine; for so the word should certainly be translated and understood.
All the truths of God relative to their salvation had been explicitly
declared to them; and they had all knowledge; so that they perfectly
comprehended the doctrines which they had heard.

[1 Corinthians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 1:6</span></span>

As the testimony of Christ, etc. - The testimony of Christ is the Gospel
which the apostle had preached, and which had been confirmed by various
gifts of the Holy Spirit, and miracles wrought by the apostle.

[1 Corinthians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 1:7</span></span>

So that ye come behind in no gift - Every gift and grace of God's Spirit
was possessed by the members of that Church, some having their gifts
after this manner, others after that.

Waiting for the coming of our Lord - It is difficult to say whether the
apostle means the final judgment, or our Lord's coming to destroy
Jerusalem, and make an end of the Jewish polity. - See [Th1
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#013). As he does not explain himself
particularly, he must refer to a subject with which they were well
acquainted. As the Jews in general continued to contradict and
blaspheme, it is no wonder if the apostle should be directed to point
out to the believing Gentiles that the judgments of God were speedily to
fall upon this rebellious people, and scatter them over the face of the
earth; which shortly afterwards took place.

[1 Corinthians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 1:8</span></span>

Who shall - confirm you - As the testimony of Christ was confirmed among
you, so, in conscientiously believing and obeying, God will confirm you
through that testimony. See [Co1 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#006).

In the day of our Lord Jesus - In the day that he comes to judge the
world, according to some; but, in the day in which he comes to destroy
the Jewish polity, according to others. While God destroys them who are
disobedient, he can save you who believe.

[1 Corinthians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 1:9</span></span>

God is faithful - The faithfulness of God is a favourite expression
among the ancient Jews; and by it they properly understand the integrity
of God in preserving whatever is entrusted to him. And they suppose that
in this sense the fidelity of man may illustrate the fidelity of God, in
reference to which they tell the two following stories. "Rabbi Phineas,
the son of Jair, dwelt in a certain city, whither some men came who had
two measures of barley, which they desired him to preserve for them.
They afterwards forgot their barley and went away. Rabbi Phineas each
year sowed the barley, reaped, thrashed, and laid it up in his granary.
When seven years had elapsed the men returned, and desired to have the
barley with which they had entrusted him. Rabbi Phineas recollected
them, and said, 'Come and take your treasure,' i.e. the barley they had
left, with all that it had produced for seven years. Thus, from the
faithfulness of man ye may know the faithfulness of God."

"Rabbi Simeon, the son of Shetach, bought an ass from some Edomites, at
whose neck his disciples saw a diamond hanging; they said unto him,
Rabbi, the blessing of the Lord maketh rich, [Pro
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#022). But he answered: The ass I have
bought, but the diamond I have not bought; therefore he returned the
diamond to the Edomites. Thus, from the fidelity of man ye may know the
fidelity of God." This was an instance of rare honesty, not to be
paralleled among the Jews of the present day, and probably among few
Gentiles. Whatever is committed to the keeping of God he will most
carefully preserve; for he is faithful.

Unto the fellowship, etc. - Εις κοινωνιαν, Into the communion or
participation of Christ, in the graces of his Spirit and the glories of
his future kingdom. God will continue to uphold and save you, if you
entrust your bodies and souls to him. But can it be said that God will
keep what is either not entrusted to him; or, after being entrusted, is
taken away?

[1 Corinthians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 1:10</span></span>

Now I beseech you, brethren - The apostle having finished his
introduction comes to his second point, exhorting them to abstain from
dissensions, that they might be of the same heart and mind, striving
together for the hope of the Gospel.

By the name of our Lord Jesus - By his authority, and in his place; and
on account of your infinite obligations to his mercy in calling you into
such a state of salvation.

That ye all speak the same thing - If they did not agree exactly in
opinion on every subject, they might, notwithstanding, agree in the
words which they used to express their religious faith. The members of
the Church of God should labor to be of the same mind, and to speak the
same thing, in order to prevent divisions, which always hinder the work
of God. On every essential doctrine of the Gospel all genuine Christians
agree: why then need religious communion be interrupted? This general
agreement is all that the apostle can have in view; for it cannot be
expected that any number of men should in every respect perfectly
coincide in their views of all the minor points, on which an exact
conformity in sentiment is impossible to minds so variously constituted
as those of the human race. Angels may thus agree, who see nothing
through an imperfect or false medium; but to man this is impossible.
Therefore men should bear with each other, and not be so ready to
imagine that none have the truth of God but they and their party.

[1 Corinthians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 1:11</span></span>

By them which are of the house of Chloe - This was doubtless some very
religious matron at Corinth, whose family were converted to the Lord;
some of whom were probably sent to the apostle to inform him of the
dissensions which then prevailed in the Church at that place. Stephanas,
Fortunatus, and Achaicus, mentioned [Co1
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#017), were probably the sons of this
Chloe.

Contentions - Εριδες, Altercations; produced by the σχισματα, divisions,
mentioned above. When once they had divided, they must necessarily have
contended, in order to support their respective parties.

[1 Corinthians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 1:12</span></span>

Every one of you saith - It seems from this expression that the whole
Church at Corinth was in a state of dissension: they were all divided
into the following sects

1\. Paulians, or followers of St. Paul;

2\. Apollonians, or followers of Apollos;

3\. Kephians, or followers of Kephas;

4\. Christians, or followers of Christ.

See the Introduction, Section 5.

The converts at Corinth were partly Jews and partly Greeks. The Gentile
part, as Dr. Lightfoot conjectures, might boast the names of Paul and
Apollos; the Jewish, those of Kephas and Christ. But these again might
be subdivided; some probably considered themselves disciples of Paul, he
being the immediate instrument of their conversion, while others might
prefer Apollos for his extraordinary eloquence.

If by Kephas the apostle Peter be meant, some of the circumcision who
believed might prefer him to all the rest; and they might consider him
more immediately sent to them; and therefore have him in higher esteem
than they had Paul, who was the minister or apostle of the
uncircumcision: and on this very account the converted Gentiles would
prize him more highly than they did Peter.

Instead of Christ, Χριστου, some have conjectured that we should read
Κρισπου, of Crispus; who is mentioned [Co1
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014). And some think that Χριστου, of
Christ, is an interpolation, as it is not likely that Christ in any
sense of the word could be said to be the head of a sect, or party, in
his own Church; as all those parties held that Gospel, of which himself
was both the author and the subject. But it is very easy to conceive
that, in a Church so divided, a party might be found, who, dividing
Christ from his ministers, might be led to say, "We will have nothing to
do with your parties, nor with your party spirit; we are the disciples
of Christ, and will have nothing to do with Paulians, Apollonians, or
Kephians, as contradistinguished from Christ." The reading Κρισπου for
Χριστου is not acknowledged by any MS. or version.

[1 Corinthians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 1:13</span></span>

Is Christ divided? - Can he be split into different sects and parties?
Has he different and opposing systems? Or, is the Messiah to appear
under different persons?

Was Paul crucified for you? - As the Gospel proclaims salvation through
the crucified only, has Paul poured out his blood as an atonement for
you? This is impossible, and therefore your being called by my name is
absurd; for his disciples you should be, alone, who has bought you by
his blood.

Were ye baptized in the name of Paul? - To be baptized in, or into the
name of one, implied that the baptized was to be the disciple of him
into whose name, religion, etc., he was baptized. As if he said: Did I
ever attempt to set up a new religion, one founded on my own authority,
and coming from myself? On the contrary, have I not preached Christ
crucified for the sin of the world; and called upon all mankind, both
Jews and Gentiles, to believe on Him?

[1 Corinthians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 1:14</span></span>

I thank God that I baptized none of you - None of those who now live in
Corinth, except Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, [Act
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008). And Gaius, the same person
probably with whom Paul lodged, [Rom
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023) (note). Dr. Lightfoot observes:
"If this be Gaius, or Caius, to whom the third epistle of John was
written, which is very probable when the first verse of that epistle
([Jo3 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#001)) is compared with [Rom
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023), then it will appear probable
that John wrote his first epistle to the Corinthians. I wrote, says he,
unto the Church - What Church? Certainly it must have been some
particular Church which the apostle has in view, and the Church where
Gaius himself resided. And if this be true, we may look for Diotrephes
([Jo3 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009)) in the Corinthian Church;
and the author of the schism of which the apostle complains. See the
Introduction, Section 8.

[1 Corinthians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 1:15</span></span>

Lest any should say, etc. - He was careful not to baptize, lest it
should be supposed that he wished to make a party for himself; because
superficial observers might imagine that he baptized them into his own
name - to be his followers, though he baptized them into the name of
Christ only.

Instead of εβαπτισα, I have baptized, the Codex Alexandrinus, the Codex
Ephraim, and several others, with the Coptic, Sahidic, later Syriac in
the margin, Armenian, Vulgate, some copies of the Itala, and several of
the fathers, read εβαπτισθητε, ye were baptized. And if we read ἱνα, so
that, instead of lest, the sentence will stand thus: So that no one can
say that ye were baptized into my name. This appears to be the true
reading, and for it Bp. Pearce offers several strong arguments.

[1 Corinthians 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 1:16</span></span>

The household of Stephanas - From [Co1
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015), we learn that the family of
Stephanas were the first converts in Achaia, probably converted and
baptized by the apostle himself. Epenetus is supposed to be one of this
family. See the note on [Rom 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005).

I know not whether I baptized any other - I do not recollect that there
is any person now residing in Corinth, or Achaia, besides the above
mentioned, whom I have baptized. It is strange that the doubt here
expressed by the apostle should be construed so as to affect his
inspiration! What, does the inspiration of prophet or apostle
necessarily imply that he must understand the geography of the universe,
and have an intuitive knowledge of all the inhabitants of the earth, and
how often, and where they may have changed their residence! Nor was that
inspiration ever given so to work on a man's memory that he could not
forget any of the acts which he had performed during life. Inspiration
was given to the holy men of old that they might be able to write and
proclaim the mind of God in the times which concern the salvation of
men.

[1 Corinthians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 1:17</span></span>

For Christ sent me not to baptize - Bp. Pearce translates thus: For
Christ sent me, not so much to baptize as to preach the Gospel: and he
supports his version thus - "The writers of the Old and New Testaments
do, almost every where (agreeably to the Hebrew idiom) express a
preference given to one thing beyond another by an affirmation of that
which is preferred, and a negation of that which is contrary to it: and
so it must be understood here, for if St. Paul was not sent at all to
baptize, he baptized without a commission; but if he was sent, not only
to baptize but to preach also, or to preach rather than baptize, he did
in fact discharge his duty aright." It appears sufficiently evident that
baptizing was considered to be an inferior office, and though every
minister of Christ might administer it, yet apostles had more important
work. Preparing these adult heathens for baptism by the continual
preaching of the word was of much greater consequence than baptizing
them when thus prepared to receive and profit by it.

Not with wisdom of words - Ουκ εν σοφιᾳ λογου. In several places in the
New Testament the term λογος is taken not only to express a word, a
speech, a saying, etc., but doctrine, or the matter of teaching. Here,
and in [Th1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005), and in several other
places, it seems to signify reason, or that mode of rhetorical
argumentation so highly prized among the Greeks. The apostle was sent
not to pursue this mode of conduct, but simply to announce the truth; to
proclaim Christ crucified for the sin of the world; and to do this in
the plainest and simplest manner possible, lest the numerous conversions
which followed might be attributed to the power of the apostle's
eloquence, and not to the demonstration of the Spirit of God. It is
worthy of remark that, in all the revivals of religion with which we are
acquainted, God appears to have made very little use of human eloquence,
even when possessed by pious men. His own nervous truths, announced by
plain common sense, though in homely phrase, have been the general means
of the conviction and conversion of sinners. Human eloquence and
learning have often been successfully employed in defending the outworks
of Christianity; but simplicity and truth have preserved the citadel.

It is farther worthy of remark, that when God was about to promulgate
his laws he chose Moses as the instrument, who appears to have labored
under some natural impediment in his speech, so that Aaron his brother
was obliged to be his spokesman to Pharaoh; and that, when God had
purposed to publish the Gospel to the Gentile world - to Athens,
Ephesus, Corinth, and Rome, he was pleased to use Saul of Tarsus as the
principal instrument; a man whose bodily presence was weak, and his
speech contemptible, [Co2 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001), [Co2
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010). And thus it was proved that God
sent him to preach, not with human eloquence, lest the cross of Christ
should be made of none effect but with the demonstration and power of
his own Spirit; and thus the excellence of the power appeared to be of
God, and not of man.

[1 Corinthians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 1:18</span></span>

For the preaching of the cross - Ὁ λογος γαρ ὁ του σταυρου, The doctrine
of the cross; or the doctrine that is of or concerning the cross; that
is, the doctrine that proclaims salvation to a lost world through the
crucifixion of Christ.

Is to them that perish foolishness - There are, properly speaking, but
two classes of men known where the Gospel is preached: απολλυμενοι, the
unbelievers and gainsayers, who are perishing; and σοζομενοι, the
obedient believers, who are in a state of salvation. To those who will
continue in the first state, the preaching of salvation through the
merit of a crucified Savior is folly. To those who believe this doctrine
of Christ crucified is the power of God to their salvation; it is
divinely efficacious to deliver them from all the power, guilt, and
pollution of sin.

[1 Corinthians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 1:19</span></span>

For it is written - The place referred to is [Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014).

I will destroy the wisdom of the wise - Των σοφων, Of wise men - of the
philosophers who in their investigations seek nothing less than God, and
whose highest discoveries amount to nothing in comparison of the grand
truths relative to God, the invisible world, and the true end of man,
which the Gospel has brought to light. Let me add, that the very
discoveries which are really useful have been made by men who feared
God, and conscientiously credited Divine revelation: witness Newton,
Boyle, Pascal, and many others. But all the skeptics and deists, by
their schemes of natural religion and morality, have not been able to
save one soul! No sinner has ever been converted from the error of his
ways by their preaching or writings.

[1 Corinthians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 1:20</span></span>

Where is the wise - the scribe - the disputer of this world? - These
words most manifestly refer to the Jews; as the places ([Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014); [Isa
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#018); [Isa
44:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#025)) to which he refers cannot be
understood of any but the Jews.

The wise man σοφος, of the apostle, is the חכם chakam of the prophet;
whose office it was to teach others.

The scribe, γραμματευς, of the apostle, is the ספר sopher of the
prophet; this signifies any man of learning, as distinguished from the
common people, especially any master of the traditions.

The disputer, συζητητης, answers to the דרש derosh, or דרשן darshan, the
propounder of questions; the seeker of allegorical, mystical, and
cabalistical senses from the Holy Scriptures. Now as all these are
characters well known among the Jews, and as the words αιωνος τουτου, of
this world are a simple translation of עולם הזה olam hazzeh, which is
repeatedly used to designate the Jewish republic, there is no doubt that
the apostle has the Jews immediately in view. This wisdom of theirs
induced them to seek out of the sacred oracles any sense but the true
one; and they made the word of God of none effect by their traditions.
After them, and precisely on their model, the schoolmen arose; and they
rendered the doctrine of the Gospel of no effect by their hypercritical
questions, and endless distinctions without differences. By the
preaching of Christ crucified God made foolish the wisdom of the Jewish
wise men; and, after that the pure religion of Christ had been corrupted
by a Church that was of this world, God rendered the wisdom and
disputing of the schoolmen foolishness, by the revival of pure
Christianity at the Reformation. The Jews themselves allow that nothing
is wise, nothing strong, nothing rich, without God.

"Our rabbins teach that there were two wise men in this world; one was
an Israelite, Achitophel, the other was a Gentile, Balaam; but both were
miserable in this world."

"There were also two strong men in the world; one an Israelite, Samson,
the other a Gentile, Goliah; but they were both miserable in this
world."

"There were two rich men in the world; one an Israelite, Korah, the
other a Gentile, Haman; but both these were miserable in this world. And
why? Because their gifts came not from God." See Schoettgen.

In truth the world has derived very little, if any, moral good, either
from the Jewish rabbins or the Gentile philosophers.

[1 Corinthians 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 1:21</span></span>

For after that in the wisdom of God - Dr. Lightfoot observes, "That
σοφια του Θεου, the wisdom of God, is not to be understood of that
wisdom which had God for its author, but that wisdom which had God for
its object. There was, among the heathen, σοφια της φυσεως, wisdom about
natural things, that is, philosophy; and σοφια του Θεου, wisdom about
God; that is, divinity. But the world in its divinity could not, by
wisdom, know God." The plain meaning of this verse is, that the wise men
of the world, especially the Greek philosophers, who possessed every
advantage that human nature could have, independently of a Divine
revelation, and who had cultivated their minds to the uttermost, could
never, by their learning, wisdom, and industry, find out God; nor had
the most refined philosophers among them just and correct views of the
Divine nature, nor of that in which human happiness consists. The work
of Lucretius, De Natura Rerum, and the work of Cicero, De Natura Deorum,
are incontestable proofs of this. Even the writings of Plato and
Aristotle have contributed little to remove the veil which clouded the
understanding of men. No wisdom but that which came from God could ever
penetrate and illuminate the human mind.

By the foolishness of preaching - By the preaching of Christ crucified,
which the Gentiles termed μωρια, foolishness, in opposition to their own
doctrines, which they termed σοφια, wisdom. It was not by the
foolishness of preaching, literally, nor by the foolish preaching, that
God saved the world; but by that Gospel which they called μωρια,
foolishness; which was, in fact, the wisdom of God, and also the power
of God to the salvation of them that believed.

[1 Corinthians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 1:22</span></span>

For the Jews require a sign - Instead of σημειον, a sign, ABCDEFG,
several others, both the Syriac, Coptic, Vulgate, and Itala, with many
of the fathers, have σημεια, signs; which reading, as undoubtedly
genuine, Griesbach has admitted into the text. There never was a people
in the universe more difficult to be persuaded of the truth than the
Jews: and had not their religion been incontestably proved by the most
striking and indubitable miracles, they never would have received it.
This slowness of heart to believe, added to their fear of being
deceived, induced them to require miracles to attest every thing that
professed to come from God. They were a wicked and adulterous
generation, continually seeking signs, and never saying, It is enough.
But the sign which seems particularly referred to here is the assumption
of secular power, which they expected in the Messiah; and because this
sign did not appear in Christ, therefore they rejected him.

And the Greeks seek after wisdom - Such wisdom, or philosophy, as they
found in the writings of Cicero, Seneca, Plato, etc., which was called
philosophy, and which came recommended to them in all the beauties and
graces of the Latin and Greek languages.

[1 Corinthians 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 1:23</span></span>

But we - Apostles, differing widely from these Gentile philosophers: -

Preach Christ crucified - Call on men, both Jews and Gentiles, to
believe in Christ, as having purchased their salvation by shedding his
blood for them.

Unto the Jews a stumbling block - Because Jesus came meek, lowly, and
impoverished; not seeking worldly glory, nor affecting worldly pomp;
whereas they expected the Messiah to come as a mighty prince and
conqueror; because Christ did not come so, they were offended at him.
Out of their own mouths, we may condemn the gainsaying Jews. In Sohar
Chadash, fol. 26, the following saying is attributed to Moses, relative
to the brazen serpent: "Moses said, This serpent is a stumbling block to
the world. The holy blessed God answered: Not at all, it shall be for
punishment to sinners, and life to upright men." This is a proper
illustration of the apostle's words.

Unto the Greeks foolishness - Because they could not believe that
proclaiming supreme happiness through a man that was crucified at Judea
as a malefactor could ever comport with reason and common sense; for
both the matter and manner of the preaching were opposite to every
notion they had formed of what was dignified and philosophic. In Justin
Martyr's dialogue with Trypho the Jew we have these remarkable words,
which serve to throw light on the above. "Your Jesus," says Trypho,
"having fallen under the extreme curse of God, we cannot sufficiently
admire how you can expect any good from God, who place your hopes επ'
ανθρωπον σταυρωθεντα, upon a man that was Crucified." The same writer
adds: "They count us mad, that after the eternal God, the Father of all
things, we give the second place, ανθρωπῳ σταυρωθεντι, to a man that was
crucified." "Where is your understanding," said the Gentiles, "who
worship for a god him who was crucified?" Thus Christ crucified was to
the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. See Whitby on
this verse.

[1 Corinthians 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 1:24</span></span>

But unto them which are called - Τοις κλητοις. Those, both of Jews and
Greeks, who were by the preaching of the Gospel called or invited to the
marriage feast, and have accordingly believed in Christ Jesus; they
prove this doctrine to be divinely powerful, to enlighten and convert
the soul, and to be a proof of God's infinite wisdom, which has found
out such an effectual way to glorify both his justice and mercy, and
save, to the uttermost, all that come to him through Christ Jesus. The
called, or invited, κλητοι, is a title of genuine Christians, and is
frequently used in the New Testament. Ἁγιοι, saints, is used in the same
sense.

[1 Corinthians 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 1:25</span></span>

The foolishness of God is wiser, etc. - The meaning of these strong
expressions is, that the things of God's appointment, which seem to men
foolishness, are infinitely beyond the highest degree of human wisdom;
and those works of God, which appear to superficial observers weak and
contemptible, surpass all the efforts of human power. The means which
God has appointed for the salvation of men are so wisely imagined and so
energetically powerful, that all who properly use them shall be
infallibly brought to the end - final blessedness, which he has promised
to them who believe and obey.

[1 Corinthians 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 1:26</span></span>

Ye see your calling - Την κλησιν. The state of grace and blessedness to
which ye are invited. I think, βλεπετε την κλησιν, etc., should be read
in the imperative: Take heed to, or consider your calling, brethren;
that (ὁτι) not many of you are wise after the flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble: men is not in the original, and Paul seems to allude to
the Corinthian believers in particular. This seems to have been said in
opposition to the high and worldly notions of the Jews, who assert that
the Divine Spirit never rests upon any man, unless he be wise, powerful,
and rich. Now this Divine Spirit did rest upon the Christians at
Corinth, and yet these were, in the sense of the world, neither wise,
rich, nor noble. We spoil, if not corrupt the apostle's meaning, by
adding are called, as if God did not send his Gospel to the wise, the
powerful, and the noble, or did not will their salvation. The truth is,
the Gospel has an equal call to all classes of men; but the wise, the
mighty, and the noble, are too busy, or too sensual, to pay any
attention to an invitation so spiritual and so Divine; and therefore
there are few of these in the Church of Christ in general.

[1 Corinthians 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 1:27</span></span>

But God hath chosen the foolish things - God has chosen by means of men
who are esteemed rude and illiterate to confound the greatest of the
Greek philosophers, and overturn their systems; and, by means of men
weak, without secular power or authority, to confound the scribes and
Pharisees, and in spite of the exertions of the Jewish sanhedrin, to
spread the doctrine of Christ crucified all over the land of Judea, and
by such instruments as these to convert thousands of souls to the faith
of the Gospel, who are ready to lay down their lives for the truth. The
Jews have proverbs that express the same sense as these words of the
apostle. In Shemoth Rabba, sec. 17, fol. 117, it is said: "There are
certain matters which appear little to men, yet by them God points out
important precepts. Thus hyssop in the sight of man is worth nothing,
but in the sight of God its power is great; sometimes he equals it to
the cedar, particularly in the ordinance concerning the lepers, and in
the burning of the red heifer. Thus God commanded them in Egypt, [Exo
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022) : And ye shall take a bunch of
hyssop, etc. And concerning Solomon it is said, [Kg1
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#033) : And he discoursed of trees,
from the cedar on Lebanon to the hyssop that grows out of the wall.
Whence we may learn that great and small things are equal in the eyes of
the Lord, and that even by small things He can work great miracles."

[1 Corinthians 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 1:28</span></span>

And base things - and things which are despised - It is very likely that
the apostle refers here to the Gentiles and to the Gentile converts, who
were considered base and despicable in the eyes of the Jews, who counted
them no better than dogs, and who are repeatedly called the things that
are not. By these very people, converted to Christianity, God has
brought to nought all the Jewish pretensions; and by means of the
Gentiles themselves, he has annihilated the whole Jewish polity; so that
even Jerusalem itself was soon after this, trodden under foot of the
Gentiles.

[1 Corinthians 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 1:29</span></span>

That no flesh should glory - God does his mighty works in such a way as
proves that though he may condescend to employ men as instruments, yet
they have no part either in the contrivance or energy by which such
works are performed.

[1 Corinthians 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co1 1:30</span></span>

But of him are ye in Christ Jesus - Even the good which you possess is
granted by God, for it is by and through him that Christ Jesus comes,
and all the blessings of the Gospel dispensation.

Who of God is made unto us wisdom - As being the author of that
evangelical wisdom which far excels the wisdom of the philosopher and
the scribe, and even that legal constitution which is called the wisdom
of the Jews, [Deu 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006).

And righteousness - Δικαιοσυνη, Justification, as procuring for us that
remission of sins which the law could not give, [Gal
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021); [Gal
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021).

And sanctification - As procuring for and working in us, not only an
external and relative holiness, as was that of the Jews, but ὁσιοτητα
της αληθειας, true and eternal holiness, [Eph
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024), wrought in us by the Holy
Spirit.

And redemption - He is the author of redemption, not from the Egyptian
bondage, or Babylonish captivity, but from the servitude of Satan, the
dominion of sin and death, and from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God, or the redemption of the body, [Rom
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021), [Rom
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023). See Whitby.

The object of the apostle is to show that man of himself possesses no
good, that whatever he has comes from God, and from God only through
Christ. For the different acceptations of the word righteousness the
reader may consult the note on [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017) (note), where the subject is
considered in every point of view.

[1 Corinthians 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 1:31</span></span>

According as it is written - In [Jer
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023), [Jer
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024) : Thus saith the Lord, Let not
the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in
his might; let not the rich man glory in his riches; but let him that
glorieth glory in this: That he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am
the Lord, which exercise loving-kindness, judgment, and righteousness,
in the earth. So then, as all good is of and from God, let him that has
either wisdom, strength, riches, pardon, holiness, or any other
blessing, whether temporal or spiritual, acknowledge that he has nothing
but what he has received; and that, as he has cause of glorying
(boasting or exultation) in being made a partaker of these benefits and
mercies of his Creator and Redeemer, let him boast in God alone, by
whom, through Christ Jesus, he has received the whole.

1\. This is an admirable chapter, and drawn up with great skill and
address. The divided state of the Corinthian Church we have already
noticed, and it appears that in these factions the apostle's authority
had been set at nought by some, and questioned by many. St. Paul begins
his letter with showing his authority; he had it immediately through
Christ Jesus himself, by the will of God. And indeed the success of his
preaching was a sufficient proof of the Divinity of his call. Had not
God been with him he never could have successfully opposed the whole
system of the national religion of the Corinthians, supported as it was
by the prejudice of the people, the authority of the laws, and the
eloquence and learning of their most eminent philosophers. It was
necessary, therefore, that he should call the attention of this people
to the Divine origin of his mission, that they might acknowledge that
the excellency of the power was of God, and not of man.

2\. It was necessary also that he should conciliate their esteem, and
therefore speak as favourably concerning them as truth would allow;
hence he shows them that they were a Church of God, sanctified in Christ
Jesus, and called to be saints; that they abounded and even excelled in
many extraordinary gifts and graces; and that they were not inferior to
any Church of God in any gift. And he shows them that they received all
these through God's confirmation of that testimony which he had
delivered among them, [Co1 1:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004).

3\. When he had thus prepared their minds to receive and profit by his
admonitions he proceeds to their schisms, which he mentions and
reprehends in the most delicate manner, so that the most obstinate and
prejudiced could take no offense.

4\. Having gained this point, he gently leads them to consider that, as
God is the fountain of all good, so their good had all come from him;
and that none of them should rest in the gift, but in the giver; nor
should they consider themselves as of particular consequence on account
of possessing such gifts, because all earthly good is transitory, and
those who trust in power, wisdom, or wealth, are confounded and brought
to nought; and that they alone are safe who receive every thing as from
the hand of God, and, in the strength of his gifts, glorify him who is
the donor of all good. He who can read this chapter without getting much
profit has very little spirituality in his soul, and must be utterly
unacquainted with the work of God in the heart.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 2](co1002)

</div>
