<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1005)  [Next](co1007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 6:0</span></span>

The Corinthians are reproved for their litigious disposition; brother
going to law with brother, and that before the heathen, [Co1
6:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001). They should suffer wrong rather
than do any, [Co1 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#007), [Co1
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#008). No unrighteous person can enter
into the glory of God, [Co1 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009), [Co1
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010). Some of the Corinthians had been
grievous sinners, but God had saved them, [Co1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011). Many things may be lawful which
are not at all times expedient, [Co1
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012). Meats are for the belly, and the
belly for meats; but the body is not for uncleanness, [Co1
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013). Christ's resurrection a pledge
of ours, [Co1 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#014). The bodies of
Christians are members of Christ, and must not be defiled, [Co1
6:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#015). He that commits fornication
sins against his own body, [Co1 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#018).
Strong dissuasives from it, [Co1 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019),
[Co1 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020).

[1 Corinthians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 6:1</span></span>

Dare any of you, etc. - From the many things that are here reprehended
by the apostle, we learn that the Christian Church at Corinth was in a
state of great imperfection, notwithstanding there were very many
eminent characters among them. Divided as they were among themselves,
there was no one person who possessed any public authority to settle
differences between man and man; therefore, as one party would not
submit to the decisions of another, they were obliged to carry their
contentions before heathen magistrates; and probably these very subjects
of litigations arose out of their ecclesiastical divisions. The thing,
and this issue of it, the apostle strongly reprehends.

Before the unjust, and not before the saints? - The heathen judges were
termed δικασται from their presumed righteousness in the administration
of justice; here the apostle, by a paronomasia, calls them αδικοι,
unrighteous persons; and it is very likely that at Corinth, where such
corruption of manners reigned, there was a great perversion of public
justice; and it is not to be supposed that matters relative to the
Christians were fairly decided. The Christians the apostle terms ἁγιοι
saints, which they were all by profession; and doubtless many were so in
spirit and in truth.

[1 Corinthians 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 6:2</span></span>

The saints shall judge the world? - Nothing can be more evident than
that the writers of the New Testament often use ὁ κοσμος, the world, to
signify the Jewish people; and sometimes the Roman empire, and the
Jewish state; and in the former sense it is often used by our Lord.
When, says he, the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory, then
shall ye sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel,
[Mat 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028). It is supposed that he
refers to the same subject as that mentioned here - the saints judging
the world; and that St. Paul has his words in view in what he says here
to the Corinthians. By judging the twelve tribes of Israel, some have
imagined that having authority in the Church is merely intended; but Dr.
Lightfoot contends that the words referred to the coming of our Lord to
execute judgment on the Jews, and to destroy their state; and that the
doctrine of the apostles, not themselves, was to judge and condemn that
most disobedient people. The place before us is generally understood to
imply, that the redeemed of the Lord shall be, on the great day,
assessors with him in judgment; and shall give their award in the
determinations of his justice. On reviewing this subject, I am fully of
opinion that this cannot be the meaning of the words, and that no such
assessorship as is contended for ever will take place; and that the
interpretation is clogged with a multitude of absurdities.

1\. The saints themselves are to appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, and shall be judged by him, after which they shall reign with
him; but it is never said in Scripture that they shall judge with him.

2\. It would be absurd to suppose that thrones should be erected for the
purpose of saints sitting on them to give their approbation in the
condemnation of the wicked; of what use can such an approbation be? is
it necessary to the validity of Christ's decision? and will not even the
damned themselves, without this, acknowledge the justice of their doom?
I therefore think with Dr. Lightfoot, that these words of the apostle
refer to the prediction of Daniel, [Dan
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#018), [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027), and such like prophecies, where
the kingdoms of the earth are promised to the saints of the Most High;
that is, that a time shall come when Christianity shall so far prevail
that the civil government of the world shall be administered by
Christians, which, at that time, was administered by heathens. And this
is even now true of all those parts of the earth which may be considered
of the greatest political consequence. They profess Christianity, and
the kings and other governors are Christians in this general sense of
the term.

[1 Corinthians 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 6:3</span></span>

Know ye not that we shall judge angels? - Dr. Lightfoot observes that
"the apostle does not say here, as he said before, the saints shall
judge the angels, but We shall judge them. By angels, all confess that
demons are intended; but certainly all saints, according to the latitude
with which that word is understood, i.e. all who profess Christianity,
shall not judge angels. Nor is this judging of angels to be understood
of the last day; but the apostle speaks of the ministers of the Gospel,
himself and others, who, by the preaching of the Gospel, through the
power of Christ, should spoil the devils of their oracles and their
idols, should deprive them of their worship, should drive them out of
their seats, and strip them of their dominion. Thus would God subdue the
whole world under the Christian power, so that Christian magistrates
should judge men, and Christian ministers judge devils."

[1 Corinthians 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 6:4</span></span>

Things pertaining to this life - They could examine all civil cases
among themselves, which they were permitted to determine without any
hinderance from the heathen governments under which they lived.

Who are least esteemed in the Church - Τους εξουθενημενους, Those who
were in the lowest order of judges; for the apostle may refer here to
the order in the Jewish benches, as Dr. Lightfoot conjectures, of which
there were five, viz.: -

1\. The great Sanhedrin, consisting of seventy-two elders, which
presided in Jerusalem.

2\. The little Sanhedrin of twenty-five, in large cities, out of
Jerusalem.

3\. The Bench of Three in every synagogue.

4\. The Authorized, or Authentic Bench.

5\. The Bench not authorized, εξουθενημενος. This latter bench was so
called because it received not its authority immediately from the
Sanhedrin, but was chosen by the parties between whom the controversy
depended. The apostle certainly does not mean persons of no repute, but
such as these arbitrators, who were chosen for the purpose of settling
private differences, and preventing them from going before the regular
magistrates. The following verse makes it pretty evident that the
apostle refers to this lower kind of tribunal; and hence he says, -

[1 Corinthians 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 6:5</span></span>

Is it so, that there is not a wise man among you? - Have you none among
yourselves that can be arbitrators of the differences which arise, that
you go to the heathen tribunals?

[1 Corinthians 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 6:6</span></span>

Brother goeth to law with brother - One Christian sues another at law!
This is almost as great a scandal as can exist in a Christian society.
Those in a religious community who will not submit to a proper
arbitration, made by persons among themselves, should be expelled from
the Church of God.

[1 Corinthians 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 6:7</span></span>

There is utterly a fault among you - There is a most manifest defect
among you,

1\. Of peaceableness;

2\. Of brotherly love;

3\. Of mutual confidence; and

4\. Of reverence for God, and concern for the honor of his cause.

Why do ye not rather take wrong? - Better suffer an injury than take a
method of redressing yourselves which must injure your own peace, and
greatly dishonor the cause of God.

[1 Corinthians 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 6:8</span></span>

Nay, ye do wrong - Far from suffering, ye are the aggressors; and
defraud your pious, long-suffering brethren, who submit to this wrong
rather than take those methods of redressing their grievances which the
spirit of Christianity forbids. Probably the apostle refers to him who
had taken his father's wife.

[1 Corinthians 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 6:9</span></span>

The unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom - The unrighteous, αδικοι,
those who act contrary to right, cannot inherit, for the inheritance is
by right. He who is not a child of God has no right to the family
inheritance, for that inheritance is for the children. If children, then
heirs; heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, [Rom
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017). There are here ten classes of
transgressors which the apostle excludes from the kingdom of God; and
any man who is guilty of any one of the evils mentioned above is thereby
excluded from this kingdom, whether it imply the Church of Christ here
below, or the state of glory hereafter.

Several of the evils here enumerated will not bear to be particularly
explained; they are, however, sufficiently plain of themselves, and show
us what abominations were commonly practised among the Corinthians.

[1 Corinthians 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 6:11</span></span>

And such were some of you - It was not with the prospect of collecting
saints that the apostles went about preaching the Gospel of the kingdom.
None but sinners were to be found over the face of the earth; they
preached that sinners might be converted unto God, made saints, and
constituted into a Church; and this was the effect as well as the object
of their preaching.

But ye are washed - Several suppose that the order in which the
operations of the grace of God take place in the soul is here inverted;
but I am of a very different mind. Every thing will appear here in its
order, when we understand the terms used by the apostle.

Ye are washed, απελουσασθε; ye have been baptized into the Christian
faith, and ye have promised in this baptism to put off all filthiness of
the flesh and spirit: and the washing of your bodies is emblematical of
the purification of your souls.

Ye are sanctified - Ἡγιασθητε; from α, privative, and γη, the earth; ye
are separated from earthly things to be connected with spiritual. Ye are
separated from time to be connected with eternity. Ye are separated from
idols to be joined to the living God. Separation from common, earthly,
or sinful uses, to be wholly employed in the service of the true God, is
the ideal meaning of this word, both in the Old and New Testaments. It
was in consequence of their being separated from the world that they
became a Church of God. Ye were formerly workers of iniquity, and
associated with workers of iniquity; but now ye are separated from them,
and united together to work out your salvation with fear and trembling
before God.

Ye are justified - Εδικαιωθητε· Ye have been brought into a state of
favor with God; your sins having been blotted out through Christ Jesus,
the Spirit of God witnessing the same to your conscience, and carrying
on by his energy the great work of regeneration in your hearts. The
process here is plain and simple: -

1\. Paul and his brother apostles preached the Gospel at Corinth, and
besought the people to turn from darkness to light - from idol vanities
to the living God, and to believe in the Lord Jesus for the remission of
sins.

2\. The people who heard were convinced of the Divine truths delivered
by the apostle, and flocked to baptism.

3\. They were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, and thus took upon
them the public profession of the Gospel.

4\. Being now baptized into the Christian faith, they were separated
from idols and idolaters, and became incorporated with the Church of
God.

5\. As penitents, they were led to the Lord Jesus for justification,
which they received through faith in his blood.

6\. Being justified freely - having their sins forgiven through the
redemption that is in Jesus, they received the Spirit of God to attest
this glorious work of grace to their consciences; and thus became
possessed of that principle of righteousness, that true leaven which was
to leaven the whole lump, producing that universal holiness without
which none can see the Lord.

[1 Corinthians 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 6:12</span></span>

All things are lawful unto me - It is likely that some of the
Corinthians had pleaded that the offense of the man who had his father's
wife, as well as the eating the things offered to idols, was not
contrary to the law, as it then stood. To this the apostle answers:
Though such a thing be lawful, yet the case of fornication, mentioned
[Co1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001), is not expedient, ου
συμφερει - it is not agreeable to propriety, decency, order, and purity.
It is contrary to the established usages of the best and most
enlightened nations, and should not be tolerated in the Church of
Christ.

They might also be led to argue in favor of their eating things offered
to idols, and attending idol feasts, thus: - that an idol was nothing in
the world; and as food was provided by the bounty of God, a man might
partake of it any where without defiling his conscience, or committing
sin against the Creator. This excuse also the apostle refers to. All
these things are lawful, taken up merely in the light that none of your
laws is against the first; and that, on the ground that an idol is
nothing in the world, there can be no reason against the last;

But I will not be brought under the power of any - Allowing that they
are all lawful, or at least that there is no law against them, yet they
are not expedient; there is no necessity for them; and some of them are
abominable, and forbidden by the law of God and nature, whether
forbidden by yours or not; while others, such as eating meats offered to
idols, will almost necessarily lead to bad moral consequences: and who,
that is a Christian, would obey his appetite so far as to do these
things for the sake of gratification? A man is brought under the power
of any thing which he cannot give up. He is the slave of that thing,
whatsoever it be, which he cannot relinquish; and then, to him, it is
sin.

[1 Corinthians 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 6:13</span></span>

Meats for the belly - I suppose that κοιλια means the animal appetite,
or propensity to food, etc., and we may conceive the apostle to reason
thus: I acknowledge that God has provided different kinds of aliments
for the appetite of man, and among others those which are generally
offered to idols; and he has adapted the appetite to these aliments, and
the aliments to the appetite: but God shall destroy both it and them;
none of these is eternal; all these lower appetites and sensations will
be destroyed by death, and have no existence in the resurrection body;
and the earth and its productions shall be burnt up.

Now the body is not for fornication - Though God made an appetite for
food, and provided food for that appetite, yet he has not made the body
for any uncleanness, nor indulgence in sensuality; but he has made it
for Christ; and Christ was provided to be a sacrifice for this body as
well as for the soul, by taking our nature upon him; so that now, as
human beings, we have an intimate relationship to the Lord; and our
bodies are made not only for his service, but to be his temples.

[1 Corinthians 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 6:14</span></span>

And God hath both raised up the Lord - He has raised up the human nature
of Christ from the grave, as a pledge of our resurrection; and will also
raise us up by his own power, that we may dwell with him in glory for
ever.

[1 Corinthians 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 6:15</span></span>

Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? - Because he has
taken your nature upon him, and thus, as believers in him, ye are the
members of Christ.

Shall I then take, etc. - Shall we, who profess to be members of his
body, of his flesh, and of his bones, connect ourselves with harlots,
and thus dishonor and pollute the bodies which are members of Christ?
God forbid! These passages admit of a more literal interpretation. This,
if given at all, I must give in a strange language.

Membra humana, ad generationem pertinentia, vocantur Membra Christi,
quia mysterium conjunctionis Christi et Ecclesiae per conjunctionem
maris et faeminae indigitatur, [Eph
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032). In Vet. Test. idem valebat de
membro masculino, guippe quod circumcisione, tanquam signo faederis,
honoratum est. Vide Schoettgen, Hor. Hebr.

[1 Corinthians 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 6:16</span></span>

He that is joined to a harlot is one body - In Sohar Genes., fol. 19, we
have these remarkable words: Whosoever connects himself with another
man's wife, does in effect renounce the holy blessed God, and the Church
of the Israelites.

[1 Corinthians 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 6:17</span></span>

Is one spirit - He who is united to God, by faith in Christ Jesus,
receives his Spirit, and becomes a partaker of the Divine nature. Who
can change such a relationship for communion with a harlot; or for any
kind of sensual gratification? He who can must be far and deeply fallen!

[1 Corinthians 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 6:18</span></span>

Flee fornication - Abominate, detest, and escape from every kind of
uncleanness. Some sins, or solicitations to sin, may be reasoned with;
in the above cases, if you parley you are undone; reason not, but Fly!

Sinneth against his own body - Though sin of every species has a
tendency to destroy life, yet none are so mortal as those to which the
apostle refers; they strike immediately at the basis of the
constitution. By the just judgment of God, all these irregular and
sinful connections are married to death. Neither prostitutes,
whoremongers, nor unclean persons of any description, can live out half
their days. It would be easy to show, and prove also, how the end of
these things, even with respect to the body, is death; but I forbear,
and shall finish the subject with the words of the prophet: The show of
their countenance doth witness against them, and they declare their sin
as Sodom, they hide it not; wo unto their soul, for they have rewarded
evil unto themselves.

[1 Corinthians 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 6:19</span></span>

Your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost - What an astonishing saying
is this! As truly as the living God dwelt in the Mosaic tabernacle, and
in the temple of Solomon, so truly does the Holy Ghost dwell in the
souls of genuine Christians; and as the temple and all its utensils were
holy, separated from all common and profane uses, and dedicated alone to
the service of God, so the bodies of genuine Christians are holy, and
all their members should be employed in the service of God alone.

And ye are not your own? - Ye have no right over yourselves, to dispose
either of your body, or any of its members, as you may think proper or
lawful; you are bound to God, and to him you are accountable.

[1 Corinthians 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 6:20</span></span>

Ye are bought with a price - As the slave who is purchased by his master
for a sum of money is the sole property of that master, so ye, being
bought with the price of the blood of Christ, are not your own, you are
his property. As the slave is bound to use all his skill and diligence
for the emolument of his master, so you should employ body, soul, and
spirit in the service of your Lord; promoting, by every means in your
power, the honor and glory of your God, whom you must also consider as
your Lord and Master.

There are strange discordances in MSS., versions, and fathers, on the
conclusion of this verse; and the clauses και εν τῳ πνευματι ὑμων, ἁτινα
εστι του Θεου, and in your spirit, which is God's, is wanting in
ABC\*D\*EFG, some others, Coptic, Ethiopic, Vulgate, and Itala, and in
several of the primitive fathers. Almost every critic of note considers
them to be spurious. Whether retained or expunged the sense is the same.
Instead of price simply, the Vulgate and some of the Latin fathers,
read, pretio magno, with a great price; and instead of glorify, simply,
they read glorificate et portate, glorify and carry God in your bodies.
These readings appear to be glosses intended to explain the text.
Litigious Christians, who will have recourse to law for every little
difference, as well as the impure, may read this chapter either to their
conviction or confusion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 7](co1007)

</div>
