<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1004)  [Next](co1006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 5:0</span></span>

Account of the incestuous person, or of him who had married his father's
wife, [Co1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001). The apostle reproves
the Corinthians for their carelessness in this matter, and orders them
to excommunicate the transgressor, [Co1
5:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#002). They are reprehended for their
glorying, while such scandals were among them, [Co1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006). They must purge out the old
leaven, that they may properly celebrate the Christian passover, [Co1
5:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007). They must not associate with
any who, professing the Christian religion, were guilty of any
scandalous vice, and must put away from them every evil person, [Co1
5:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#010).

[1 Corinthians 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 5:1</span></span>

There is fornication among you - The word πορνεια, which we translate
fornication in this place, must be understood in its utmost latitude of
meaning, as implying all kinds of impurity; for, that the Corinthians
were notoriously guilty of every species of irregularity and debauch, we
have already seen; and it is not likely that in speaking on this
subject, in reference to a people so very notorious, he would refer to
only one species of impurity, and that not the most flagitious.

That one should have his father's wife - Commentators and critics have
found great difficulties in this statement. One part of the case is
sufficiently clear, that a man who professed Christianity had illegal
connections with his father's wife; but the principal question is, was
his father alive or dead? Most think that the father was alive, and
imagine that to this the apostle refers, [Co2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#012), where, speaking of the person
who did the wrong, he introduces also him who had suffered the wrong;
which must mean the father and the father then alive. After all that has
been said on this subject, I think it most natural to conclude that the
person in question had married the wife of his deceased father, not his
own mother, but stepmother, then a widow.

This was a crime which the text says was not so much as named among the
Gentiles; the apostle must only mean that it was not accredited by them,
for it certainly did often occur: but by their best writers who notice
it, it was branded as superlatively infamous. Cicero styles it, scelus
incredibile et inauditum, an incredible and unheard of wickedness; but
it was heard of and practised; and there are several stories of this
kind in heathen authors, but they reprobate not commend it. The word
ονομαζεται, named, is wanting in almost every MS. and version of
importance, and certainly makes no part of the text. The words should be
read, and such fornication as is not amongst the Gentiles, i.e., not
allowed. Some think that this woman might have been a proselyte to the
Jewish religion from heathenism; and the rabbins taught that proselytism
annulled all former relationship, and that a woman was at liberty in
such a case to depart from an unbelieving husband, and to marry even
with a believing son, i.e., of her husband by some former wife.

[1 Corinthians 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 5:2</span></span>

Ye are puffed up - Ye are full of strife and contention relative to your
parties and favourite teachers, and neglect the discipline of the
Church. Had you considered the greatness of this crime, ye would have
rather mourned, and have put away this flagrant transgressor from among
you.

Taken away from among you - Ἱνα εξαρθη εκ μεσου υμων. This is supposed
by some to refer to the punishment of death, by others to
excommunication. The Christian Church was at this time too young to have
those forms of excommunication which were practised in succeeding
centuries. Probably no more is meant than a simple disowning of the
person, accompanied with the refusal to admit him to the sacred
ordinances, or to have any intercourse or connection with him.

[1 Corinthians 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 5:3</span></span>

Absent in body, but present in spirit - Perhaps St. Paul refers to the
gift of the discernment of spirits, which it is very likely the apostles
in general possessed on extraordinary occasions. He had already seen
this matter so clearly, that he had determined on that sort of
punishment which should be inflicted for this crime.

[1 Corinthians 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 5:4</span></span>

In the name of our Lord Jesus - Who is the head of the Church; and under
whose authority every act is to be performed.

And my spirit - My apostolical authority derived from him; with the
power, συν δυναμει, with the miraculous energy of the Lord Jesus, which
is to inflict the punishment that you pronounce: -

[1 Corinthians 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 5:5</span></span>

To deliver such a one unto Satan - There is no evidence that delivering
to Satan was any form of excommunication known either among the Jews or
the Christians. Lightfoot, Selden, and Schoettgen, who have searched all
the Jewish records, have found nothing that answers to this: it was a
species of punishment administered in extraordinary cases, in which the
body and the mind of an incorrigible transgressor were delivered by the
authority of God into the power of Satan, to be tortured with diseases
and terrors as a warning to all; but while the body and mind were thus
tormented, the immortal spirit was under the influence of the Divine
mercy; and the affliction, in all probability, was in general only for a
season; though sometimes it was evidently unto death, as the destruction
of the flesh seems to imply. But the soul found mercy at the hand of
God; for such a most extraordinary interference of God's power and
justice, and of Satan's influence, could not fail to bring the person to
a state of the deepest humiliation and contrition; and thus, while the
flesh was destroyed, the spirit was saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
No such power as this remains in the Church of God; none such should be
assumed; the pretensions to it are as wicked as they are vain. It was
the same power by which Ananias and Sapphira were struck dead, and
Elymas the sorcerer struck blind. Apostles alone were intrusted with it.

[1 Corinthians 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 5:6</span></span>

Your glorying is not good - You are triumphing in your superior
knowledge, and busily employed in setting up and supporting your
respective teachers, while the Church is left under the most scandalous
corruptions - corruptions which threaten its very existence if not
purged away.

Know ye not - With all your boasted wisdom, do you not know and
acknowledge the truth of a common maxim, a little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump? If this leaven - the incestuous person, be permitted to
remain among you; if his conduct be not exposed by the most formidable
censure; the flood-gates of impurity will be opened on the Church, and
the whole state of Christianity ruined in Corinth.

[1 Corinthians 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 5:7</span></span>

Purge out therefore the old leaven - As it is the custom of the Jews
previously to the passover to search their houses in the most diligent
manner for the old leaven, and throw it out, sweeping every part clean;
so act with this incestuous person. I have already shown with what care
the Jews purged their houses from all leaven previously to the passover;
see the note on [Exo 12:8-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008) (note),
and on the term passover, and Christ as represented by this ancient
Jewish sacrifice; see on [Exo 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027)
(note), and my Discourse on the Nature and Design of the Eucharist.

[1 Corinthians 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 5:8</span></span>

Therefore let us keep the feast - It is very likely that the time of the
passover was now approaching, when the Church of Christ would be called
to extraordinary acts of devotion, in commemorating the passion, death,
and resurrection of Christ; and of this circumstance the apostle takes
advantage in his exhortation to the Corinthians. See the Introduction,
Section 12.

Not with old leaven - Under the Christian dispensation we must be saved
equally from Judaism, heathenism, and from sin of every kind; malice and
wickedness must be destroyed; and sincerity and truth, inward purity and
outward holiness, take their place.

The apostle refers here not more to wicked principles than to wicked
men; let us keep the feast, not with the old leaven - the impure
principles which actuated you while in your heathen state; neither with
the leaven of malice and wickedness, κακιας και πονηριας, wickedness,
radical depravity, producing unrighteousness in the life; nor with the
persons who are thus influenced, and thus act; but with the unleavened
bread, αλλ' εν αζυμοις, but with upright and godly men, who have
sincerity, ειλικρινεια, such purity of affections and conduct, that even
the light of God shining upon them discovers no flaw, and truth - who
have received the testimony of God, and who are inwardly as well as
outwardly what they profess to be.

The word πονηριας, which we translate wickedness, is so very like to
πορνειας, fornication, that some very ancient MSS. have the latter
reading instead of the former; which, indeed, seems most natural in this
place; as κακιας, which we translate malice, includes every thing that
is implied in πονηριας, wickedness whereas πορνειας, as being the
subject in question, see [Co1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001),
would come more pointedly in here: Not with wickedness and fornication,
or rather, not with wicked men and fornicators: but I do not contend for
this reading.

[1 Corinthians 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 5:9</span></span>

I wrote unto you in an epistle - The wisest and best skilled in Biblical
criticism agree that the apostle does not refer to any other epistle
than this; and that he speaks here of some general directions which he
had given in the foregoing part of it; but which he had now in some
measure changed and greatly strengthened, as we see from [Co1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011). The words εγραψα εν τῃ επιστολῃ
may be translated, I Had written to you in This Epistle; for there are
many instances in the New Testament where the aorist, which is here
used, and which is a sort of indefinite tense, is used for the perfect
and the plusquam-perfect. Dr. Whitby produces several proofs of this,
and contends that the conclusion drawn by some, viz. that it refers to
some epistle that is lost, is not legitimately drawn from any premises
which either this text or antiquity affords. The principal evidence
against this is [Co2 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008), where εν τῃ
επιστολῃ, the same words as above, appear to refer to this first
epistle. Possibly the apostle may refer to an epistle which he had
written though not sent; for, on receiving farther information from
Stephanas, Fortunatus, and Achaicus, relative to the state of the
Corinthian Church, he suppressed that, and wrote this, in which he
considers the subject much more at large. See Dr. Lightfoot.

Not to company with fornicators - With which, as we have already seen,
Corinth abounded. It was not only the grand sin, but staple, of the
place.

[1 Corinthians 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 5:10</span></span>

For then must ye needs go out of the world - What an awful picture of
the general corruption of manners does this exhibit! The Christians at
Corinth could not transact the ordinary affairs of life with any others
than with fornicators, covetous persons, extortioners, railers,
drunkards, and idolaters, because there were none others in the place!
How necessary was Christianity in that city!

[1 Corinthians 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 5:11</span></span>

But now I have written - I not only write this, but I add more: if any
one who is called a brother, i.e. professes the Christian religion, be a
fornicator, covetous, idolater, railer, drunkard, or extortioner, not
even to eat with such - have no communion with such a one, in things
either sacred or civil. You may transact your worldly concerns with a
person that knows not God, and makes no profession of Christianity,
whatever his moral character may be; but ye must not even thus far
acknowledge a man professing Christianity, who is scandalous in his
conduct. Let him have this extra mark of your abhorrence of all sin; and
let the world see that the Church of God does not tolerate iniquity.

[1 Corinthians 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 5:12</span></span>

For what have I to do to judge them also that are without? - The term
without, τους εξω, signifies those who were not members of the Church,
and in this sense its correspondent term: החיצונים hachitsonim, those
that are without, is generally understood in the Jewish writers, where
it frequently occurs. The word και also, which greatly disturbs the
sense here, is wanting in ABCFG, and several others, with the Syriac,
Coptic, Slavonic, Vulgate, and the Itala; together with several of the
fathers. The sentence, I think, with the omission of και also, should
stand thus: Does it belong to me to pass sentence on those which are
without - which are not members of the Church? By no means (ουχι.) Pass
ye sentence on them which are within - which are members of the Church:
those which are without - which are not members of the Church, God will
pass sentence on, in that way in which he generally deals with the
heathen world. But put ye away the evil from among yourselves. This is
most evidently the apostle's meaning, and renders all comments
unnecessary. In the last clause there appears to be an allusion to [Deu
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007), where the like directions are
given to the congregation of Israel, relative to a person found guilty
of idolatry: Thou shalt put away the evil from among you - where the
version of the Septuagint is almost the same as that of the apostle: και
εξαρεις τον πονηρον εξ ὑμων αυτων.

There are several important subjects in this chapter which intimately
concern the Christian Church in general.

1\. If evil be tolerated in religious societies, the work of God cannot
prosper there. If one scandal appear, it should be the cause of general
humiliation and mourning to the followers of God where it occurs;
because the soul of a brother is on the road to perdition, the cause of
God so far betrayed and injured, and Christ recrucified in the house of
his friends. Pity should fill every heart towards the transgressor, and
prayer for the backslider occupy all the members of the Church.

2\. Discipline must be exercised in the Christian Church; without this
it will soon differ but little from the wilderness of this world. But
what judgment, prudence, piety, and caution, are requisite in the
execution of this most important branch of a minister's duty! He may be
too easy and tender, and permit the gangrene to remain till the flock be
infected with it. Or he may be rigid and severe, and destroy parts that
are vital while only professing to take away what is vitiated. A
backslider is one who once knew less or more of the salvation of God.
Hear what God says concerning such: Turn, ye backsliders, for I am
married unto you. See how unwilling He is to give them up! He suffers
long, and is kind: do thou likewise; and when thou art obliged to cut
off the offender from the Church of Christ, follow him still with thy
best advice and heartiest prayers.

3\. A soul cut off from the flock of God is in an awful state! his
outward defense is departed from him; and being no longer accountable to
any for his conduct, he generally plunges into unprecedented depths of
iniquity; and the last state of that man becomes worse than the first.
Reader, art thou without the pale of God's Church? remember it is here
written, them that are Without God judgeth, [Co1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#013).

4\. Christians who wish to retain the spirituality of their religion
should be very careful how they mingle with the world. He who is pleased
with the company of ungodly men, no matter howsoever witty or learned,
is either himself one with them, or is drinking into their spirit. It is
impossible to associate with such by choice without receiving a portion
of their contagion. A man may be amused or delighted with such people,
but he will return even from the festival of wit with a lean soul.
Howsoever contiguous they may be, yet the Church and the world are
separated by an impassable gulf.

5\. If all the fornicators, adulterers, drunkards, extortioners, and
covetous persons which bear the Christian name, were to be publicly
excommunicated from the Christian Church, how many, and how awful would
the examples be! If however the discipline of the visible Church be so
lax that such characters are tolerated in it, they should consider that
this is no passport to heaven. In the sight of God they are not members
of his Church; their citizenship is not in heaven, and therefore they
have no right to expect the heavenly inheritance. It is not under names,
creeds, or professions, that men shall be saved at the last day; those
alone who were holy, who were here conformed to the image of Christ,
shall inherit the kingdom of God. Those who expect it in any other way,
or on any other account, will be sadly deceived.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 6](co1006)

</div>
