<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2007)  [Next](co2009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 8:0</span></span>

The apostle stirs them up to make a collection for the poor Christians
at Jerusalem, by the very liberal contributions of the people of
Macedonia for the same purpose, who were comparatively a poor people,
[Co2 8:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001). He tells them that he had
desired Titus to finish this good work among them which he had begun;
hoping that as they abounded in many excellent gifts and graces, they
would abound in this also, [Co2 8:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006).
He exhorts them to this by the example of Jesus Christ, who, though
rich, subjected himself to voluntary poverty, that they might be
enriched, [Co2 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009). He shows them that
this contribution, which had been long ago begun, should have been long
since finished, [Co2 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#010). And that
they should do every thing with a ready and willing mind, according to
the ability which God had given them; that abundance should not prevail
on one hand, while pinching poverty ruled on the other; but that there
should be an equality, [Co2 8:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#011).
He shows from the distribution of the manna in the wilderness, that the
design of God was, that every member of his spiritual household should
have the necessaries of life, [Co2
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#015). He tells them that he had now
sent Titus, and another with him, to Corinth, to complete this great
work, [Co2 8:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#016). The character
which he gives of Titus and the others employed in this business, [Co2
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#023), [Co2
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#024).

[2 Corinthians 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 8:1</span></span>

Moreover, brethren, we do you to wit - In all our dignified version very
few ill-constructed sentences can be found; however here is one, and the
worst in the book. We do you to wit is in the original γνωριζομεν δε
ὑμιν, we make known unto you. This is plain and intelligible, the other
is not so; and the form is now obsolete.

The grace of God bestowed - Dr. Whitby has made it fully evident that
the χαρις Θεου signifies the charitable contribution made by the
Churches in Macedonia, to which they were excited by the grace or
influence of God upon their hearts; and that δεδομενην εν cannot signify
bestowed on, but given in. That χαρις means liberality, appears from
[Co2 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006) : We desired Titus that as he
had begun, so he would finish την χαριν ταυτην, this charitable
contribution. And [Co2 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#007) : That ye
abound εν ταυτῃ τῃ χαριτι, in this liberal contribution. And [Co2
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#019) : Who was chosen of the Church to
travel with us συν τῃ χαριτι ταυτῃ, with this charitable contribution,
which is administered - which is to be dispensed, by us. So [Co2
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#008) : God is able to make πασαν χαριν,
all liberality, to abound towards you. And [Co1
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#003) : To bring την χαριν, your
liberality, to the poor saints. Hence χαρις, is by Hesychius and
Phavorinus interpreted a gift, as it is here by the apostle: Thanks be
to God for his unspeakable gift, [Co2
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#015). This charity is styled the grace
of God, either from its exceeding greatness, (as the cedars of God and
mountains of God signify great cedars and great mountains, [Psa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006); [Psa
80:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#010)); or rather, it is called so as
proceeding from God, who is the dispenser of all good, and the giver of
this disposition; for the motive of charity must come from him. So, in
other places, the zeal of God, [Rom
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002); the love of God, [Co2
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014); the grace of God, [Tit
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011).

The Churches of Macedonia - These were Philippi, Thessalonica, Berea,
etc.

[2 Corinthians 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 8:2</span></span>

In a great trial of affliction - The sense of this verse is the
following: The Macedonians, though both poor and persecuted, rejoiced
exceedingly that an opportunity was afforded them of doing good to their
more impoverished and more persecuted brethren. We can scarcely ever
speak of poverty and affliction in an absolute sense; they are only
comparative. Even the poor are called to relieve those who are poorer
than themselves; and the afflicted, to comfort those who are more
afflicted than they are. The poor and afflicted Churches of Macedonia
felt this duty, and therefore came forward to the uttermost of their
power to relieve their more impoverished and afflicted brethren in
Judea.

[2 Corinthians 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 8:3</span></span>

For to their power, etc. - In their liberality they had no rule but
their ability; they believed they were bound to contribute all they
could; and even this rule they transgressed, for they went beyond their
power - they deprived themselves for a time of the necessaries of life,
in order to give to others who were destitute even of necessaries.

[2 Corinthians 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 8:4</span></span>

Praying us with much entreaty - We had not to solicit them to this great
act of kindness; they even entreated us to accept their bounty, and to
take on ourselves the administration or application of it to the wants
of the poor in Judea.

[2 Corinthians 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 8:5</span></span>

Not as we hoped - They far exceeded our expectations, for they
consecrated themselves entirely to the work of God; giving themselves
and all they possessed first unto the Lord; and then, as they saw that
it was the will of God that they should come especially forward in this
charitable work, they gave themselves to us, to assist to the uttermost
in providing relief for the suffering Christians in Judea.

[2 Corinthians 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 8:6</span></span>

That we desired Titus - Titus had probably laid the plan of this
contribution when he was before at Corinth, according to the direction
given by the apostle, [Co1 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001), etc.

The same grace - Liberality. See the note on [Co2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001).

[2 Corinthians 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 8:7</span></span>

As ye abound in every thing - See the note on [Co1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005). In faith, crediting the whole
testimony of God; in utterance, λογῳ, in doctrine, knowing what to
teach: knowledge of God's will, and prudence to direct you in teaching
and doing it; in diligence, to amend all that is wrong among you, and to
do what is right; and in love to us, whom now ye prize as the apostles
of the Lord, and your pastors in him.

Abound in this grace also - Be as eminent for your charitable
disposition as ye are for your faith, doctrine, knowledge, diligence,
and love.

[2 Corinthians 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 8:8</span></span>

I speak not by commandment - I do not positively order this; I assume no
right or authority over your property; what you devote of your substance
to charitable purposes must be your own work, and a free-will offering.

The forwardness of others - Viz. the Churches of Macedonia, which had
already exerted themselves so very much in this good work. And the
apostle here intimates that he takes this opportunity to apprise them of
the zeal of the Macedonians, lest those at Corinth, who excelled in
every other gift, should be outdone in this. Their own honor, if better
motives were absent, would induce them to exert themselves, that they
might not be outdone by others. And then, as they had professed great
love for the apostle, and this was a service that lay near his heart,
they would prove the sincerity of that professed love by a liberal
contribution for the afflicted and destitute Jewish Christians.

[2 Corinthians 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 8:9</span></span>

For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ - This was the strongest
argument of all; and it is urged home by the apostle with admirable
address.

Ye know - Ye are acquainted with God's ineffable love in sending Jesus
Christ into the world; and ye know the grace - the infinite benevolence
of Christ himself.

That, though he was rich - The possessor, as he was the creator, of the
heavens and the earth; for your sakes he became poor - he emptied
himself, and made himself of no reputation, and took upon himself the
form of a servant, and humbled himself unto death, even the death of the
cross; that ye, through his poverty - through his humiliation and death,
might be rich - might regain your forfeited inheritance, and be enriched
with every grace of his Holy Spirit, and brought at last to his eternal
glory.

If Jesus Christ, as some contend, were only a mere man, in what sense
could he be said to be rich? His family was poor in Bethlehem; his
parents were very poor also; he himself never possessed any property
among men from the stable to the cross; nor had he any thing to bequeath
at his death but his peace. And in what way could the poverty of one man
make a multitude rich? These are questions which, on the Socinian
scheme, can never be satisfactorily answered.

[2 Corinthians 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 8:10</span></span>

Herein I give my advice - For I speak not by way of commandment, [Co2
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#008).

For this is expedient for you - It is necessary you should do this to
preserve a consistency of conduct; for ye began this work a year ago,
and it is necessary that ye should complete it as soon as possible.

Not only to do, but also to be forward - Το ποιησαι - και το θελειν,
literally, to do and to will; but as the will must be before the deed,
θελειν, must be taken here in the sense of delight, as it frequently
means in the Old and New Testaments. See several examples in Whitby.

Some MSS. transpose the words: allowing this, there is no difficulty.

A year ago - Απο περυσι. It was about a year before this that the
apostle, in his first epistle, [Co1
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002), had exhorted them to make this
contribution and there is no doubt that they, in obedience to his
directions, had begun to lay up in store for this charitable purpose; he
therefore wishes them to complete this good work, and thus show that
they were not led to it by the example of the Macedonians, seeing they
themselves had been first movers in this business.

[2 Corinthians 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 8:11</span></span>

A readiness to will, so there may be a performance - Ye have willed and
purposed this; now perform it.

Out of that which ye have - Give as God has enabled you; and give as God
has disposed you. He requires each man to do as he can; and accepts the
will where the means are wanting to perform the deed.

[2 Corinthians 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 8:12</span></span>

According to that a man hath - According to his real property; not
taking that which belongs to his own family, and is indispensably
necessary for their support; and not taking that which belongs to
others; viz. what he owes to any man.

[2 Corinthians 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 8:13</span></span>

That other men be eased - I do not design that you should impoverish
yourselves in order that others may live affluently.

[2 Corinthians 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 8:14</span></span>

But by an equality - That you may do to those who are distressed now,
as, on a change of circumstances, you would wish them to do to you. And
I only wish that of your abundance you would now minister to their
wants; and it may be that there abundance may yet supply your wants; for
so liable are all human affairs to change, that it is as possible that
you rich Corinthians should need the charitable help of others as it is
that those Jews, who once had need of nothing, should now be dependent
on your bounty.

That there may be equality - That ye may exert yourselves so in behalf
of those poor people that there may be between you an equality in the
necessaries of life; your abundance supplying them with that of which
they are utterly destitute.

[2 Corinthians 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 8:15</span></span>

He that had gathered much, had nothing over - On the passage to which
the apostle alludes, [Exo 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#018), I
have stated that, probably, every man gathered as much manna as he
could, and when he brought it home and measured it by the omer, (for
this was the measure for each man's eating), if he had a surplus it went
to the supply of some other family that had not been able to collect
enough; the family being large, and the time in which the manna might be
gathered, before the heat of the day, not being sufficient to collect a
supply for so numerous a household; several of whom might be so confined
as not to be able to collect for themselves. Thus there was an equality
among the Israelites in reference to this thing; and in this light these
words of St. Paul lead us to view the passage. To apply this to the
present case: the Corinthians, in the course of God's providence, had
gathered more than was absolutely necessary for their own support; by
giving the surplus to the persecuted and impoverished Christian Jews
these would be an equality; both would then possess the necessaries of
life, though still the one might have more property than the other.

[2 Corinthians 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 8:16</span></span>

But thanks be to God - He thanks God who had already disposed the heart
of Titus to attend to this business; and, with his usual address,
considers all this as done in the behalf of the Corinthian Church; and
that though the poor Christians in Judea are to have the immediate
benefit, yet God put honor upon them in making them his instruments in
supplying the wants of others. He who is an almoner to God Almighty is
highly honored indeed.

[2 Corinthians 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 8:17</span></span>

He accepted the exhortation - I advised him to visit you and excite you
to this good work, and I found that he was already disposed in his heart
to do it; God put this earnest care in the heart of Titus for you, [Co2
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#016).

[2 Corinthians 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 8:18</span></span>

The brother, whose praise is in the Gospel - Who this brother was we
cannot tell; some suppose it was St. Luke, who wrote a gospel, and who
was the companion of St. Paul in several of his travels; others think it
was Silas; others, Barnabas; others, Mark; and others, Apollos. Neither
ancients nor moderns agree in either; but Luke, John, and Mark, seem to
have the most probable opinions in their favor. Whoever the person was
he was sufficiently known to the Corinthians, as we learn by what the
apostle says of him in this place.

[2 Corinthians 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co2 8:19</span></span>

Chosen of the Churches to travel with us - Χειροτονηθεις· Appointed by a
show of hands; from χειρ the hand, and τεινω, to extend. This
appointment, by the suffrage of the Churches, seems to refer more to St.
Luke than any one else; unless we suppose he refers to the transaction,
[Act 15:40](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#040), [Act
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#041), and then it would appear that
Silas is the person intended.

With this grace - Liberal contribution. See on [Co2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001) (note).

Your ready mind - Your willingness to relieve them. But, instead of
ὑμων, your, ἡμων, our, is the reading of almost all the best MSS. and
all the versions. This is, doubtless, the reading.

[2 Corinthians 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co2 8:20</span></span>

Avoiding this, that no man should blame us - Taking this prudent caution
to have witnesses of our conduct, and such as were chosen by the
Churches themselves, that we might not be suspected of having either
embezzled or misapplied their bounty, See the note on [Co1
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#004).

[2 Corinthians 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co2 8:21</span></span>

Providing for honest things - Taking care to act so as not only to be
clear in the sight of God, but also to be clear in the sight of all men;
avoiding even the appearance of evil. I wish the reader to refer to the
excellent note on [Co1 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#004) (note),
which I have extracted from Dr. Paley.

[2 Corinthians 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co2 8:22</span></span>

We have sent with them - Titus and, probably, Luke, our brother,
probably Apollos.

Now much more diligent - Finding that I have the fullest confidence in
your complete reformation and love to me, he engages in this business
with alacrity, and exceeds even his former diligence.

[2 Corinthians 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co2 8:23</span></span>

Whether any do inquire of Titus - Should it be asked, Who is this Titus?
I answer, he is my companion, and my fellow laborer in reference to you;
[Co2 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013); [Co2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#006), [Co2
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#007). Should any inquire, Who are these
brethren, Luke and Apollos? I answer, They are Αποστολοι, apostles of
the Churches, and intensely bent on promoting the glory of Christ.

[2 Corinthians 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co2 8:24</span></span>

Wherefore show ye to them, and before the Churches, etc. - Seeing they
are persons every way worthy in themselves, and coming to you on such an
important occasion, and so highly recommended, receive them
affectionately; and let them thus see that the very high character I
have given of you is not exaggerated, and that you are as ready in every
work of charity as I have stated you to be. Act in this for your honor.

1\. The whole of this chapter and the following is occupied in exciting
the richer followers of Christ to be liberal to the poorer; the
obligation of each to be so, the reasons on which that obligation is
founded, the arguments to enforce the obligation from those reasons, are
all clearly stated, and most dexterously and forcibly managed. These two
chapters afford a perfect model for a Christian minister who is pleading
the cause of the poor.

2\. In the management of charities a man ought carefully to avoid the
least suspicion of avarice, self-interest, and unfaithfulness. How few
persons are entirely free from the upbraidings of their own consciences
in the matter of alms! But who will be able to hear the upbraidings of
Christ at the time of death and judgment? No man can waste without
injustice, or neglect without sin, those things of which he is only the
dispenser and steward.

3\. God has not settled an equality among men by their birth to the end
that this equality might be the work of his grace. He has put the
temporal portion of the poor into the hands of the rich, and the
spiritual portion of the rich into the hands of the poor, on purpose to
keep up a good understanding betwixt the members of the same body by a
mutual dependence on one another. He who withholds the part belonging to
the poor steals more from himself than from them. Let every one answer
this admirable design of God, and labor to re-establish equality: the
poor, in praying much for the rich; and the rich, in giving much to the
poor. See Quesnel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 9](co2009)

</div>
