<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2001)  [Next](co2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 2:0</span></span>

The apostle farther explains the reasons why he did not pay his intended
visit to the Corinthians, [Co2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001).
And why he wrote to them in the manner he did, [Co2
2:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#002). He exhorts them also to forgive
the incestuous person, who had become a true penitent; and therefore he
had forgiven him in the name of Christ, [Co2
2:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#006). He mentions the disappointment
he felt when he came to Troas in not meeting with Titus, from whom he
expected to have heard an account of the state of the Corinthian Church,
[Co2 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#012), [Co2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013). Gives thanks to God for the
great success he had in preaching the Gospel, so that the influence of
the name of Christ was felt in every place, [Co2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014). Shows that the Gospel is a
savour of life to them that believe, and of death to them that believe
not, [Co2 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015), [Co2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016). And that he and his brethren
preached the pure, unadulterated doctrine of God among the people, [Co2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017).

[2 Corinthians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 2:1</span></span>

But I determined this - The apostle continues to give farther reasons
why he did not visit them at the proposed time. Because of the scandals
that were among them he could not see them comfortably; and therefore he
determined not to see them at all till he had reason to believe that
those evils were put away.

[2 Corinthians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 2:2</span></span>

For if I make you sorry - Should he have come and used his apostolical
authority, in inflicting punishment upon the transgressors, this would
have been a common cause of distress. And though he might expect that
the sound part of the Church would be a cause of consolation to him, yet
as all would be overwhelmed with trouble at the punishment of the
transgressors, he could not rejoice to see those whom he loved in
distress.

[2 Corinthians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 2:3</span></span>

And I wrote this same unto you - This I particularly marked in my first
epistle to you; earnestly desiring your reformation, lest, if I came
before this had taken place, I must have come with a rod, and have
inflicted punishment on the transgressors. See [Co1
5:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001).

My joy is the joy of you all - I know that ye wish my comfort as much as
I wish yours.

[2 Corinthians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 2:4</span></span>

For out of much affliction, etc. - It is very likely that the apostle's
enemies had represented him as a harsh, austere, authoritative man; who
was better pleased with inflicting wounds than in healing them. But he
vindicates himself from this charge by solemnly asserting that this was
the most painful part of his office; and that the writing of his first
epistle to them cost him much affliction and anguish of heart, and many
tears.

[2 Corinthians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 2:5</span></span>

But, if any have caused grief - Here he seems to refer particularly to
the cause of the incestuous person.

Grieved me, but in part - I cannot help thinking that the εκ μερους and
απο μερους, which we render in part, and which the apostle uses so
frequently in these epistles, are to be referred to the people. A part
of them had acknowledged the apostle, [Co2
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#014); and here, a part of them had
given him cause of grief; and therefore he immediately adds, that I may
not overcharge you all; as only a part of you has put me to pain, (viz.
the transgressor, and those who had taken his part), it would be
unreasonable that I should load you all, επιβαρω παντας ὑμας, with the
blame which attaches to that party alone.

[2 Corinthians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 2:6</span></span>

Sufficient to such a man is this punishment - That is, the man has
already suffered sufficiently. Here he gives a proof of his parental
tenderness towards this great transgressor. He had been disowned by the
Church; he had deeply repented; and now the apostle pleads for him.

[2 Corinthians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 2:7</span></span>

Ye ought rather to forgive him - He had now suffered enough; for the
punishment inflicted had answered the end for which it was inflicted;
and there was some danger that, if this poor culprit were not restored
to the bosom of the Church, his distress and anguish would destroy his
life, or drive him to despair.

[2 Corinthians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 2:8</span></span>

That ye would confirm your love toward him - You do love him,
notwithstanding the reproach he has brought on the Gospel; and
notwithstanding your love to him, ye were obliged to cut him off for the
credit of the Gospel. Now that he has repented, I beseech you to
confirm, κυρωσαι, to ratify, by a public act of the Church, your love to
him; give him the fullest proof that you do love him; by forgiving him
and restoring him to his place in the Church.

[2 Corinthians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 2:9</span></span>

For to this end also did I write - Εγραψα, I have written this also, the
advices and commands which I now give you, that I might know whether ye
be obedient in all things.

[2 Corinthians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 2:10</span></span>

To whom ye forgive any thing - Here he farther shows them that his sole
object in the punishment inflicted on the transgressor, was his
amendment and therefore promises to ratify, in the name and authority of
Christ, the free pardon which he exhorts them to dispense.

In the person of Christ - As I believe Christ acts towards his penitent
soul, so do I. Christ forgives his sin, and takes him to his favor; let
us forgive him his offense against the Church, and restore him to its
communion.

[2 Corinthians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 2:11</span></span>

Lest Satan should get an advantage - If the man who has given sufficient
proof of the sincerity of his repentance be not restored, he may be
overwhelmed with sorrow, and sink into despair; and then the discipline
of the Church will be represented, not as emendatory, but as leading to
destruction. Of this our enemies would most gladly avail themselves, as
they wish to discredit this ministry; and there is always at hand a
devil to suggest evil, and prompt men to do it; for in this respect we
have thorough acquaintance with his devices. Let us therefore be careful
to remove, both from Satan and his partisans, all those occasions which
might turn to the disadvantage or disparagement of the Gospel of Christ.

[2 Corinthians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 2:12</span></span>

When I came to Troas - After having written the former epistle, and not
having heard what effect it had produced on your minds; though the Lord
had opened me a particular door to preach the Gospel, in which I so
especially rejoice and glory;

[2 Corinthians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 2:13</span></span>

I had no rest in my spirit - I was so concerned for you, through the
love I bear you, that I was greatly distressed because I did not find
Titus returned to give me an account of your state.

But taking my leave of them - I went thence into Macedonia, expecting to
find him there; and thither he did come; and gave me a joyous account of
your state. See [Co2 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006), [Co2
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#007).

[2 Corinthians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 2:14</span></span>

Now, thanks be unto God - His coming dispelled all my fears, and was the
cause of the highest satisfaction to my mind; and filled my heart with
gratitude to God, who is the Author of all good, and who always causes
us to triumph in Christ; not only gives us the victory, but such a
victory as involves the total ruin of our enemies; and gives us cause of
triumphing in him, through whom we have obtained this victory.

A triumph, among the Romans, to which the apostle here alludes, was a
public and solemn honor conferred by them on a victorious general, by
allowing him a magnificent procession through the city.

This was not granted by the senate unless the general had gained a very
signal and decisive victory; conquered a province, etc. On such
occasions the general was usually clad in a rich purple robe, interwoven
with figures of gold, setting forth the grandeur of his achievements;
his buskins were beset with pearls, and he wore a crown, which at first
was of laurel, but was afterwards of pure gold. In one hand he had a
branch of laurel, the emblem of victory; and in the other, his
truncheon. He was carried in a magnificent chariot, adorned with ivory
and plates of gold, and usually drawn by two white horses. (Other
animals were also used: when Pompey triumphed over Africa, his chariot
was drawn by elephants; that of Mark Antony, by lions; that of
Heliogabalus, by tigers; and that of Aurelius, by deer.) His children
either sat at his feet in the chariot, or rode on the chariot horses. To
keep him humble amidst these great honors a slave stood at his back,
casting out incessant railings, and reproaches; and carefully
enumerating all his vices, etc. Musicians led up the procession, and
played triumphal pieces in praise of the general; and these were
followed by young men, who led the victims which were to be sacrificed
on the occasion, with their horns gilded, and their heads and necks
adorned with ribbons and garlands. Next followed carts loaded with the
spoils taken from the enemy, with their horses, chariots, etc. These
were followed by the kings, princes, or generals taken in the war,
loaded with chains. Immediately after these came the triumphal chariot,
before which, as it passed, the people strewed flowers, and shouted Io,
triumphe!

The triumphal chariot was followed by the senate; and the procession was
closed by the priests and their attendants, with the different
sacrificial utensils, and a white ox, which was to be the chief victim.
They then passed through the triumphal arch, along the via sacra to the
capitol, where the victims were slain.

During this time all the temples were opened, and every altar smoked
with offerings and incense.

The people at Corinth were sufficiently acquainted with the nature of a
triumph: about two hundred years before this, Lucius Mummius, the Roman
consul, had conquered all Achaia, destroyed Corinth, Thebes, and
Chalcis; and, by order of the senate, had a grand triumph, and was
surnamed Achaicus. St. Paul had now a triumph (but of a widely different
kind) over the same people; his triumph was in Christ, and to Christ he
gives all the glory; his sacrifice was that of thanksgiving to his Lord;
and the incense offered on the occasion caused the savour of the
knowledge of Christ to be manifested in every place. As the smoke of the
victims and incense offered on such an occasion would fill the whole
city with their perfume, so the odour of the name and doctrine of Christ
filled the whole of Corinth and the neighboring regions; and the
apostles appeared as triumphing in and through Christ, over devils,
idols, superstition, ignorance, and vice, wherever they came.

[2 Corinthians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 2:15</span></span>

For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ - The apostle still alludes
to the case of a triumph; the conqueror always represented the person of
Jupiter; as even the heathens supposed that God alone could give the
victory: and as the punishment of death was inflicted on some of the
captives, who had often rebelled and broken leagues and covenants; so
others were spared, made tributaries, and often became allies. Alluding
to this, the apostle says: We are a sweet savour to God - we have
fulfilled his will in faithfully proclaiming the Gospel, and fighting
against sin. And as he has determined that those who believe shall be
saved, and those who believe not shall perish, we are equally acceptable
to him though we unsuccessfully preach the Gospel to some who
obstinately reject it, and so perish, as we are in preaching to others
who believe, and are saved.

[2 Corinthians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 2:16</span></span>

To the one we are the savour of death unto death - There are several
sayings among the ancient Jewish writers similar to this. In Debarim
Rabba, sec. i. fol. 248, it is said: "As the bee brings home honey to
its owner, but stings others; so it is with the words of the law;" סם
חיים לישראל sam chaiyim leyisrael, "They are a savour of lives to the
Israelites:" וסם המות לאומות העולם vesam hammaveth leomoth haolam, "And
a savour of death to the people of this world." The learned reader may
see much more to this effect in Schoettgen. The apostle's meaning is
plain: those who believe and receive the Gospel are saved; those who
reject it, perish. The meaning of the rabbins is not less plain: the
Israelites received the law and the prophets as from God, and thus
possessed the means of salvation; the Gentiles ridiculed and despised
them, and thus continued in the path of death. The same happens to the
present day to those who receive and to those who reject the Gospel: it
is the means of salvation to the former, it is the means of destruction
to the latter; for they are not only not saved because they do not
believe the Gospel, but they are condemned because they reject it. For
how can they escape who neglect so great a salvation? The sun which
nourishes the tree that is planted in a good soil, decomposes and
destroys it if plucked up and laid on the surface.

That the saved, σωζομενοι, and they that perish, απολλυμενοι, mean those
who receive and obey the Gospel, and those who reject it and live and
die in sin, needs no proof. No other kinds of reprobate and elect, in
reference to the eternal world, are known in the Book of God, though
they abound in the books of men. The Jews were possessed with such an
exalted opinion of their own excellence that they imagined that all the
love and mercy of God were concentrated among themselves, and that God
never would extend his grace to the Gentiles.

Such sentiments may become Jews but when we find some Gentiles
arrogating to themselves all the salvation of God, and endeavoring to
prove that he has excluded the major part even of their own world - the
Gentiles, from the possibility of obtaining mercy; and that God has made
an eternal purpose, that the death of Christ shall never avail them, and
that no saving grace shall ever be granted to them, and that they shall
infallibly and eternally perish; what shall we say to such things? It is
Judaism in its worst shape: Judaism with innumerable deteriorations. The
propagators of such systems must answer for them to God.

Who is sufficient for these things? - Is it the false apostle that has
been labouring to pervert you? Or, is it the men to whom God has given
an extraordinary commission, and sealed it by the miraculous gifts of
the Holy Ghost? That this is the apostle's meaning is evident from the
following verse.

[2 Corinthians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 2:17</span></span>

For we are not as many, which corrupt the word of God - God has made Us
sufficient for these things by giving us his own pure doctrine, the
ministry of reconciliation, which we conscientiously preserve and
preach; and we act, not like many among you, who, having received that
doctrine, corrupt it; mingling with it their own inventions, and
explaining away its force and influence, so as to accommodate it to men
of carnal minds.

The word καπηλευοντες, from καπηλος, a tavernkeeper, signifies acting
like an unprincipled vintner; for this class of men have ever been
notorious for adulterating their wines, mixing them with liquors of no
worth, that thereby they might increase their quantity; and thus the
mixture was sold for the same price as the pure wine. [Isa
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022), Thy wine is mixed with water,
the Septuagint thus translate: οἱ καπηλοι σου μισγουσι τον οινον ὑδατι·
"Thy vintners mix thy wine with water;" that is, thy false prophets and
corrupt priests adulterate the word of God, and render it of none
effect, by their explanations and traditions.

The word has been used, both among the Greeks and Latins, to signify a
prostitution of what was right and just, for the sake of gain. So
Herodian, lib. vi. cap. 11; Ειρηνην χρυσιου καπηλευοντες, "Making peace
for money." So cauponari bellum is, "To make war for money." In short,
the word is used to signify any artifice employed to get gain by making
a thing look more or better than it is; or mingling that which is
excellent with what is not so to promote the gain of the adulterater.

It is used by Aristophanes, Plut. Act. iv., scene 5, ver. 1064, to
express an old woman who was patched and painted to hide her deformity.

Ου δητ', επει μεν νυν καπηλικως εχει·

Ει δ' εκπλυνειται τουτο το ψιμυθιον,

Οψει καταδηλα του προσωπου γε τα ῥακη.

Not at all; the old woman is painted:

If the paint were washed off, then you

Would plainly see her wrinkled face.

Where see the note of the Scholiast, who observes that the term is
applied to those who deal in clothes, patching, mending, etc., as well
as to those who mix bad wine with good. Καπηλικως εχει· Πανουργικως·
επει οἱ καπηλοι χριειν και αναποιειν τα ἱματια ειωθασι, και τον οινον δε
νωθυλευουσι, συμμιγνυντες αυτῳ σαπρον. Vid. Kusteri Aristoph., page 45.

But as of sincerity - Εξ ειλικρινειας. See the note on [Co2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012). We receive the doctrine pure
from God; we keep it pure, and deliver it in its purity to mankind. For
we speak in Christ - in the things of his Gospel, as being in the sight
of God - our whole souls and all their motives being known to him. As
the unprincipled vintner knows that he adulterates the wine, his
conscience testifying this; so we know that we deliver the sincere truth
of God, our conscience witnessing that we deliver it to you, as we
receive it, by the inspiration of the Spirit of truth.

1\. That St. Paul was a man of a very tender and loving spirit is
evident from all his epistles; but especially from this, and
particularly from the chapter before us. It was not an easy thing with
him to give a reproof; and nothing but a sense of his duty to God and
his Church could have led him to use his apostolical power, to inflict
spiritual punishment on transgressors. He felt like a loving and tender
father, who, being obliged to correct his froward and disobedient child,
feels in his own heart the pain of a hundred blows for that occasioned
by one laid on the body of his son. There are some ministers who think
nothing of cutting off members from the Church of Christ; they seem to
do it, if not cheerfully, yet with indifference and unconcern! How can
this be? Nothing but absolute duty to God should induce any man to
separate any person from the visible Church; and then it must be on the
conviction that the case is totally hopeless. And who, even in those
circumstances, that knows the worth of a soul, can do it without torture
of heart?

2\. We must not only love the doctrines, but also the morality of the
Gospel. He who loves this will not corrupt it; but, as Quesnel says
truly, in order to love the truth a man must practice it; as in order to
practice it he must love it. That a minister, says he, may preach the
word of God in such a manner as is worthy of him, he must, with St.
Paul, be always mindful of these three things:

1\. That he be sent by God, and that he speak directly from him, and as
his ambassador.

2\. That he speak as in his presence, and under his immediate
inspection.

3\. That he consider himself as being in the place of Christ, and
endeavor to minister to the souls of men, as he has reason to believe
Christ would do, were he in the place; and as he knows Christ did, when
he sojourned among men.

The minister of the Gospel is Christ's ambassador; and he prays men in
Christ's stead to be reconciled to God. See [Co2
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020). The people should consider the
nature of this embassage, and receive it as coming immediately from God,
that it may accomplish the end for which he has sent it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 3](co2003)

</div>
