<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan005)  [Next](dan007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 6:0</span></span>

Darius the Median, who succeeded Belshazzar in the kingdom of Babylon,
having heard of Daniel's extraordinary wisdom and understanding,
constitutes him the chief of the three presidents who were over the
whole empire, and purposed also to make him prime minister or viceroy,
[Dan 6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001). This great partiality of
the king towards a stranger of Jewish extraction, and who had been
carried captive into Chaldea, raised up a great many enemies to Daniel;
and a scheme was even contrived by the presidents and princes to ruin
him, [Dan 6:4-15](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#004); which succeeded so
far that he was cast into a den of lions, but was miraculously
delivered, [Dan 6:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#016). Darius, who
was greatly displeased with himself for having been entrapped by the
governors of the provinces to the prejudice of his faithful minister, is
pleased and astonished at this deliverance; punished Daniel's enemies
with the same kind of death which they had designed for the prophet; and
made a decree that, throughout his dominions, the God of Daniel should
be had in the greatest veneration, [Dan
6:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#024).

[Daniel 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 6:1</span></span>

A hundred and twenty princes - A chief or satrap over every province
which belonged to the Medo-Persian empire. Afterwards we find it
enlarged to one hundred and twenty-seven provinces, by the victories of
Cambyses and Darius Hystaspes. See [Est
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001). Josephus reckons three hundred
and sixty satrapies or lordships; but this is most probably an
exaggeration or mistake.

[Daniel 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 6:2</span></span>

Three presidents - Each having forty of these presidents accountable to
him for their administration.

Daniel was first - As being established over that part where was the
seat of government. He was confirmed in his offices by Darius.

[Daniel 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 6:3</span></span>

The king thought to set him over the whole realm - Intended to make him
grand vizier or emir ul amrim. This partiality of the king made Daniel
the object of the other presidents, and the grandees of the kingdom.

[Daniel 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 6:4</span></span>

Sought to find occasion against Daniel - But they found no blemish in
his administration, for he was faithful to his king: this was a virtue.
But he was also faithful to his God: this they hoped to construe into a
crime, and make it the cause of his ruin.

[Daniel 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 6:7</span></span>

Whosoever shall ask a petition - What pretense could they urge for so
silly an ordinance? Probably to flatter the ambition of the king, they
pretend to make him a god for thirty days; so that the whole empire
should make prayer and supplication to him, and pay him Divine honors!
This was the bait; but their real object was to destroy Daniel.

[Daniel 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 6:8</span></span>

According to the law of the Medes and Persians - I do not think that
this is to be understood so as to imply that whatever laws or ordinances
the Medes or Persians once enacted, they never changed them. This would
argue extreme folly in legislators in any country. Nothing more appears
to be meant than that the decree should be enacted, written, and
registered, according to the legal forms among the Medes and Persians;
and this one to be made absolute for thirty days. The laws were such
among this people, that, when once passed with the usual formalities,
the king could not change them at his own will. This is the utmost that
can be meant by the law of the Medes and Persians that could not be
changed.

[Daniel 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 6:10</span></span>

Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed - He saw what was
designed, and he knew whom he served.

His windows being open - He would not shut them to conceal himself, but
"kneeled down with his face turned toward Jerusalem, and prayed thrice
each day, giving thanks to God as usual." When the Jews were in distant
countries, in prayer they turned their faces towards Jerusalem; and when
in Jerusalem, they turned their faces towards the temple. Solomon, in
his prayer at the dedication of the temple, [Kg1
8:48](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#048), had entreated God to hear the
prayers of those who might be in strange lands, or in captivity, when
they should turn their faces towards their own land, which God gave unto
their fathers; and towards the city which he had chosen, and the house
which was dedicated to his name. It was in reference to this that Daniel
turned his face towards Jerusalem when he prayed.

[Daniel 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 6:12</span></span>

Shall be cast into the den of lions - Either this was the royal
menagerie, like that place in the Tower of London, where wild beasts are
kept for the king's pleasure, and the public amusement; or they were
kept for the purpose of devouring certain criminals, which the laws
might consign to that kind of death. This is most likely, from the case
before us.

[Daniel 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 6:14</span></span>

The king - was sore displeased with himself - And well he might, when
through his excessive folly he passed a law that, for its ostensible
object, would have been a disgrace almost to an idiot.

And set his heart on Daniel - He strove by every means to get the law
annulled. He had no doubt spoken to several of his lords in private, and
had gone from one to another till the going down of the sun.

[Daniel 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 6:15</span></span>

Then these men assembled - Having got favorable answers, as we may
presume, from many individuals, he called a parliament; but they now
collectively joined to urge the execution of the law, not its repeal.

[Daniel 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 6:16</span></span>

Then the king commanded - With a heavy heart he was obliged to warrant
this murderous conspiracy. But when passing sentence his last words were
affecting: "Thy God, whom thou servest continually, he will deliver
thee." He is thy God; thou servest him, not occasionally, but
continually; therefore "he will deliver thee." Daniel had now the same
kind of opportunity of showing his fidelity to God, as his three Hebrew
companions before. The lions were not less terrible than the fiery
furnace.

[Daniel 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 6:17</span></span>

A stone was brought - All this precaution served the purposes of the
Divine Providence. There could be no trick nor collusion here; if Daniel
be preserved, it must be by the power of the Supreme God. The same
precaution was taken by the Jews, in the case of the burial of our
blessed Lord; and this very thing has served as one of the strongest
proofs of the certainty of his resurrection and their unmixed
wickedness.

[Daniel 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 6:18</span></span>

Passed the night fasting - He neither ate nor drank, had no music to
solace, nor sweet odors burnt or brought before him, and he passed the
night without sleep. All this points out his great sincerity; and when
it is considered that Darius could not be less than sixty-two or
sixty-three years of age at this time, it shows more fully the depth of
his concern.

[Daniel 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 6:19</span></span>

The king arose very early - By the break of day.

[Daniel 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 6:20</span></span>

He cried with a lamentable voice - His heart, full of grief, affected
his speech.

Servant of the living God - The king was convinced that, unless his God
saved him, his destruction was inevitable.

[Daniel 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 6:22</span></span>

My God hath sent his angel - Such a one as that who attended Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abed-nego, in the fiery furnace, and blew aside the flames,
so that they could not hurt them.

Before him innocency was found in one - Because I was innocent God has
preserved me; and now that I am preserved, my innocence is fully proved.

[Daniel 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">dan 6:23</span></span>

No manner of hurt was found upon him - And why? Because he believed in
his God. How mighty is faith? It interests that power in the behalf of
the believer by which the sea is dried up, the mountains removed, the
dead raised to life, sin forgiven, the heart purified, Satan vanquished,
death conquered, and God himself delighted and glorified! See Hebrews
11.

[Daniel 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 6:24</span></span>

They brought those men - It was perfectly just that they should suffer
that death to which they had endeavored to subject the innocent; but it
was savage cruelty to destroy the women and children who had no part in
the transgression.

[Daniel 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 6:25</span></span>

Then king Darius wrote - And the substance of this decree, which was
made by a heathen king, was to point out the perfections of the true
God, and the fidelity of his devoted servant.

[Daniel 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 6:26</span></span>

I make a decree that - men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel -
As in the case of the three Hebrews, [Dan
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#029). The true God was known by his
servants, and by the deliverances he wrought for them. See his
characters in this decree.

1\. He is the living God, the Author and Giver of life; all others are
dead gods.

2\. He is steadfast for ever. All things change; but he is unchangeable.

3\. He has a kingdom; for as he made all things, so he governs all
things.

4\. His kingdom shall not be destroyed. No human power can prevail
against it, because it is upheld by his omnipotence.

5\. His dominion is without end. It is an everlasting dominion, under an
everlasting rule, by an everlasting God.

6\. He delivereth them that are in danger and bondage.

7\. He rescueth those who have fallen into the hands of their enemies,
and implore his succor.

8\. He worketh signs in the heavens.

9\. And wonders upon earth; showing that both are under his sway, and
are parts of his dominion.

10\. And to complete all, He hath delivered Daniel. Before our own eyes
he has given the fullest proof of his power and goodness, in rescuing
his faithful servant from the teeth of the lions. What a fine eulogium
on the great God and his faithful servant!

[Daniel 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 6:28</span></span>

So this Daniel prospered - He had served fine kings: Nebuchadnezzar,
Evil-merodach, Belshazzar, Darius, and Cyrus. Few courtiers have had so
long a reign, served so many masters without flattering any, been more
successful in their management of public affairs, been so useful to the
states where they were in office, or have been more owned of God, or
have left such an example to posterity.

Where shall we find ministers like Samuel and Daniel? None so wise, so
holy, so disinterested, so useful, have ever since appeared in the
nations of the earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 7](dan007)

</div>
