<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan011)  [Next](hos000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 12:0</span></span>

The proper conclusion to the great revolutions predicted in this and the
following chapters is the general resurrection, of which the beginning
of this chapter (to be literally understood) gives some intimation, [Dan
12:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001). Daniel is then commanded to
shut up the words and to seal the book to the time of the end, [Dan
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004); and is informed of the three
grand symbolical periods of a time, times, and a half, twelve hundred
and ninety days and thirteen hundred and thirty-five days, [Dan
12:4-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004); at the end of the last of
which Daniel shall rest and stand in his lot, [Dan
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#013). It is generally thought by
commentators that the termination of the last period is the epoch of the
First resurrection. See [Rev 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004),
[Rev 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#005).

[Daniel 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 12:1</span></span>

And at that time Michael shall stand up - Michael the archangel, as has
already been observed, was ever reputed the guardian of the Jewish
people.

Every one that shall be found written in the book - All that truly fear,
love, and obey the Lord, On the phrase, "written in the book, the book
of life," etc., see the passages in the margin, and the notes on those
passages.

[Daniel 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 12:2</span></span>

Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth - This prophecy has
been referred to the future restoration of the Jews. It will be also
true of the state of mankind at the general judgment.

[Daniel 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 12:3</span></span>

And they that be wise - Those who are thoroughly instructed in Christ's
word and doctrine, shall shine - shall be eminently distinguished in the
Christian Church by the holiness of their lives, and the purity of their
creed.

And they that turn many to righteousness - They who, by preaching Christ
crucified among their brethren, shall be the means of converting them to
the Christian faith; shall be as the stars - bright luminaries in the
Gospel kingdom of Jesus Christ. This also may be applied to the case of
holy and useful men, particularly the faithful ministers of the Gospel,
in the day of judgment. See [Jam 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020)
(note), [Co1 15:41-42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041) (note).

[Daniel 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 12:4</span></span>

Shut up the words, and seal the book - When a prophet received a
prediction concerning what was at a considerable distance of time, he
shut his book, did not communicate his revelation for some time after.
This Daniel was commanded to do, [Dan
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026). See also [Isa
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#010), [Isa
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011); [Rev
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#010). Among the ancients, those were
said to seal, who in the course of their reading stamped the places of
which they were yet doubtful, in order to keep them in memory, that they
might refer to then; again, as not yet fully understood. This custom
Salmasius, in his book De modo Usurarum, p. 446, proves from Hesychius.

Many shall run to and fro - Many shall endeavour to search out the
sense; and knowledge shall be increased by these means; though the
meaning shall not be fully known till the events take place: Then the
seal shall be broken, and the sense become plain. This seems to be the
meaning of this verse, though another has been put on it, viz., "Many
shall run to and fro preaching the Gospel of Christ, and therefore
religious knowledge and true wisdom shall be increased." This is true in
itself; but it is not the meaning of the prophet's words.

[Daniel 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 12:5</span></span>

Behold there stood other two - Probably two angels. We know no more of
them, unless they be the same as those called saints, [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013) (note), which see. The river was
most likely the Tigris.

[Daniel 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 12:6</span></span>

The man clothed in linen - Gabriel in a human form. Thus he is
represented, [Dan 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005).

[Daniel 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 12:7</span></span>

Which was upon the waters - By this description, he was standing on the
water. This is very similar to the description of the angel, [Rev
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#005), [Rev
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#006), and in the seventh verse there
seems to be a reference to this prophecy "a time, times, and a half."
See the note on [Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025) (note).

[Daniel 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 12:8</span></span>

I heard, but I understand not - Could not comprehend what the time,
times, and half time should refer to. These make three years and a half
of prophetic times answering to one thousand two hundred and sixty
years.

[Daniel 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 12:9</span></span>

The words are closed up - The prophecy shall not be understood, but in
its accomplishment; and then the depth of the wisdom and providence of
God will be clearly seen in these matters. See on Daniel 4 (note). We
must wait "till the time of the end;" and this, it appears from the
following calculations, will not arrive before the Twentieth Century. We
here see the reason why these prophecies are at present so imperfectly
understood. God has sealed them.

[Daniel 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 12:10</span></span>

Many shall be purified - During the interim, the great work of God's
providence and grace shall be carried on in the salvation of men; who,
in the midst of trials, temptations, and difficulties, shall be purified
and made white - be fully saved from their sins.

None of the wicked shall understand - Because they are wicked, and will
continue in their sins, the eyes of their understanding shall be closed,
and their hearts hardened; so that they shall not see the light of the
glorious Gospel.

But the wise - Those who open their hearts to God, that he may pour in
his light, shall understand the things that make for their peace.

[Daniel 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 12:11</span></span>

From the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away - See the
notes on [Dan 11:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#025) (note).

The abomination that maketh desolate set up - I believe, with Bp.
Newton, that this is a proverbial phrase; and may be applied to any
thing substituted in the place of, or set up in opposition to, the
ordinances of God, his worship, his truth, etc. Adrian's temple, built
in the place of God's temple at Jerusalem, the church of St. Sophia
turned into a Mohammedan mosque, etc., etc., may be termed abominations
that make desolate. Perhaps Mohammedanism may be the abomination; which
sprang up a.d. 612. If we reckon one thousand two hundred and ninety
years, [Dan 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#011), from that time, it
will bring us down to a.d. 1902, when we might presume from this
calculation, that the religion of the False Prophet will cease to
prevail in the world; which from the present year, 1825, is distant only
seventy-seven years.

[Daniel 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 12:12</span></span>

Blessed is he that waiteth - He who implicitly depends on God,
expecting, as his truth cannot fail, that these predictions shall be
accomplished in due time.

And cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days - This
is seventy-five days more than what is included in the three years and a
half, or the time, times, and a half in the seventh verse; and as we
have met with so many instances of prophets days and years, this
undoubtedly is another instance; and as a day stands for a year, this
must mean a period of one thousand three hundred and thirty-five years,
which period is to bring all these wonders to an end, [Dan
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#006). But we are left totally in the
dark relative to the time from which these one thousand three hundred
and thirty-five years are to be reckoned. If, however, we reckon them
from the above epoch, a.d. 612, when Mohammedanism arose, they lead us
to a.d. 1947, when the fullness of the Gentiles shall be brought in; and
thus a final closure of vision and prophecy be made, as then all the
great events relative to the salvation of men shall have taken place.
Wars and contentions will probably then cease over the whole world; Jews
and Gentiles become one fold, under one Shepherd and Bishop of souls;
and the triune God be properly worshipped and glorified, from generation
to generation, over the face of the whole earth. But all these
conjectures may be founded in darkness. We have not chronological data;
and "the times and seasons God has reserved in his own power."

[Daniel 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 12:13</span></span>

But go thou thy way till the end be - Here is proper advice for every
man.

1\. Thou hast a way - a walk in life, which God has assigned thee; walk
in that way, it is thy way.

2\. There will be an end to thee of all earthly things. Death is at the
door, and eternity is at hand; go on to the end - be faithful unto
death.

3\. There is a rest provided for the people of God. Thou shalt rest; thy
body, in the grave; thy soul, in the Divine favor here, and finally in
paradise.

4\. As in the promised land there was a lot for each of God's people, so
in heaven there is a lot for thee. Do not lose it, do not sell it, do
not let thy enemy rob thee of it. Be determined to stand in thy own lot
at the end of the days. See that thou keep the faith; die in the Lord
Jesus, that thou mayest rise and reign with him to all eternity. Amen.

Masoretic Notes

Number of verses in this book, 357

Middle verse, [Dan 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030)

Masoretic sections, 7

Finished correcting for the press, March 1st, 1831. - A. C.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Introduction](hos000)

</div>
