<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](num036)  [Next](deu001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the Book of Deuteronomy

We have borrowed the name of this book, as in former cases, from the
Vulgate Latin, Deuteronomium, as the Vulgate has done from the Greek
version of the Septuagint, Δευτερονομιον, which is a compound term
literally signifying the second law, because it seems to contain a
repetition of the preceding laws, from which circumstance it has been
termed by the rabbins משנה mishneh, the iteration or doubling.

It appears that both these names are borrowed from [Deu
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#018), where the king is commanded to
write him a copy of this law; the original is משנה התורה mishneh
hattorah, a repetition or doubling of the law, which the Septuagint have
translated το δευτερονομιον, this second law, which we, properly enough,
translate a copy of the law: but in Hebrew, like the preceding books, it
takes its name from its commencement, אלה הדברים Elleh Haddebarim, these
are the words; and in the best rabbinical Bibles its running title is
ספר דברים Sepher Debarim, the book of debarim, or the book of the words.
Our Saxon ancestors termed it the after law.

The Book of Deuteronomy contains an account of what passed in the
wilderness from the first day of the eleventh month of the fortieth year
after the departure of the Israelites from Egypt to the seventh day of
the twelfth month of the same; making in the whole a history of the
transactions of exactly five weeks, the months of the Jews being lunar.
The history is continued about seven days after the death of Moses; for
he began to deliver his first discourse to the people in the plains of
Moab the first day of the eleventh month of the fortieth year, [Deu
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#003), and died on the first day of the
twelfth month of the same year, aged 120 years.

As the Israelites were now about to enter into the promised land, and
many of them had not witnessed the different transactions in the
wilderness, the former generations having been all destroyed except
Joshua and Caleb; to impress their hearts with a deep sense of their
obligation to God, and to prepare them for the inheritance which God had
prepared for them. Moses here repeats the principal occurrences of the
forty years, now almost elapsed; shows them the absolute necessity of
fearing, loving, and obeying God; repeats the ten commandments, and
particularly explains each, and the ordinances belonging to them, adding
others which he had not delivered before; confirms the whole law in a
most solemn manner, with exceeding great and precious promises to them
that keep it, and a denunciation of the most awful judgments against
those who should break it; renews the covenant between God and the
people; prophesies of things which should come to pass in the latter
days; blesses each of the tribes, prophetically, with the choicest
spiritual and temporal blessings; and then, having viewed the whole
extent of the land, from the top of Mount Nebo or Pisgah, he yielded up
the ghost, and was privately buried by God, leaving Joshua the son of
Nun for his successor.

The Book of Deuteronomy and the Epistle to the Hebrews contain the best
comment on the nature, design, and use of the law; the former may be
considered as an evangelical commentary on the four preceding books, in
which the spiritual reference and signification of the different parts
of the law are given, and given in such a manner as none could give who
had not a clear discovery of the glory which was to be revealed. It may
be safely asserted that very few parts of the Old Testament Scriptures
can be read with greater profit by the genuine Christian than the Book
of Deuteronomy.

The contents of the different chapters may be thus briefly summed up: -

On the first day of the eleventh month of the fortieth year, after the
departure from Egypt, the Israelites being then on the east side of
Jordan, in the land of the Moabites, Moses gives them a brief
recapitulation of what took place in the wilderness, from their leaving
Mount Horeb till they came to Kadesh; Deuteronomy 1.

Their travels from Kadesh till they come to the country of the Amorites,
with the defeat of Sihon their king; Deuteronomy 2. The war with Og,
king of Bashan, with the dividing his land and that of Sihon among the
tribes of Reuben and Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh; Deuteronomy 3.

Moses exhorts them to observe the Divine precepts; threatens those who
should violate them; and appoints Bezer, Ramoth, and Golan, to be the
cities of refuge on the east side of Jordan; Deuteronomy 4.

Repeats the decalogue, and tells the people what effect the publication
of it had on their fathers, when God spoke to them from the mount;
Deuteronomy 5.

Exhorts them to love God with all their heart, and promises them an
abundance of good things; Deuteronomy 6.

Repeats the command to exterminate the Canaanites, and all vestiges of
their idolatry; Deuteronomy 7.

Recites the many interpositions of God's kindness which they had
received during their forty years' travel in the wilderness, and
strongly exhorts them to remember those mercies, and not to forfeit a
continuance of his favors by ingratitude and disobedience; Deuteronomy
8.

Shows them that they were to pass Jordan in a short time, and that God
was about to bring them in, not on account of their goodness, but of his
mercy; Deuteronomy 9.

Gives an account of the second tables of the law, which he made at the
command of God; mentions their journey from Beeroth to Jotbath, the
choosing of the Levites, and the necessity of having the heart
circumcised; Deuteronomy 10.

Continues an account of God's mighty acts in their behalf, and shows the
blessings which should come on them who kept his law, and the curse on
those who were disobedient. The blessings to be pronounced on Mount
Gerizim, and the curses on Mount Ebal; Deuteronomy 11.

Commands them to destroy all monuments of idolatry in the land, to offer
the different offerings and sacrifices, and to avoid eating of blood;
Deuteronomy 12.

Ordinances against false prophets, idolatrous cities, etc.; Deuteronomy
13.

Forbids their cutting themselves at funerals, recapitulates the law
concerning clean and unclean animals, and exhorts them to remember the
Levites; Deuteronomy 14.

Every seventh year shall be a year of release for the poor of usury;
first-born, etc.; Deuteronomy 15.

Concerning the annual feasts, passover, pentecost, and tabernacles; the
establishment of judges and officers; no groves to be planted near the
altar of God; Deuteronomy 16.

Idolaters are to be put to death; difficult cases in equity to be
referred to the superior judges; of a king and his duties; Deuteronomy
17.

All divination is prohibited. The grand promise of an Extraordinary
Prophet. How false prophets are to be distinguished; Deuteronomy 18.

The laws relative to the cities of refuge, and how the intentional
murderer is to be treated; Deuteronomy 19.

Laws relative to the carrying on of war; who should be sent back from
the army, how they are to treat the Canaanites, and how they are to
commence sieges, Deuteronomy 20.

How to make expiation for an uncertain murder; marriages with captives;
rights of the first-born, etc.; Deuteronomy 21.

Things lost or strayed are to be restored to their right owners; men and
women must not interchange apparel; improper mixtures to be avoided; of
the tokens of virginity; adulterers and adulteresses to be put to death;
Deuteronomy 22.

Eunuchs, bastards, Moabites, and Ammonites, are not to be permitted to
enter into the congregation of the Lord. Harlots not to be tolerated;
Deuteronomy 23.

Laws relative to divorce; privileges of the newly-married man:
concerning pledges, wages, gleanings, etc.; Deuteronomy 24.

More than forty stripes shall not be given. If a man die childless, his
brother shall take his wife. Of weights, measures, etc.; Deuteronomy 25.
Different ceremonies to be used in offering the first-fruits; tithes. Of
full self-consecration to God; Deuteronomy 26.

The words of the law to be written on stones, and to be set up on Mount
Ebal. The tribes which stand on Mount Gerizim to bless the obedient, and
those which should stand on Mount Ebal to curse the disobedient. Who
they are that are to be cursed; Deuteronomy 27.

The blessings of those who are faithful; curses against the disobedient;
Deuteronomy 28.

A recital of the covenant of God, made not only with them, but for their
posterity; Deuteronomy 29.

Promises of pardon to the penitent; good and evil, life and death, are
set before them; Deuteronomy 30.

Moses, being now 120 years old, delivers a copy of the law which he had
written into the hands of the priests, to be laid up in the ark, and to
be publicly read every seventh year; a charge is given to Joshua;
Deuteronomy 31.

The prophetical and historical song of Moses: he is commanded to go up
to Mount Nebo that he may see the promised land; Deuteronomy 32.

The prophetical blessing of the twelve tribes. The indescribable
happiness of Israel; Deuteronomy 33.

Moses views the promised land from the top of Mount Nebo, dies, and is
privately buried by the Lord. The Israelites mourn for him thirty days.

Joshua takes command of the people. The character of Moses; [Deu
34:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001).

At the close of this book I have added a number of useful Tables, such
as no edition of the Bible ever could boast, viz.:

Table I. A perpetual table, showing through the course of 13 lunar
cycles (which embrace every possible variation) the day of the week with
which the Jewish year begins, and on which the passover is held; as also
the lengths of the months Marchesvan and Cisleu.

Table II. Containing the whole variations in the reading of the
Pareshioth or sections of the law for every year of the Jewish cycle of
247 years.

Table III. To find, with the help of Table IV., the day of the week upon
which any Jewish new moon or festival happens.

Table IV. To determine upon what day of the week any Jewish month
commences for any given year; as also the day of the week upon which the
Jews celebrate their principal fasts and festivals.

Table V. Containing the order of reading the Pareshioth and Haphtaroth
for 90 Jewish years, i. e., from A. M. 5572 to A. M. 5661, both
inclusive, connected with the corresponding dates in the Christian Era,
according to the Gregorian or new style.

Table VI. Containing the year of the Jewish lunar cycle, the golden
number, the first day of the Jewish pass over, Easter Sunday, and the
commencement of each Jewish year according to the Gregorian Calendar, a.
d. 1812 to a. d. 1900, both inclusive. All concluded with an explanation
of the preceding tables. To them succeeds A Chronology of the
Pentateuch, with the Book of Joshua; or a Systematic Arrangement of
Events from the creation of Adam, A. M. 1, to the birth of Peleg, A. M.
1757, and thence to the death of Joshua, A. M. 2561. This chronology
includes two tables, viz.: Table I. The birth and death of all the
patriarchs, from Adam, A. M. 1, to Rhea, son of Peleg, A. M. 1787. Table
II. A chronology of ancient kingdoms synchronized with the sacred
history, from A. M. 1757, B. C. 2247, to A. M. 2561, B. C. 1443. The
whole so calculated as to prevent the necessity of having recourse to
systems of chronology for historic facts in anywise connected with those
mentioned in the Sacred Writings.

The great utility of these tables will, I think, be at once evident to
every Biblical critic, chronologist, and antiquary; and for the immense
labor employed in their construction the editor, no doubt, will have
their hearty thanks.

Adam Clarke.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 1](deu001)

</div>
