<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu028)  [Next](deu030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 29:0</span></span>

A recapitulation of God's gracious dealings with Israel, [Deu
29:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001). An exhortation to obedience,
and to enter into covenant with their God, that they and their posterity
may be established in the good land, [Deu
29:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#009). They are to remember the
abominations of Egypt, and to avoid them, [Deu
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#016), [Deu
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#017). He who hardens his heart, when
he hears these curses, shall be utterly consumed, [Deu
29:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018). Their posterity shall be
astonished at the desolations that shall fall upon them, [Deu
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#022), [Deu
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023); shall inquire the reason, and
shall be informed that the Lord has done thus to them because of their
disobedience and idolatry, [Deu
29:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#024). A caution against prying too
curiously into the secrets of the Divine providence, and to be contented
with what God has revealed, [Deu
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029).

[Deuteronomy 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 29:1</span></span>

These are the words of the covenant - This verse seems properly to
belong to the preceding chapter, as a widely different subject is taken
up at [Deu 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#002) of this; and it is
distinguished as the 69th verse in some of the most correct copies of
the Hebrew Bible.

Commanded Moses to make - לכרת lichroth, to cut, alluding to the
covenant sacrifice which was offered on the occasion and divided, as is
explained, [Gen 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018) (note).

Beside the covenant which he made - in Horeb - What is mentioned here is
an additional institution to the ten words given on Horeb; and the
curses denounced here are different from those denounced against the
transgressors of the decalogue.

[Deuteronomy 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 29:4</span></span>

The Lord hath not given you a heart, etc. - Some critics read this verse
interrogatively: And hath not God given you a heart, etc.? because they
suppose that God could not reprehend them for the non-performance of a
duty, when he had neither given them a mind to perceive the obligation
of it, nor strength to perform it, had that obligation been known.
Though this is strictly just, yet there is no need for the
interrogation, as the words only imply that they had not such a heart,
etc., not because God had not given them all the means of knowledge, and
helps of his grace and Spirit, which were necessary; but they had not
made a faithful use of their advantages, and therefore they had not that
wise, loving, and obedient heart which they otherwise might have had. If
they had had such a heart, it would have been God's gift, for he is the
author of all good; and that they had not such a heart was a proof that
they had grieved his Spirit, and abused the grace which he had afforded
them to produce that gracious change, the want of which is here
deplored. Hence God himself is represented as grieved because they were
unchanged and disobedient: "O that there were such a heart in them, that
they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it might
be well with them and with their children for ever!" See [Deu
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#029) (note), and the note there.

[Deuteronomy 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 29:5</span></span>

Your clothes are not waxen old - See on [Deu
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#004) (note).

[Deuteronomy 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 29:6</span></span>

Ye have not eaten bread, etc. - That is, ye have not been supported in
an ordinary providential way; I have been continually working miracles
for you, that ye might know that I am the Lord. Thus we find that God
had furnished them with all the means of this knowledge, and that the
means were ineffectual, not because they were not properly calculated to
answer God's gracious purpose, but because the people were not workers
with God; consequently they received the grace of God in vain. See [Co2
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001).

[Deuteronomy 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 29:10</span></span>

Ye stand - all of you before the Lord - They were about to enter into a
covenant with God; and as a covenant implies two parties contracting,
God is represented as being present, and they and all their families,
old and young, come before him.

[Deuteronomy 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 29:12</span></span>

That thou shouldest enter - לעבר leaber, to pass through, that is,
between the separated parts of the covenant sacrifice. See [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018) (note).

And into his oath - Thus we find that in a covenant were these seven
particulars:

1\. The parties about to contract were considered as being hitherto
separated.

2\. They now agree to enter into a state of close and permanent amity.

3\. They meet together in a solemn manner for this purpose.

4\. A sacrifice is offered to God on the occasion, for the whole is a
religious act.

5\. The victim is separated exactly into two equal parts, the separation
being in the direction of the spine; and those parts are laid opposite
to each other, sufficient room being allowed for the contracting parties
to pass between them.

6\. The contracting parties meet in the victim, and the conditions of
the covenant by which they are to be mutually bound are recited.

7\. An oath is taken by these parties that they shall punctually and
faithfully perform their respective conditions, and thus the covenant is
made and ratified. See [Jer 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018),
[Jer 34:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#019), and the notes on [Gen
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#018) (note); [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018) (note); [Exo
29:45](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#045) (note); Leviticus 26 (note).

[Deuteronomy 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 29:15</span></span>

Him that standeth here - The present generation. Him that is not here -
all future generations of this people.

[Deuteronomy 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 29:18</span></span>

A root that beareth gall and wormwood - That is, as the apostle
expresses it, [Heb 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#012), An evil heart
of unbelief departing from the living God; for to this place he
evidently refers. It may also signify false doctrines, or idolatrous
persons among themselves.

[Deuteronomy 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 29:19</span></span>

To add drunkenness to thirst - A proverbial expression denoting the
utmost indulgence in all sensual gratifications.

[Deuteronomy 29:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 29:26</span></span>

Gods - whom he had not given unto them - This is an unhappy translation.
Houbigant renders the original words ולו חלק להם velo chalak lahem, et
quibuscum nulla eis societas, "And with whom they had no society;" and
falls unmercifully on Le Clerc because he had translated it, From whom
they had received no benefits. I must differ from both these great men,
because I think they differ from the text. חלק chalak signifies a
portion, lot, inheritance, and God is frequently represented in
Scripture as the portion or inheritance of his people. Here, therefore,
I think the original should be rendered, And there was no portion to
them, that is, the gods they served could neither supply their wants nor
save their souls - they were no portion.

[Deuteronomy 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 29:29</span></span>

The secret things belong unto the Lord, etc. - This verse has been
variously translated. Houbigant renders it thus: Quae apud Dominum
nostrum abscondita sunt, nobis ea filiisque nostris palam facta sunt ad
multas aetates, "The things which were hidden with the Lord our God, are
made manifest to us and our children for many generations." I am not
satisfied with this interpretation, and find that the passage was not so
understood by any of the ancient versions. The simple general meaning
seems to be this: "What God has thought proper to reveal, he has
revealed; what he has revealed is essential to the well-being of man,
and this revelation is intended not for the present time merely, nor for
one people, but for all succeeding generations. The things which he has
not revealed concern not man but God alone, and are therefore not to be
inquired after." Thus, then, the things that are hidden belong unto the
Lord, those that are revealed belong unto us and our children. But
possibly the words here refer to the subjects of these chapters, as if
he had said, "Apostasy from God and his truth is possible. When a
national apostasy among us may take place, is known only to God; but he
has revealed himself to us and our children that we may do all the words
of this law, and so prevent the dreadful evils that shall fall on the
disobedient."

The Jews have always considered these verses as containing subjects of
the highest importance to them, and have affixed marks to the original
לנו ולבנינו lanu ulebaneynu, "to Us and to our Children," in order to
fix the attention of the reader on truths which affect them
individually, and not them only, but the whole of their posterity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 30](deu030)

</div>
