<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu030)  [Next](deu032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 31:0</span></span>

Moses, being one hundred and twenty years old and about to die, calls
the people together, and exhorts them to courage and obedience, [Deu
31:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#001). Delivers a charge to Joshua,
[Deu 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#007), [Deu
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#008). Delivers the law which he hod
written to the priests, with a solemn charge that they should read it
every seventh year, publicly to all the people, [Deu
31:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#009). The Lord calls Moses and
Joshua to the tabernacle, [Deu 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#014).
He appears to them, informs Moses of his approaching death, and delivers
to him a prophetical and historical song, or poem, which he is to leave
with Israel, for their instruction and reproof, [Deu
31:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#015). Moses writes the song the
same day, and teaches it to the Israelites, [Deu
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#022); gives Joshua a charge, [Deu
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#023); finishes writing the book of
the law, [Deu 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#024). Commands the
Levites to lay it up in the side of the ark, [Deu
31:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#025), [Deu
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#026). Predicts their rebellions, [Deu
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#027). Orders the elders to be
gathered together, and shows them what evils would befall the people in
the latter days, [Deu 31:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#028), [Deu
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#029), and repeats the song to them,
[Deu 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#030).

[Deuteronomy 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 31:2</span></span>

I am a hundred and twenty years old - The life of Moses, the great
prophet of God and lawgiver of the Jews, was exactly the same in length
as the time Noah employed in preaching righteousness to the antediluvian
world. These one hundred and twenty years were divided into three
remarkable periods: forty years he lived in Egypt, in Pharaoh's court,
acquiring all the learning and wisdom of the Egyptians; (see [Act
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020), [Act
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#023)); forty years he sojourned in the
land of Midian in a state of preparation for his great and important
mission; ([Act 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#029), [Act
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#030)); and forty years he guided, led,
and governed the Israelites under the express direction and authority of
God: in all, one hundred and twenty years.

[Deuteronomy 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 31:3</span></span>

Joshua, he shall go over before thee - See on [Num
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#017) (note), etc.

[Deuteronomy 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 31:6</span></span>

Be strong - חזקו chizku, the same word that is used [Exo
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021) (note), [Exo
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#015) (note), for hardening Pharaoh's
heart. See the notes there. The Septuagint, in this and the following
verse, have, Ανδριζου και ισχυε, Play the man, and be strong; and from
this St. Paul seems to have borrowed his ideas, [Co1
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013) : Στηκετε εν τῃ πιστει·
ανδριζεσθε, κρατιουσθε: Stand firm in the faith; play the man - act like
heroes; be vigorous.

[Deuteronomy 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 31:8</span></span>

The Lord - doth go before thee - To prepare thy way, and to direct thee.

He will be with thee - Accompany thee in all thy journeys, and assist
thee in all thy enterprises.

He will not fail thee - Thy expectation, however strong and extensive,
shall never be disappointed: thou canst not expect too much from him.

Neither forsake thee - He knows that without him thou canst do nothing,
and therefore he will continue with thee, and in such a manner too that
the excellence of the power shall appear to be of him, and not of man.

[Deuteronomy 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 31:9</span></span>

Moses wrote this law - Not the whole Pentateuch, but either the
discourses and precepts mentioned in the preceding chapters, or the book
of Deuteronomy, which is most likely.

Some of the rabbins have pretended that Moses wrote thirteen copies of
the whole Pentateuch; that he gave one to each of the twelve tribes, and
the thirteenth was laid up by the ark. This opinion deserves little
credit. Some think that he wrote two copies, one of which he gave to the
priests and Levites for general use, according to what is said in this
verse, the other to be laid up beside the ark as a standard copy for
reference, and to be a witness against the people should they break it
or become idolatrous. This second copy is supposed to be intended [Deu
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#026). As the law was properly a
covenant or contract between God and the people, it is natural to
suppose there were two copies of it, that each of the contracting
parties might have one: therefore one was laid up beside the ark, this
was the Lord's copy; another was given to the priests and Levites, this
was the people's copy.

[Deuteronomy 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 31:10</span></span>

At the end of every seven years - thou shalt read this law - Every
seventh year was a year of release, [Deu
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#001), at which time the people's
minds, being under a peculiar degree of solemnity, were better disposed
to hear and profit by the words of God. I suppose on this ground also
that the whole book of Deuteronomy is meant, as it alone contains an
epitome of the whole Pentateuch. And in this way some of the chief
Jewish rabbins understand this place.

It is strange that this commandment, relative to a public reading of the
law every seven years, should have been rarely attended to. It does not
appear that from the time mentioned [Jos
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#030), at which time this public
reading first took place, till the reign of Jehoshaphat [Ch2
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#007), there was any public seventh
year reading - a period of 530 years. The next seventh year reading was
not till the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah, [Ch2
34:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#030), a space of two hundred and
eighty-two years. Nor do we find any other publicly mentioned from this
time till the return from the Babylonish captivity, [Neh
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#002). Nor is there any other on record
from that time to the destruction of Jerusalem. See Dodd.

[Deuteronomy 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 31:16</span></span>

Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy fathers - שכב shocheb, thou shalt lie
down; it signifies to rest, take rest in sleep, and, metaphorically, to
die. Much stress cannot be safely laid on this expression to prove the
immortality of the soul, or that the people in the time of Moses had a
distinct notion of its separate existence. It was, however, understood
in this sense by Jonathan ben Uzziel, who in his Targum paraphrases the
word thus: "Thou shalt lie down in the dust with thy fathers; and thy
soul (נשמתך nishmethach) shall be laid up in the treasury of the life to
come with thy fathers."

[Deuteronomy 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 31:18</span></span>

I will surely hide my face - Withdraw my approbation and my protection.
This is a general meaning of the word in Scripture.

[Deuteronomy 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 31:19</span></span>

Write ye this song - The song which follows in the next chapter. Things
which were of great importance and of common concern were, among the
ancients, put into verse, as this was found the best method of keeping
them in remembrance, especially in those times when writing was little
practiced. Even prose was sometimes sung. The history of Herodotus was
divided into Nine books, and each inscribed with the name of one of the
Nine Muses, because these books were anciently sung. Homer is reported
to have sung his poems through different Greek cities. Aristotle
observes that anciently the people sung their laws. And Cicero observes
that it was a custom among the ancient Romans to sing the praises of
their heroes at the public festivals. This was the case among the
northern inhabitants of Europe, particularly in Ireland and Scotland;
hence the Gaelic poetry of Ossian and others. See Dodd; and see the note
on [Exo 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001), where the subject is
largely treated.

[Deuteronomy 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 31:21</span></span>

This song shall testify against them - Because in it their general
defection is predicted, but in such a way as to show them how to avoid
the evil; and if they did not avoid the evil, and the threatened
punishment should come upon them, then the song should testify against
them, by showing that they had been sufficiently warned, and might have
lived to God, and so escaped those disasters.

[Deuteronomy 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 31:26</span></span>

Take this book of the law - The standard copy to which all transcripts
must ultimately refer: another copy was put into the bands of the
priests. See the note on [Deu 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#009).

[Deuteronomy 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">deu 31:27</span></span>

While I am yet alive - ye have been rebellious - Such was the
disposition of this people to act contrary to moral goodness that Moses
felt himself justified in inferring what would take place from what had
already happened.

1\. Never was a people more fully and faithfully warned, and from this
very circumstance we may see that they were under no fatal constraining
necessity to commit sin against God; they might have avoided it, but
they would not. God was present to help them, till by their repeated
provocations they forced him to depart: wrath therefore came upon them
to the uttermost because they sinned when they might have lived to the
glory of God. Those who abuse God's grace shall not only have that grace
taken away from them, but shall be punished for the abuse of it, as well
as for the transgression. Every sin is double, and must have a twofold
punishment; for 1. Grace is resisted; 2. Transgression is committed; and
God will visit for both.

2\. How astonishing it is that, with such examples of God's justice
before their eyes, the Jews should be so little affected; and that the
Gentiles, who have received the Gospel of God, should act as if God
would no more punish transgression, or that he must be so partial to
them as to pass by iniquities for which the hand of his justice still
continues heavy upon the descendants of Jacob! Let them take heed, for
if God spared not the natural branches, he will not spare them. If they
sin after the manner of the Jews, they may expect to be partakers with
them in their punishments. What God does to nations he will do to
individuals who reject his mercy, or trample under foot his grace; the
soul that sinneth, and returns not to God by repentance and faith, shall
die. This is a decree of God that shall never be reversed, and every day
bears witness how strictly he keeps it in view.

3\. The ode composed by Moses for this occasion was probably set to some
lively and affecting air, and sung by the people. It would be much
easier to keep such a song in remembrance, than an equal quantity of
prose. The whole would have the additional circumstances of cadence and
tune to cause it to be often repeated; and thus insure its being kept in
memory. Poetry, though often, nay, generally abused, is nevertheless a
gift from God, and may be employed with the best effect in his service.
A very considerable part of the Old Testament is written in poetry;
particularly the whole book of Psalms, great part of the prophet Isaiah,
the Lamentations, and much of the minor prophets. Those who speak
against poetic compositions in the service of God, speak against what
they do not understand. All that a man hath should be consecrated to his
Maker, and employed in his service; not only the energy of his heart and
mind, the physical force of his body, but also the musical tones and
modulations of his voice.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 32](deu032)

</div>
