<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu033)  [Next](jos000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 34:0</span></span>

Moses goes up Mount Nebo to the top of Pisgah, and God shews him the
whole extent of the land which he promised to give to the descendants of
Abraham, [Deu 34:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001). There Moses
died, and was so privately buried by the Lord that his sepulcher was
never discovered, [Deu 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#005), [Deu
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#006). His age and strength of
constitution, [Deu 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#007). The people
weep for him thirty days, [Deu 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#008).
Joshua being filled with the spirit of wisdom, the Israelites hearken to
him, as the Lord commanded them, [Deu
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#009). The character of Moses as a
prophet, and as a worker of the most extraordinary miracles, both in the
sight of the Egyptians, and the people of Israel: conclusion of the
Pentateuch, [Deu 34:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#010).

[Deuteronomy 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 34:1</span></span>

And Moses went up - This chapter could not have been written by Moses. A
man certainly cannot give an account of his own death and burial. We may
therefore consider Moses's words as ending with the conclusion of the
preceding chapter, as what follows could not possibly have been written
by himself. To suppose that he anticipated these circumstances, or that
they were shown to him by an especial revelation, is departing far from
propriety and necessity, and involving the subject in absurdity; for God
gives no prophetic intimations but such as are absolutely necessary to
be made; but there is no necessity here, for the Spirit which inspired
the writer of the following book, would naturally communicate the matter
that concludes this. I believe, therefore, that [Deu
34:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001), should constitute the first
chapter of the book of Joshua.

On this subject the following note from an intelligent Jew cannot be
unacceptable to the reader: -

"Most commentators are of opinion that Ezra was the author of the last
chapter of Deuteronomy; some think it was Joshua, and others the seventy
elders, immediately after the death of Moses; adding, that the book of
Deuteronomy originally ended with the prophetic blessing upon the twelve
tribes: 'Happy art thou, O Israel! who is like unto thee, O people saved
by the Lord,' etc.; and that what now makes the last chapter of
Deuteronomy was formerly the first of Joshua, but was removed from
thence and joined to the former by way of supplement. This opinion will
not appear unnatural if it be considered that sections and other
divisions, as well as points and pauses, were invented long since these
books were written; for in those early ages several books were connected
together, and followed each other on the same roll. The beginning of one
book might therefore be easily transferred to the end of another, and in
process of time be considered as its real conclusion, as in the case of
Deuteronomy, especially as this supplemental chapter contains an account
of the last transactions and death of the great author of the
Pentateuch." - Alexander's Heb. and Eng. Pentateuch.

This seems to be a perfectly correct view of the subject. This chapter
forms a very proper commencement to the book of Joshua, for of this last
chapter of Deuteronomy the first chapter of Joshua is an evident
continuation. If the subject be viewed in this light it will remove
every appearance of absurdity and contradiction with which, on the
common mode of interpretation, it stands sadly encumbered.

[Deuteronomy 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 34:5</span></span>

So Moses - died - according to the word of the Lord - על פי יהוה al pi
Yehovah, at the mouth of Jehovah; i. e., by the especial command and
authority of the Lord; but it is possible that what is here said refers
only to the sentence of his exclusion from the promised land, when he
offended at the waters of Meribah.

[Deuteronomy 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 34:6</span></span>

He buried him - It is probable that the reason why Moses was buried thus
privately was, lest the Israelites, prone to idolatry, should pay him
Divine honors; and God would not have the body of his faithful servant
abused in this way. Almost all the gods of antiquity were defiled men,
great lawgivers, eminent statesmen, or victorious generals. See the
account of the life of Moses at the end of this chapter, [Deu
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#010) (note).

[Deuteronomy 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 34:7</span></span>

His eye was not dim - Even at the advanced age of a hundred and twenty;
nor his natural force abated - he was a young man even in old age,
notwithstanding the unparalleled hardships he had gone through. See the
account of his life at the end of this chapter, [Deu
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#010) (note).

[Deuteronomy 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 34:9</span></span>

Laid his hands upon him - See on [Num
27:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#018) (note).

[Deuteronomy 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 34:10</span></span>

There arose not a prophet, etc. - Among all the succeeding prophets none
was found so eminent in all respects nor so highly privileged as Moses;
with him God spoke face to face - admitted him to the closest
familiarity and greatest friendship with himself. Now all this continued
true till the advent of Jesus Christ, of whom Moses said, "A Prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you from among your brethren, like
unto me;" but how great was this person when compared with Moses! Moses
desired to see God's glory; this sight he could not bear; he saw his
back parts, probably meaning God's design relative to the latter days:
but Jesus, the Almighty Savior, in whom dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, who lay in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared God
to man. Wondrous system of legal ordinances that pointed out and
typified all these things! And more wonderful system of Gospel
salvation, which is the body, soul, life, energy, and full
accomplishment of all that was written in the Law, in the Prophets, and
in the Psalms, concerning the sufferings and death of Jesus, and the
redemption of a ruined world "by his agony and bloody sweat, by his
cross and passion, by his death and burial, by his glorious resurrection
and ascension, and by the coming of the Holy Ghost!" Thus ends the
Pentateuch, commonly called the Law of Moses, a work every way worthy of
God its author, and only less than the New Covenant, the law and Gospel
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Now to the ever blessed and glorious Trinity, Father, Word, and Spirit,
the infinite and eternal One, from whom alone wisdom, truth, and
goodness can proceed, be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Introduction](jos000)

</div>
