<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu020)  [Next](deu022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 21:0</span></span>

If a man be found slain in a field, and the cause of his death be
unknown, the murder shall be expiated by the sacrifice of a heifer in an
uncultivated valley, [Deu 21:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001). The
rites to be used on the occasion, [Deu
21:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#005). The ordinance concerning
marriage with a captive, [Deu
21:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#010). The law relative to the
children of the hated and beloved wives: if the son of the hated wife
should be the first-born he shall not be disinherited by the son of the
beloved wife, but shall have a double portion of all his father's goods,
[Deu 21:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015). The law concerning the
stubborn and rebellious son, who, when convicted, is to be stoned to
death, [Deu 21:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#019). Of the person
who is to be hanged, [Deu 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#022). His
body shall not be left on the tree all night; every one that is hanged
on a tree is accursed of God, [Deu
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023).

[Deuteronomy 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 21:4</span></span>

Shall bring down the heifer unto a rough valley - נחל איתן nachal eythan
might be translated a rapid stream, probably passing through a piece of
uncultivated ground where the elders of the city were to strike off the
head of the heifer, and to wash their hands over her in token of their
innocence. The spot of ground on which this sacrifice was made must be
uncultivated, because it was considered to be a sacrifice to make
atonement for the murder, and consequently would pollute the land. This
regulation was calculated to keep murder in abhorrence, and to make the
magistrates alert in their office, that delinquents might be discovered
and punished, and thus public expense saved.

[Deuteronomy 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 21:6</span></span>

Shall wash their hands over the heifer - Washing the hands, in reference
to such a subject as this, was a rite anciently used to signify that the
persons thus washing were innocent of the crime in question. It was
probably from the Jews that Pilate learned this symbolical method of
expressing his innocence.

[Deuteronomy 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 21:11</span></span>

And seest - a beautiful woman - No forcible possession was allowed even
in this case, when the woman was taken in war, and was, by the general
consent of ancient nations, adjudged as a part of the spoils. The person
to whose lot or share such a woman as is here described fell, might, if
he chose, have her for a wife on certain conditions; but he was not
permitted to use her under any inferior character.

[Deuteronomy 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 21:12</span></span>

She shall shave her head - This was in token of her renouncing her
religion, and becoming a proselyte to that of the Jews. This is still a
custom in the East; when a Christian turns Mohammedan his head is
shaven, and he is carried through the city crying, la alahila allah we
Mohammed resooli Allah; "There is no God but God, and Mohammed is the
prophet of God."

Pare her nails - ועשתה את צפרניה veasethah eth tsipporneyha, "she shall
make her nails." Now whether this signifies paring or letting them grow,
is greatly doubted among learned men. Possibly it means neither, but
colouring the nails, staining them red with the hennah, which is much
practiced in India to the present day, and which was undoubtedly
practiced among the ancient Egyptians, as is evident from the nails of
mummies which are found thus stained. The hennah, according to
Hasselquist, grows in India, and in Upper and Lower Egypt; it flowers
from May to August. The manner of using it is this: the leaves are
powdered, and made into a paste with water: they bind this paste on the
nails of their fingers and toes, and let it stand on all night; in the
morning they are found to be of a beautiful reddish yellow, and this
lasts three weeks or a month, after which they renew the application.
They often stain the palms of their hands and the soles of their feet in
the same way, as appears from many paintings of eastern ladies done in
India and Persia, which now lie before me. This staining the soles of
the feet with the hennah is probably meant in [Sa2
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#024) : Mephibosheth had not dressed
(literally made) his feet - they had not been thus coloured.

[Deuteronomy 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 21:15</span></span>

One beloved, and another hated - That is, one loved less than the other.
This is the true notion of the word hate in Scripture. So Jacob Hated
Leah, that is, he loved her less than he did Rachel; and Jacob have I
loved, but Esau have I Hated, that is, I have shown a more particular
affection to the posterity of Jacob than I have to the posterity of
Esau. See the note on [Gen 29:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#031). From
this verse we see that polygamy did exist under the Mosaic laws, and
that it was put under certain regulations; but it was not enjoined,
Moses merely suffered it, because of the hardness of their hearts, as
our Lord justly remarks [Mat 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#008).

[Deuteronomy 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 21:18</span></span>

The stubborn, rebellious, gluttonous, and drunken son is to be stoned to
death - This law, severe as it may seem, must have acted as a powerful
preventive of crime. If such a law were in force now, and duly executed,
how many deaths of disobedient and profligate children would there be in
all corners of the land!

[Deuteronomy 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 21:23</span></span>

His body shall not remain all night upon the tree - Its exposure for the
space of one day was judged sufficient. The law which required this
answered all the ends of public justice, exposed the shame and infamy of
the conduct, but did not put to torture the feelings of humanity by
requiring a perpetual exhibition of a human being, a slow prey to the
most loathsome process of putrefaction. Did ever the spiking of the
heads of state criminals prevent high treason? or the gibbeting of a
thief or a murderer, prevent either murder or robbery? These questions
may be safely answered in the negative; and the remains of the ancient
barbarism which requires these disgusting and abominable exhibitions,
and which are deplored by every feeling heart, should be banished with
all possible speed. In the case given in the text, God considers the
land as defiled while the body of the executed criminal lay exposed,
hence it was enjoined, Thou shalt in any wise bury him that day.

For he that is hanged is accursed of God - That is, he has forfeited his
life to the law; for it is written, Cursed is every one who continueth
not in all things that are written in the book of the law to do them;
and on his body, in the execution of the sentence of the law, the curse
was considered as alighting; hence the necessity of removing the
accursed thing out of sight. How excellent are all these laws! How
wondrously well calculated to repress crimes by showing the enormity of
sin! It is worthy of remark that in the infliction of punishment
prescribed by the Mosaic law, we ever find that Mercy walks hand in hand
with Judgment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 22](deu022)

</div>
