<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu021)  [Next](deu023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 22:0</span></span>

Ordinances relative to strayed cattle and lost goods, [Deu
22:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#001). Humanity to oppressed cattle,
[Deu 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#004). Men and women shall not
wear each other's apparel, [Deu 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#005).
No bird shall be taken with her nest of eggs or young ones, [Deu
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#006), [Deu
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#007). Battlements must be made on the
roofs of houses, [Deu 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#008). Improper
mixtures to be avoided, [Deu 22:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#009).
Fringes on the garments, [Deu 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#012).
Case of the hated wife, and the tokens of virginity, and the proceedings
thereon, [Deu 22:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#013). The adulterer
and adulteress to be put to death, [Deu
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#022). Case of the betrothed damsel
corrupted in the city, [Deu 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#023),
[Deu 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#024). Cases of rape and the
punishment, [Deu 22:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#025); of
fornication, [Deu 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#028), [Deu
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#029). No man shall take his father's
wife, [Deu 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#030).

[Deuteronomy 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 22:1</span></span>

Thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray - The same
humane, merciful, and wise regulations which we met with before, [Exo
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#004), [Exo
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#005), well calculated to keep in
remembrance the second grand branch of the law of God, Thou shalt love
thy neighbor as thyself. A humane man cannot bear to see even an ass
fall under his burden, and not endeavor to relieve him; and a man who
loves his neighbor as himself cannot see his property in danger without
endeavoring to preserve it. These comparatively small matters were tests
and proofs of matters great in themselves, and in their consequences.
See the note on [Exo 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#004).

[Deuteronomy 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 22:3</span></span>

Thou mayest not hide thyself - Thou shalt not keep out of the way of
affording help, nor pretend thou didst not see occasion to render thy
neighbor any service. The priest and the Levite, when they saw the
wounded man, passed by on the other side of the way, [Luk
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#031), [Luk
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#032). This was a notorious breach of
the merciful law mentioned above.

[Deuteronomy 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 22:5</span></span>

The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man - כלי גבר keli
geber, the instruments or arms of a man. As the word גבר geber is here
used, which properly signifies a strong man or man of war, it is very
probable that armor is here intended; especially as we know that in the
worship of Venus, to which that of Astarte or Ashtaroth among the
Canaanites bore a striking resemblance, the women were accustomed to
appear in armor before her. It certainly cannot mean a simple change in
dress, whereby the men might pass for women, and vice versa. This would
have been impossible in those countries where the dress of the sexes had
but little to distinguish it, and where every man wore a long beard. It
is, however, a very good general precept understood literally, and
applies particularly to those countries where the dress alone
distinguishes between the male and the female. The close-shaved
gentleman may at any time appear like a woman in the female dress, and
the woman appear as a man in the male's attire. Were this to be
tolerated in society, it would produce the greatest confusion. Clodius,
who dressed himself like a woman that he might mingle with the Roman
ladies in the feast of the Bona Dea, was universally execrated.

[Deuteronomy 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 22:7</span></span>

Thou shalt - let the dam go, and take the young to thee; that it may be
well with thee - This passage may be understood literally. If they
destroyed both young and old, must not the breed soon fail, and would it
not in the end be ill with them; and by thus cutting off the means of
their continual support, must not their days be shortened on the land?
But we may look for a humane precept in this law. The young never knew
the sweets of liberty; the dam did: they might be taken and used for any
lawful purpose, but the dam must not be brought into a state of
captivity. They who can act otherwise must be either very inconsiderate
or devoid of feeling; and such persons can never be objects of God's
peculiar care and attention, and therefore need not expect that it shall
be well with them, or that they shall prolong their days on the earth.
Every thing contrary to the spirit of mercy and kindness the ever
blessed God has in utter abhorrence. And we should remember a fact, that
he who can exercise cruelty towards a sparrow or a wren, will, when
circumstances are favorable, be cruel to his fellow creatures. The poet
Phocylides has a maxim in his admonitory poem very similar to that in
the sacred text: -

Μηδε τις ορυιθας καλιης ἁμα παντας ἑλεσθω·

Μητερα δ' εκπρολιπῃς, ἱν' εχῃς παλι τησδε νεοττους.

Phocyl. Ποιημα Νουθετ., ver. 80.

"Nor from a nest take all the birds away;

The mother spare, she'll breed a future day."

[Deuteronomy 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 22:8</span></span>

A battlement for thy roof - Houses in the East are in general built with
flat roofs, and on them men walk to enjoy the fresh air, converse
together, sleep, etc.; it was therefore necessary to have a sort of
battlement or balustrade to prevent persons from falling off. If a man
neglected to make a sufficient defense against such accidents, and the
death of another was occasioned by it, the owner of the house must be
considered in the light of a murderer.

[Deuteronomy 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 22:9</span></span>

Divers seeds - See the note on [Lev
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#019).

[Deuteronomy 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 22:10</span></span>

Thou shalt not plough with an ox and an ass - It is generally supposed
that mixtures of different sorts in seed, breed, etc., were employed for
superstitious purposes, and therefore prohibited in this law. It is more
likely, however, that there was a physical reason for this; two beasts
of a different species cannot associate comfortably together, and on
this ground never pull pleasantly either in cart or plough; and every
farmer knows that it is of considerable consequence to the comfort of
the cattle to put those together that have an affection for each other.
This may be very frequently remarked in certain cattle, which, on this
account, are termed true yoke-fellows. After all, it is very probable
that the general design was to prevent improper alliances in civil and
religious life. And to this St. Paul seems evidently to refer, [Co2
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014) : Be ye not unequally yoked with
unbelievers; which is simply to be understood as prohibiting all
intercourse between Christians and idolaters in social, matrimonial, and
religious life. And to teach the Jews the propriety of this, a variety
of precepts relative to improper and heterogeneous mixtures were
interspersed through their law, so that in civil and domestic life they
might have them ever before their eyes.

[Deuteronomy 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 22:12</span></span>

Fringes - See on [Num 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038) (note).

[Deuteronomy 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 22:15</span></span>

Tokens of the damsel's virginity - This was a perfectly possible case in
all places where girls were married at ten, twelve, and fourteen years
of age, which is frequent in the East. I have known several instances of
persons having had two or three children at separate births before they
were fourteen years of age. Such tokens, therefore, as the text speaks
of, must be infallibly exhibited by females so very young on the
consummation of their marriage.

[Deuteronomy 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 22:17</span></span>

They shall spread the cloth, etc. - A usage of this kind argues a
roughness of manners which would ill comport with the refinement of
European ideas on so delicate a subject. Attempts have been made to show
that the law here is to be understood metaphorically; but they so
perfectly fail to establish any thing like probability, that it would be
wasting my own and my reader's time to detail them. A custom similar to
that above is observed among the Mohammedans to the present day.

[Deuteronomy 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 22:22</span></span>

Shall both of them die - Thus we find that in the most ancient of all
laws adultery was punished with death in both the parties.

[Deuteronomy 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 22:25</span></span>

And the man force her - A rape also, by these ancient institutions, was
punished with death, because a woman's honor was considered equally as
precious as her life; therefore the same punishment was inflicted on the
ravisher as upon the murderer. This offense is considered in the same
point of view in the British laws, and by them also it is punished with
death.

[Deuteronomy 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 22:30</span></span>

A man shall not take his father's wife - This is to be understood as
referring to the case of a stepmother. A man in his old age may have
married a young wife, and on his dying, his son by a former wife may
desire to espouse her: this the law prohibits. It was probably on
pretense of having broken this law, that Solomon put his brother
Adonijah to death, because he had desired to have his father's concubine
to wife, [Kg1 2:13-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#013).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 23](deu023)

</div>
