<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu016)  [Next](deu018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 17:0</span></span>

All sacrifices to be without blemish, [Deu
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#001). Of persons consisted of idolatry
and their punishment, [Deu 17:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002).
Difficult matters in judgment to be laid before the priests and judges,
and to be determined by them; and all to submit to their decision, [Deu
17:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#008). The king that may be chosen
to be one of their brethren; no stranger to be appointed to that office,
[Deu 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#014), [Deu
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#015). He shall not multiply horses to
himself, nor cause the people to return unto Egypt, [Deu
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016). Nor multiply wives, money,
etc., [Deu 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#017). He shall write a
copy of the law for his own use, and read and study it all his days,
that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, [Deu
17:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#018).

[Deuteronomy 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 17:1</span></span>

Wherein is blemish - God must not have that offered to him which thou
wouldst not use thyself. This not only refers to the perfect sacrifice
offered by Christ Jesus, but to that sincerity and uprightness of heart
which God requires in all those who approach him in the way of worship.

[Deuteronomy 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 17:4</span></span>

If it be told thee - In a private way by any confidential person. And
thou hast heard of it; so that it appears to be notorious, very likely
to be true, and publicly scandalous. And hast inquired diligently -
sought to find out the truth of the report by the most careful
examination of persons reporting, circumstances of the case, etc. And,
behold, it be true - the report is not founded on vague rumor, hearsay,
or malice. And the thing certain - substantiated by the fullest
evidence. Then shalt thou bring forth that man, [Deu
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#005). As the charge of idolatry was
the most solemn and awful that could be brought against an Israelite,
because it affected his life, therefore God required that the charge
should be substantiated by the most unequivocal facts, and the most
competent witnesses. Hence all the precautions mentioned in the fourth
verse must be carefully used, in order to arrive at so affecting and so
awful a truth.

[Deuteronomy 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 17:6</span></span>

Two witnesses - One might be deceived, or be prejudiced or malicious;
therefore God required two substantial witnesses for the support of the
charge.

[Deuteronomy 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 17:8</span></span>

If there arise a matter too hard for thee - These directions are given
to the common magistrates, who might not be able to judge of or apply
the law in all cases that might be brought before them. The priests and
Levites, who were lawyers by birth and continual practice, were
reasonably considered as the best qualified to decide on difficult
points.

[Deuteronomy 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 17:12</span></span>

The man that will do presumptuously - The man who refused to abide by
this final determination forfeited his life, as being then in a state of
rebellion against the highest authority, and consequently the public
could have no pledge for his conduct.

[Deuteronomy 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 17:15</span></span>

One from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over thee - It was on
the ground of this command that the Jews proposed that insidious
question to our Lord, Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, Or No?
[Mat 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#017); for they were then under
the authority of a foreign power. Had Christ said Yes, then they would
have condemned him by this law; had he said No, then they would have
accused him to Caesar. See this subject discussed in great detail in the
notes, [Mat 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#016) (note), etc.

[Deuteronomy 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 17:16</span></span>

He shall not multiply horses - As horses appear to have been generally
furnished by Egypt, God prohibits these,

1\. Lest there should be such commerce with Egypt as might lead to
idolatry.

2\. Lest the people might depend on a well-appointed cavalry as a means
of security, and so cease from trusting in the strength and protection
of God. And,

3\. That they might not be tempted to extend their dominion by means of
cavalry, and so get scattered among the surrounding idolatrous nations,
and thus cease, in process of time, to be that distinct and separate
people which God intended they should be, and without which the
prophecies relative to the Messiah could not be known to have their due
and full accomplishment.

[Deuteronomy 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 17:17</span></span>

Neither shall he multiply wives - For this would necessarily lead to
foreign alliances, and be the means of introducing the manners and
customs of other nations, and their idolatry also. Solomon sinned
against this precept, and brought ruin on himself and on the land by it;
see [Kg1 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#004).

[Deuteronomy 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 17:18</span></span>

He shall write him a copy of this law - משנה התורה הזאת mishneh hattorah
hazzoth, an iteration or duplicate of this law; translated by the
Septuagint, το δευτερονομιον τουτο this deuteronomy. From this version
both the Vulgate Latin and all the modern versions have taken the name
of this book; and from the original word the Jews call it Mishneh. See
the preface to this book.

Out of that which is before the priests the Levites - It is likely this
means, that the copy which the king was to write out was to be taken
from the autograph kept in the tabernacle before the Lord, from which,
as a standard, every copy was taken and with which doubtless every copy
was compared; and it is probable that the priests and Levites had the
revising of every copy that was taken off, in order to prevent errors
from creeping into the sacred text.

[Deuteronomy 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 17:19</span></span>

And it shall be with him, etc. - It was the surest way to bring the king
to an acquaintance with the Divine law to oblige him to write out a fair
copy of it with his own hand, in which he was to read daily. This was
essentially necessary, as these laws of God were all permanent, and no
Israelitish king could make any new law, the kings of this people being
ever considered as only the vice-gerents of Jehovah.

[Deuteronomy 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 17:20</span></span>

He, and his children, in the midst of Israel - From this verse it has
been inferred that the crown of Israel was designed to be hereditary,
and this is very probable; for long experience has proved to almost all
the nations of the world that hereditary succession in the regal
government is, on the whole, the safest, and best calculated to secure
the public tranquillity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 18](deu018)

</div>
