<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu004)  [Next](deu006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 5:0</span></span>

God's covenant with the people in Horeb, [Deu
5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001). Moses the mediator of it, [Deu
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#005). A repetition of the ten
commandments, vv. 6-21; which God wrote on two tables of stone, [Deu
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#022). The people are filled with dread
at the terrible majesty of God, [Deu
5:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#023); and beseech Moses to be their
mediator, [Deu 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#027). The Lord admits
of their request, [Deu 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#028); and
deplores their ungodliness, [Deu 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#029).
They are exhorted to obedience, that they may be preserved in the
possession of the promised land, [Deu
5:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#030).

[Deuteronomy 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 5:1</span></span>

And Moses called all Israel, and said - Hear, etc. -

1\. God speaks to the people.

2\. The people are called to hear what God speaks.

3\. To learn what they heard, that they may be thoroughly instructed in
the will of God.

4\. To keep God's testimonies ever in mind, and to treasure them up in a
believing and upright heart.

5\. That they might do them - obey the whole will of God, taking his
word for the invariable rule of their conduct. Should not all these
points be kept in view by every Christian assembly?

[Deuteronomy 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 5:3</span></span>

The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers (only) but with us
(also).

[Deuteronomy 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 5:6</span></span>

I am the Lord thy God - See these commandments explained in the notes on
Exodus 20 (note).

[Deuteronomy 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 5:15</span></span>

And remember that thou wast a servant - In this and the latter clause of
the preceding verse Moses adds another reason why one day in seven
should be sanctified, viz., that the servants might rest, and this is
urged upon them on the consideration of their having been servants in
the land of Egypt. We see therefore that God had three grand ends in
view by appointing a Sabbath.

1\. To commemorate the creation.

2\. To give a due proportion of rest to man and beast. When in Egypt
they had no rest; their cruel task-masters caused them to labor without
intermission; now God had given rest, and as he had showed them mercy,
he teaches them to show mercy to their servants: Remember that thou wast
a servant.

3\. To afford peculiar spiritual advantages to the soul, that it might
be kept in remembrance of the rest which remains at the right hand of
God.

Therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day - Here
is a variation in the manner of expression, Sabbath day for seventh,
owing, it is supposed, to a change of the day at the exodus from Sunday
to Saturday, effected upon the gathering of the manna, [Exo
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#023). The Sabbath now became a
twofold memorial of the deliverance, as well as of the creation; and
this accounts for the new reason assigned for its observance: "Therefore
the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day." See Dr. A.
Bayley's Hebr. and Eng. Bible, and see the note on [Exo
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#023).

[Deuteronomy 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 5:21</span></span>

His field - This clause is not in the tenth commandment as it stands in
[Exo 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017).

[Deuteronomy 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 5:23</span></span>

And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice - See the notes on [Exo
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018), etc.

[Deuteronomy 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 5:29</span></span>

O that there were such a heart in them - Or rather, מי יתן והיה לבבם זה
mi yitten vehayah lebabam zeh, Who will give such a heart to them, that
they may fear, etc. They refuse to receive such a heart from me; who
then can supply it? If they had not been such perfectly free agents as
could either use or abuse their liberty, could God have made the
complaint or expressed the earnest desire we find in this verse? He made
the human will free; and in spite of all the influence of sin and Satan,
he preserves its liberty. Had man no free will, he could neither be
punished nor rewarded, because a mere machine, and consequently no more
accountable for his actions than the fire for its consuming quality, or
the stone for its gravity; the one having burned the house of the
righteous, the other having crushed the innocent to death. See the note
on [Deu 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#004).

[Deuteronomy 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">deu 5:32</span></span>

Ye shall observe to do - He who marks not the word of God is never
likely to fulfill the will of God.

Ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left - The way of
truth and righteousness is a right line; a man must walk straight
forward who wishes to go to glory; no crooked or devious path ever led
to God or happiness.

[Deuteronomy 5:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">deu 5:33</span></span>

Ye shall walk in all the ways, etc. - God never gave a commandment to
man which he did not design that he should obey. He who selects from the
Divine testimonies such precepts as he feels but little inclination to
transgress, and lives in the breach of others, sins against the grand
legislative authority of God, and shall be treated as a rebel.

That ye may live - תחיון ticheyun, that ye may enjoy life, (for the
paragogic nun, at the end of the word, deepens the sense), that it may
be well with you ותוב לכם vetob lachem, and good shall be to you - God
will prosper you in all things essential to the welfare of your bodies,
and the salvation of your souls.

That ye may prolong your days in the land - That ye may arrive at a good
old age, and grow more and more meet for the inheritance among the
saints in light.

On this very important verse we may remark, a long life is a great
blessing, if a man live to God, because it is in life, and in life
alone, that a preparation for eternal glory may be acquired. Those who
wish to die soon, have never yet learned to live, and know not the value
of life or time. Many have a vain hope that they shall get either in
death, or in the other world, a preparation for glory. This is a fatal
error. Here, alone, we may acquaint ourselves with God, and receive that
holiness without which none can see him. Reader, be thankful to him that
thou art still in a state of probation; and pray that thou mayest live
for eternity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 6](deu006)

</div>
