<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu009)  [Next](deu011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 10:0</span></span>

Moses is commanded to make a second set of tables, [Deu
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001), [Deu
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#002). He makes an ark, prepares the
two tables, God writes on them the ten commandments, and Moses lays them
up in the ark, [Deu 10:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#003). The
Israelites journey from Beeroth to Mosera, where Aaron dies, [Deu
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006); and from thence to Gudgodah and
Jotbath, [Deu 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#007). At that time God
separated the tribe of Levi for the service of the sanctuary, [Deu
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008), [Deu
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#009). How long Moses stayed the second
time in the mount, [Deu 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#010), [Deu
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#011). What God requires of the
Israelites, [Deu 10:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012). Their heart
must be circumcised, [Deu 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016). God's
character and conduct, [Deu 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017),
[Deu 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#018). They are commanded to love
the stranger, [Deu 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#019); to fear,
love, and serve God, [Deu 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#020),
because he had done such great things for them and their fathers, [Deu
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#021), [Deu
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#022).

[Deuteronomy 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 10:1</span></span>

Hew thee two tables of stone - See the notes on [Exo
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001).

[Deuteronomy 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 10:3</span></span>

Shittim wood - See the note on [Exo
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005), and succeeding verses, and on
the parallel places in the margin.

[Deuteronomy 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 10:4</span></span>

Ten commandments - See the note on [Exo
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001), etc.

[Deuteronomy 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 10:6</span></span>

And the children of Israel took their journey, etc. - On this and the
three following verses see Kennicott's remarks at the end of this
chapter.

[Deuteronomy 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 10:12</span></span>

Now, Israel, what doth the Lord - require of thee - An answer is
immediately given. God requires,

1\. That ye fear him as Jehovah your God; him who made, preserves, and
governs you.

2\. That ye walk in all his ways - that, having received his precepts,
all of which are good and excellent, ye obey the whole; walking in God's
ways, not your own, nor in the ways of the people of the land.

3\. That ye love him - have confidence in him as your father and friend,
have recourse to him in all your necessities, and love him in return for
his love.

4\. That you serve him - give him that worship which he requires,
performing it with all your heart - the whole of your affections, and
with all your soul - your will, understanding, and judgment. In a word,
putting forth your whole strength and energy of body and soul in the
sacred work.

[Deuteronomy 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 10:14</span></span>

Behold, the heaven and the heaven of heavens - All these words in the
original are in the plural number: הן השמים ושמי השמים hen hashshamayim,
ushemey hashshamayim; behold the heavens and the heavens of heavens. But
what do they mean? To say that the first means the atmosphere, the
second the planetary system, and the third the region of the blessed, is
saying but very little in the way of explanation. The words were
probably intended to point out the immensity of God's creation, in which
we may readily conceive one system of heavenly bodies, and others beyond
them, and others still in endless progression through the whole vortex
of space, every star in the vast abyss of nature being a sun, with its
peculiar and numerous attendant worlds! Thus there may be systems of
systems in endless gradation up to the throne of God!

[Deuteronomy 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 10:16</span></span>

Circumcise - the foreskin of your heart - A plain proof from God himself
that this precept pointed out spiritual things, and that it was not the
cutting away a part of the flesh that was the object of the Divine
commandment, but the purification of the soul, without which all forms
and ceremonies are of no avail. Loving God with all the heart, soul,
mind, and strength, the heart being circumcised to enable them to do it,
was, from the beginning, the end, design, and fulfillment of the whole
law.

[Deuteronomy 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 10:17</span></span>

God of gods, and Lord of lords - That is, He is the source whence all
being and power proceed; every agent is finite but himself; and he can
counteract, suspend, or destroy all the actions of all creatures
whensoever he pleases. If he determine to save, none can destroy; if he
purpose to destroy, none can save. How absolutely necessary to have such
a God for our friend!

A great God - mighty - האל הגבר hael haggibbor, the mighty God; this is
the very title that is given to our blessed Lord and Savior, [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006).

[Deuteronomy 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 10:21</span></span>

He is thy praise - It is an eternal honor to any soul to be in the
friendship of God. Why are people ashamed of being thought religious?
Because they know nothing of religion. He who knows his Maker may glory
in his God, for without him what has any soul but disgrace, pain, shame,
and perdition? How strange is it that those who fear God should be
ashamed to own it, while sinners boldly proclaim their relationship to
Satan!

[Deuteronomy 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 10:22</span></span>

With threescore and ten persons - And now, from so small a beginning,
they were multiplied to more than 600,000 souls; and this indeed in the
space of forty years, for the 603,000 which came out of Egypt were at
this time all dead but Moses, Joshua, and Caleb. How easily can God
increase and multiply, and how easily diminish and bring low! In all
things, because of his unlimited power, he can do whatsoever he will;
and he will do whatsoever is right.

On a very important subject in this chapter Dr. Kennicott has the
following judicious observations: -

"The book of Deuteronomy contains the several speeches made to the
Israelites by Moses just before his death, recapitulating the chief
circumstances of their history, from their deliverance out of Egypt to
their arrival on the banks of Jordan. What in this book he has recorded
as spoken will be best understood by comparing it with what he has
recorded as done in the previous history; and this, which is very useful
as to the other parts of this book, is absolutely necessary as to the
part of the tenth chapter here to be considered.

"The previous circumstances of the history necessary to be here attended
to are these: In Exodus 20, God speaks the ten commandments; in Exodus
24, Moses, on Mount Sinai, receives the two tables, and is there forty
days and nights; in Exodus 25, 26, 27, God appoints the service of the
tabernacle; in Exodus 28, separates Aaron and his sons for the priest's
office, by a statute for ever, to him and his seed after him; in Exodus
30, Moses, incensed at the golden calf, breaks the tables; yet he prays
for the people, and God orders him to lead them towards Canaan; in
Exodus 34, Moses carries up two other tables, and stays again forty days
and nights. In Numbers 3, the tribe of Levi is selected; Numbers 8,
consecrated; Numbers 10 and 11, the Israelites march from Sinai on the
twentieth day of the second month in the second year; in Numbers 13
spies sent; in Numbers 14, the men are sentenced to die in the
wilderness during the forty years; in Numbers 18, the Levites are to
have no lot nor large district in Canaan, but to be the Lord's
inheritance; in Numbers 20, Aaron dies on Mount Hor; lastly, in the
complete catalogue of the whole march (Numbers 33). we are told that
they went from Moseroth to Bene-jaakan, thence to Hor-hagidgad, to
Jotbathah, to Ebronah, to Ezion-gaber, to Zin, (which is Kadesh), and
thence to Mount Hor, where Aaron died in the fortieth and last year. In
Deuteronomy 9, Moses tells the Israelites, ([Deu
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#007)), that they had been rebels, from
Egypt even to Jordan, particularly at Horeb, (9:8-29), whilst he was
with God, and received the tables at the end of forty days and nights;
and that, after breaking the tables, he fasted and interceded for his
brethren during a second period of forty days and nights; and this ninth
chapter ends with the prayer which he then made. Chapter 10 begins thus:
'At that time the Lord said unto me, Hew thee two tables of stone like
unto the first, and come up,' etc. And from [Deu
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001) to the end of [Deu
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#005) he describes the second copy of
the ten commandments, as written also by God, and deposited by himself
in the ark.

"After this we have now four verses, ([Deu
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006), [Deu
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#007),[Deu
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008), and [Deu
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#009)), which not only have no kind of
connection with the verses before and after them, but also, as they
stand in the present Hebrew text, directly contradict that very text;
and the two first of these verses have not, in our Hebrew text, the
least connection with the two last of them. Our Hebrew text, ([Deu
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006)), says that Israel journeyed from
Bene-jaakan to Mosera. Whereas that very text in the complete catalogue,
([Num 33:31](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#031)), says they journeyed from
Moseroth to Bene-jaakan. Again: Aaron is here said to have died at
Mosera, whereas he died on Mount Hor, the seventh station afterwards;
see [Num 33:38](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#038). And again: they are
here said to go from Bene-jaakan to Mosera, thence to Gudgodah, and
thence to Jotbath; whereas the complete catalogue says, Moseroth to
Bene-jaakan, thence to Hor-hagidgad, and thence to Jotbathah. But if the
marches could possibly be true as they now stand in these two verses,
yet what connection can there be between Jotbath and the Separation Of
The Tribe Of Levi? It is very happy that these several difficulties in
the Hebrew text are removed by the Samaritan Pentateuch: for that text
tells us here rightly that the march was from Moseroth to Bene-jaakan;
to Hagidgad, to Jotbathah, to Ebronah, to Ezion-gaber, to Zin, (which is
Kadesh), and thence to Mount Hor, where Aaron died. Again: as the
regular deduction of these stations ends with Mount Hor and Aaron's
death, we have then what we had not before, a regular connection with
the two next verses, and the connection is this: That when Aaron, the
son of Amram, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, died, neither the
tribe of Levi nor the priesthood was deserted, but God still supported
the latter by maintaining the former; and this, not by allotting that
tribe any one large part of Canaan, but separate cities among the other
tribes, and by allowing them to live upon those offerings which were
made by the other tribes to God himself. These four verses therefore,
([Deu 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006), [Deu
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#007), [Deu
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008), and [Deu
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#009)), in the same text, stand thus:
([Deu 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006)), When the children of
Israel journeyed from Moseroth, and encamped in Bene-jaakan; from thence
they journeyed and encamped at Hagidgad; from thence they journeyed and
encamped in Jotbathah, a land of rivers of water: ([Deu
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#007)) From thence they journeyed and
encamped in Ebronah; in Ezion-gaber; in the wilderness of Zin, which is
Kadesh; and then at Mount Hor; And Aaron Died There, and there he was
buried; and Eleazar his son ministered as priest in his stead. ([Deu
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008)) At that time the Lord Had
separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of the
Lord, to stand before the Lord, to minister unto him, and to bless in
his name unto this day. ([Deu 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#009))
Wherefore Levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren; the Lord
is his inheritance, according as the Lord thy God promised him.

"But however consistent these four verses are now with themselves, it
will be still demanded, What connection have they with the fifth verse
before them, and with the tenth verse after them? I confess I cannot
discover their least pertinency here, because Aaron's Death and Levi's
Separation seem totally foreign to the speech of Moses in this place.
And this speech without these four verses is a regularly connected
admonition from Moses to this purpose: that his brethren were for ever
to consider themselves as indebted to him, under God, for the renewal of
the two tables, and also to his intercession for rescuing them from
destruction. The words are these: ([Deu
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#004)), 'The Lord wrote again the ten
commandments, and gave them unto me. ([Deu
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#005)) And I came down from the mount,
and put the tables in the ark, which I Had made: - ([Deu
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#010)) Thus I stayed in the mount
according to the first time, forty days and forty nights: and the Lord
hearkened unto me at that time also; the Lord would not destroy thee.
([Deu 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#011)) And the Lord said unto
me, Arise, take thy journey before the people, that they may go in and
possess the land,' etc. But then, if these four verses were not at first
a part of this chapter, but are evidently interpolated, there arises
another inquiry, Whether they are an insertion entirely spurious, or a
genuine part of the sacred text, though removed hither out of some other
chapter? As they contain nothing singular or peculiar, are of no
particular importance, and relate to no subject of disputation, they are
not likely to have arisen from fraud or design; but, perfectly
coinciding in sense with other passages, they may safely be considered
as another instance of a large transposition \[86 words\] in the present
text, arising from accident and want of care. And the only remaining
question therefore is, Whether we can discover, though not to
demonstration, yet with any considerable degree of probability, the
original place of these four verses, that so they may be at last
restored to that neighborhood and connection from which they have been,
for so many ages, separated?

"It was natural for Moses, in the course of these several speeches to
his brethren in Deuteronomy, to embrace the first opportunity of
impressing on their memories a matter of such particular importance as
the continuation of the priesthood among the Levites after Aaron's
death. And the first proper place seems to be in the second chapter,
after the first verse. At [Deu 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019),
he speaks of their march from Horeb to Kadesh-barnea, whence they sent
the spies into Canaan. He then sets forth their murmurings, and God's
sentence that they should die in the wilderness, and he ends the first
chapter with their being defeated by the Amorites, their weeping before
the Lord, and abiding many days in Kadesh, which is Kadesh-Barnea, near
Canaan. "Deuteronomy 2 begins thus: Then we turned, and took our journey
into the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea, as the Lord spake unto
me: and We Compassed Mount Seir Many Days. Now, the many days, or long
time, which they spent in compassing Mount Seir, that is, going round on
the south-west coasts of Edom in order to proceed north-east from Edom
through Moab to Arnon, must include several of their stations, besides
that eminent one at Mount Hor, where Aaron died. And as part of their
road, during this long compass, lay through Ezion-gaber, (which was on
the eastern tongue of the Red Sea, and the south boundary of Edom),
thence to Zin, (which is Kadesh, that is, Meribah Kadesh), and thence to
Mount Hor, as they marched to the north-east; so it is probable that the
five stations preceding that of Ezion-gaber were on the extremity of
Mount Seir, to the south-west. And if their first station at entering
the south-west borders of Edom, and beginning to compass Mount Seir, was
Moseroth, this gives the reason wanted why Moses begins this passage at
Moseroth, and ends it with Aaron's death at Mount Hor. And this will
discover a proper connection between the four dislocated verses and the
context here - [Deu 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#046) : 'So ye
abode in Kadesh (Barnea) many days.' [Deu
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001) : 'Then we turned, and took our
journey into the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea, as the Lord spake
unto me; and We Compassed Mount Seir Many Days.'

"'For the children of Israel journeyed from Moseroth, and pitched in
Bene-jaakan: from thence they journeyed and pitched in Hagidgad: from
thence they journeyed and pitched in Jotbathah, a land of rivers of
water: from thence they journeyed and pitched in Ebronah: from thence
they journeyed and pitched in Ezion-gaber: from thence they journeyed
and pitched in the wilderness of Zin, which is Kadesh: from thence they
journeyed and pitched in Mount Hor, and Aaron died there, and there he
was buried; and Eleazar his son ministered as priest in his stead. At
that time the Lord had separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of
the covenant of the Lord, to stand before the Lord to minister unto him,
and to bless in his name unto this day. Wherefore, Levi hath no part nor
inheritance with his brethren; the Lord is his inheritance, according as
the Lord thy God promised him.'

"And this paragraph being thus inserted at the end of the first verse,
the second begins a new paragraph, thus: And the Lord spake unto me,
saying, Ye have compassed this mountain long enough; turn you northward
- through the east side of Seir (or Edom) towards Moab on the north. See
[Deu 2:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#004)." - Kennicott's Remarks, p.
74.

These remarks should not be hastily rejected.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 11](deu011)

</div>
