<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu025)  [Next](deu027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 26:0</span></span>

First-fruits must be offered to God, [Deu
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#001), [Deu
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#002). The form of confession to be
used on the occasion, [Deu 26:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#003).
The third year's tithe to be given to the Levites and the poor, [Deu
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#012), and the form of confession to
be used on this occasion, [Deu
26:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#013). The Israelites are to take
Jehovah for their God, and to keep his testimonies, [Deu
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#016), [Deu
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#017). And Jehovah is to take them for
his people, and make them high above all the nations of the earth, [Deu
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#018), [Deu
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#019).

[Deuteronomy 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 26:2</span></span>

Thou shalt take of the first of all the fruit, etc. - This was intended
to keep them in continual remembrance of the kindness of God, in
preserving them through so many difficulties and literally fulfilling
the promises he had made to them. God being the author of all their
blessings, the first-fruits of the land were consecrated to him, as the
author of every good and perfect gift.

[Deuteronomy 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 26:5</span></span>

A Syrian ready to perish was my father - This passage has been variously
understood, both by the ancient versions and by modern commentators. The
Vulgate renders it thus: Syrus persequebatur patrem meum, "A Syrian
persecuted my father." The Septuagint thus: Συριαν απεβαλεν ὁ πατηρ μου,
"My father abandoned Syria." The Targum thus: לבן ארמאה בעא לאובדא ית
אבא Laban arammaah bea leobada yath abba, "Laban the Syrian endeavored
to destroy my father." The Syriac: "My father was led out of Syria into
Egypt." The Arabic: "Surely, Laban the Syrian had almost destroyed my
father." The Targum of Jonathan ben Uzziel: "Our father Jacob went at
first into Syria of Mesopotamia, and Laban sought to destroy him."

Father Houbigant dissents from all, and renders the original thus: Fames
urgebat patrem meum, qui in Aegyptum descendit, "Famine oppressed my
father, who went down into Egypt." This interpretation Houbigant gives
the text, by taking the י yod from the word ארמי arammi, which signifies
an Aramite or Syrian, and joining it to יאבד yeabud, the future for the
perfect, which is common enough in Hebrew, and which may signify
constrained; and seeking for the meaning of ארם aram in the Arabic
arama, which signifies famine, dearth, etc., he thus makes out his
version, and this version he defends at large in his notes. It is pretty
evident, from the text, that by a Syrian we are to understand Jacob, so
called from his long residence in Syria with his father-in-law Laban.
And his being ready to perish may signify the hard usage and severe
labor he had in Laban's service, by which, as his health was much
impaired, so his life might have often been in imminent danger.

[Deuteronomy 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 26:8</span></span>

With a mighty hand, etc. - See on [Deu
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034) (note).

[Deuteronomy 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 26:11</span></span>

Thou shalt rejoice - God intends that his followers shall be happy; that
they shall eat their bread with gladness and singleness of heart,
praising him. Those who eat their meat grudgingly, under the pretense of
their unworthiness, etc., profane God's bounties and shall have no
thanks for their voluntary humility.

Thou, and the Levite, and the stranger - They were to take care to share
God's bounties among all those who were dependent on them. The Levite
has no inheritance, let him rejoice with thee. The stranger has no home,
let him feel thee to be his friend and his father.

[Deuteronomy 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 26:12</span></span>

The third year, which is the year of tithing - This is supposed to mean
the third year of the seventh or Sabbatical year, in which the tenths
were to be given to the poor. See the law, [Deu
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#028). But from the letter in both
these places it would appear that the tithe was for the Levites, and
that this tithe was drawn only once in three years.

[Deuteronomy 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 26:14</span></span>

I have not - given aught thereof for the dead - That is, I have not
consecrated any of it to an idol which was generally a dead man whom
superstition and ignorance had deified. From [Co1
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#027), [Co1
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#028), we learn that it was customary
to offer that flesh to idols which was afterwards sold publicly in the
shambles; probably the blood was poured out before the idol in imitation
of the sacrifices offered to the true God. Perhaps the text here alludes
to a similar custom.

[Deuteronomy 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 26:17</span></span>

Thou hast avouched the Lord - The people avouch - publicly declare, that
they have taken Jehovah to be their God.

[Deuteronomy 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 26:18</span></span>

And the Lord hath avouched - Publicly declared, by the blessings he
pours down upon them, that he has taken them to be his peculiar people.
Thus the covenant is made and ratified between God and his followers.

[Deuteronomy 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 26:19</span></span>

Make thee high above all nations - It is written, Righteousness exalteth
a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people, [Pro
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#034). While Israel regarded God's
word and kept his testimonies, they were the greatest and most
respectable of all nations; but when they forsook God and his law, they
became the most contemptible. O Britain, even more highly favored than
ancient Israel! learn wisdom by what they have suffered. It is not thy
fleets nor thine armies, howsoever excellent and well appointed, that
can ultimately exalt and secure thy permanence among the nations. It is
righteousness alone. Become irreligious, neglect God's ordinances,
profane his Sabbath, despise his word, persecute his followers, and thou
art lost. But fear, love, and serve him, and thy enemies shall be found
liars, thou shalt defeat their projects, and trample on their high
places.

The form of confession when bringing the first-fruits, related [Deu
26:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#004), is both affecting and
edifying. Even when brought into a state of affluence and rest, they
were commanded to remember and publicly acknowledge their former
degradation and wretchedness, that they might be ever kept humble and
dependent; and they must bring their offering as a public acknowledgment
to God that it was by his mercy their state was changed, and by his
bounty their comforts were continued. If a man rise from poverty to
affluence, and forget his former state, he becomes proud, insolent, and
oppressive. If a Christian convert forget his former state, the rock
whence he was hewn, and the hole of the pit whence he was digged, he
soon becomes careless, unthankful, and unholy. The case of the ten
lepers that were cleansed, of whom only one returned to give God thanks,
is an awful lesson. How many are continually living on the bounty of
God, who feel no gratitude for his mercies! Reader, Is this thy state?
If so, then expect the just God to curse thy blessings.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 27](deu027)

</div>
