<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu027)  [Next](deu029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 28:0</span></span>

The blessings which God pronounces on the obedient, [Deu
28:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001). Particular privileges which
the faithful shall receive, [Deu
28:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#007). The curses pronounced against
the ungodly and idolatrous, [Deu
28:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#014). A detailed account of the
miseries which should be inflicted on them, should they neglect the
commandments of the Lord, [Deu 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#020).
They shall be smitten with the pestilence, [Deu
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#021); with consumption, fever, etc.,
[Deu 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#022); drought and barrenness,
[Deu 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#023), [Deu
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#024); they shall be defeated by their
enemies, [Deu 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#025), [Deu
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#026); they shall be afflicted with
the botch of Egypt, [Deu 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027); with
madness and blindness, [Deu 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#028),
[Deu 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#029); they shall be disappointed
in all their projects, [Deu 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030);
deprived of all their possessions, and afflicted in all their members,
[Deu 28:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#031); they and their king
shall go into captivity, [Deu 28:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#036),
and become a by-word among the nations, [Deu
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037). Their land shall be unfruitful,
and they shall be the lowest of all people, [Deu
28:38-44](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#038). All these curses shall come
on them should they be disobedient, [Deu
28:45-48](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#045). Character of the people by
whom they should be subdued, [Deu
28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049), [Deu
28:50](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#050). Particulars of their dreadful
sufferings, [Deu 28:51-57](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#051). A
recapitulation of their wretchedness, [Deu
28:58-63](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#058). The prediction that they
shall be scattered among all the nations of the earth, [Deu
28:64-68](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#064).

[Deuteronomy 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 28:2</span></span>

All these blessings shall come on thee - God shall pour out his blessing
from heaven upon thee. And overtake thee. Upright men are represented as
going to the kingdom of God, and God's blessings as following and
overtaking them in their heavenly journey. There are several things in
this verse worthy of the most careful observation: - 1. If thou shalt
hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God. The voice of God must be
heard; without a Divine revelation how can the Divine will be known? And
if not known, it cannot be fulfilled. 2. When God speaks, men must
hearken to the words of his mouth. He who does not hearken will not
obey. 3. He who hearkens to the words of God must set out for the
kingdom of heaven. The curse must fall on him who stands in the way of
sinners, and will overtake them who loiter in the way of righteousness.
4. Those who run in the way of God's testimonies shall have an abundance
of blessing. Blessings shall come upon them, and blessings shall
overtake them - in every part of their march through life they shall
continue to receive the fulfillment of the various promises of God which
relate to all circumstances, vicissitudes, trials, stages of life, etc.,
etc., each overtaking them in the time and place where most needed.

[Deuteronomy 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 28:3</span></span>

In the city - In all civil employments. In the field - in all
agricultural pursuits.

[Deuteronomy 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 28:4</span></span>

Fruit of thy body - All thy children. Increase of thy kine, etc.; every
animal employed in domestic and agricultural purposes shall be under the
especial protection of Divine Providence.

[Deuteronomy 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 28:5</span></span>

Thy basket - Thy olive gathering and vintage, as the basket was employed
to collect those fruits.

Store - משארת mishereth, kneading-trough, or remainder; all that is laid
up for future use, as well as what is prepared for present consumption.
Some think that by basket all their property abroad may be meant, and by
store all that they have at home, i. e., all that is in the fields, and
all that is in the houses. The following note of Mr. Harmer is
important: -

"Commentators seem to be at a great loss how to explain the basket and
the store mentioned [Deu 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#005), [Deu
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#017). Why Moses, who in the other
verses mentions things in general, should in this case be so minute as
to mention baskets, seems strange; and they that interpret either the
first or the second of these words of the repositories of their corn,
etc., forget that their barns or storehouses are spoken of presently
after this in [Deu 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#008). Might I be
permitted to give my opinion here, I should say that the basket, טנא
tene, in this place means their travelling baskets, and the other word
משארת mishereth, (their store), signifies their leathern bags, in both
which they were wont to carry things in travelling. The first of these
words occurs nowhere else in the Scriptures but in the account that is
given us of the conveyance in which they were to carry their
first-fruits to Jerusalem; the other nowhere but in the description of
the hurrying journey of Israel out of Egypt, where it means the utensils
in which they then carried their dough, which I have shown elsewhere in
these papers means a piece of leather drawn together by rings, and
forming a kind of bag. Agreeably to this, Hasselquist informs us that
the Eastern people use baskets in travelling; for, speaking of that
species of the palm tree which produces dates, and its great usefulness
to the people of those countries, he tells us that of the leaves of this
tree they make baskets, or rather a kind of short bags, which are used
in Turkey on journeys and in their houses; pages 261,262. Hampers and
panniers are English terms denoting travelling baskets, as tene seems to
be a Hebrew word of the same general import, though their forms might
very much differ, as it is certain that of the travelling baskets
mentioned by Hasselquist now does.

"In like manner as they now carry meal, figs, and raisins, in a goat's
skin in Barbary for a viaticum, they might do the same anciently, and
consequently might carry merchandise after the same manner, particularly
their honey, oil, and balm, mentioned [Eze
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017). They were the proper vessels
for such things. So Sir J. Chardin, who was so long in the East, and
observed their customs with so much care, supposed, in a manuscript note
on [Gen 43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011), that the balm and the
honey sent by Jacob into Egypt for a present were carried in a goat or
kid's skin, in which all sorts of things, both dry and liquid, are wont
to be carried in the East. "Understood after this manner, the passage
promises Israel success in their commerce, as the next verse (the 6th)
promises them personal safety in their going out and in their return. In
this view the passage appears with due distinctness, and a noble
extent." - Observations, vol. 2:, p. 181.

[Deuteronomy 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 28:6</span></span>

When thou comest in - From thy employment, thou shalt find that no evil
has happened to the family or dwelling in thy absence.

When thou goest out - Thy way shall be made prosperous before thee, and
thou shalt have the Divine blessing in all thy labors.

[Deuteronomy 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 28:7</span></span>

The Lord shall cause thine enemies, etc. - This is a promise of security
from foreign invasion, or total discomfiture of the invaders, should
they enter the land. They shall come against thee one way - in the
firmest and most united manner. And flee seven ways - shall be utterly
broken, confounded, and finally routed.

[Deuteronomy 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 28:8</span></span>

The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee - Every thing that thou
hast shall come by Divine appointment; thou shalt have nothing casually,
but every thing, both spiritual and temporal, shall come by the
immediate command of God.

[Deuteronomy 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 28:9</span></span>

The Lord shall establish thee a holy people unto himself - This is the
sum of all blessings, to be made holy, and be preserved in holiness.

If thou shalt keep, etc. - Here is the solemn condition; if they did not
keep God's testimonies, taking them for the regulators of their lives,
and according to their direction walking in his ways, under the
influence and aids of his grace, then the curses, and not the blessings,
must be their portion. See [Deu 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015),
etc.

[Deuteronomy 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 28:12</span></span>

The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure - The clouds, so that a
sufficiency of fructifying showers should descend at all requisite
times, and the vegetative principle in the earth should unfold and exert
itself, so that their crops should be abundant.

[Deuteronomy 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 28:14</span></span>

Thou shalt not go aside - to the right hand or to the left - The way of
obedience is a straight way; it goes right forward; he who declines
either to right or left from this path goes astray and misses heaven.

[Deuteronomy 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 28:20</span></span>

Cursing - This shall be thy state; vexation - grief, trouble, and
anguish of heart; rebuke - continual judgments, and marks of God's
displeasure.

[Deuteronomy 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 28:21</span></span>

The pestilence cleave unto thee - ידבק יהוה בך אה הדבר yadbek Yehovah
becha eth haddaber, the Lord shall cement the pestilence or plague to
thee. Sept., Προσκολλησει Κυριος εις σε τον θανατον, The Lord will glue
- inseparably attach, the death unto thee. How dreadful a plague it must
be that ravages without intermission, any person may conceive who has
ever heard the name.

[Deuteronomy 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 28:22</span></span>

Consumption - שחפת shachepheth, atrophy through lack of food; from שחף
shacaph, to be in want.

Fever - קדחת kaddachath, from קדח kadach, to be kindled, burn, sparkle;
a burning inflammatory fever.

Inflammation - דלקת dalleketh, from דלק dalak, to pursue eagerly, to
burn after; probably a rapidly consuming cancer.

Extreme burning - חרחר charchur, burning upon burning, scald upon scald;
from חר char, to be heated, enraged, etc. This probably refers, not only
to excruciating inflammations on the body, but also to the irritation
and agony of a mind utterly abandoned by God, and lost to hope. What an
accumulation of misery! how formidable! and especially in a land where
great heat was prevalent and dreadful.

Sword - War in general, enemies without, and civil broils within. This
was remarkably the case in the last siege of Jerusalem.

Blasting - שדפון shiddaphon, probably either the blighting east wind
that ruined vegetation, or those awful pestilential winds which
suffocate both man and beast wherever they come. These often prevail in
different parts of the East, and several examples have already been
given. See [Gen 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#006) (note).

Mildew - ירקון yerakon, an exudation of the vegetative juice from
different parts of the stalk, by which the maturity and perfection of
the plant are utterly prevented. It comes from ירק yarak, to throw out
moisture.

Of these seven plagues, the five former were to fall on their bodies,
the two latter upon their substance. What a fearful thing it is to fall
into the hands of the living God!

[Deuteronomy 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 28:23</span></span>

Thy heaven - shall be brass, and the earth - iron - The atmosphere
should not be replenished with aqueous vapours, in consequence of which
they should have neither the early nor the latter rain; hence the earth
- the ground, must be wholly intractable, and, through its hardness,
incapable of cultivation. God shows them by this that he is Lord of
nature; and that drought and sterility are not casualties, but proceed
from the immediate appointment of the Lord.

[Deuteronomy 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 28:24</span></span>

The rain of thy land powder and dust - As their heavens - atmosphere,
clouds, etc., were to be as brass - yielding no rain; so the surface of
the earth must be reduced to powder; and this, being frequently taken up
by the strong winds, would fall down in showers instead of rain. Whole
caravans have been buried under showers of sand; and Thevenot, a French
traveler, who had observed these showers of dust, etc., says, "They
grievously annoy all they fall on, filling their eyes, ears, nostrils,
etc." - Travels in the East, part 1, book ii., chap. 80. The ophthalmia
in Egypt appears to be chiefly owing to a very fine sand, the particles
of which are like broken glass, which are carried about by the wind,
and, entering into the ciliary glands, produce grievous and continual
inflammations.

[Deuteronomy 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">deu 28:27</span></span>

The Lord will smite thee with the botch - שחין shechin, a violent
inflammatory swelling. In Job ii., one of the Hexapla versions renders
it ελεφας, the elephantiasis, a disease the most horrid that can
possibly afflict human nature. In this disorder, the whole body is
covered with a most loathsome scurf; the joints are all preternaturally
enlarged, and the skin swells up and grows into folds like that of an
elephant, whence the disease has its name. The skin, through its
rigidity, breaks across at all the joints, and a most abominable ichor
flows from all the chinks, etc. See an account of it in Aretaeus, whose
language is sufficient to chill the blood of a maniac, could he attend
to the description given by this great master, of this most loathsome
and abominable of all the natural productions of death and sin. This was
called the botch of Egypt, as being peculiar to that country, and
particularly in the vicinity of the Nile. Hence those words of
Lucretius: -

Est Elephas morbus, qui circum flumina Nili

Nascitur, Aegypto in media; nec praeterea usquam.

Lib. vi., ver. 1112.

Emerods - עפלים ophalim, from עפל aphal, to be elevated, raised up;
swellings, protuberances; probably the bleeding piles.

Scab - brg garab does not occur as a verb in the Hebrew Bible, but
gharb, in Arabic, signifies a distemper in the corner of the eye,
(Castel)., and may amount to the Egyptian ophthalmia, which is so
epidemic and distressing in that country: some suppose the scurvy to be
intended.

Itch - חרס cheres, a burning itch, probably something of the
erysipelatous kind, or what is commonly called St. Anthony's fire.

Whereof thou canst not be healed - For as they were inflicted by God's
justice, they could not of course be cured by human art.

[Deuteronomy 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 28:28</span></span>

The Lord shall smite thee with madness - שגעון shiggaon, distraction, so
that thou shalt not know what to do.

And blindness - עורון ivvaron, blindness, both physical and mental; the
גרב garab, ([Deu 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027)), destroying
their eyes, and the judgments of God confounding their understandings.

Astonishment - תמהון timmahon, stupidity and amazement. By the just
judgments of God they were so completely confounded, as not to discern
the means by which they might prevent or remove their calamities, and to
adopt those which led directly to their ruin. How true is the ancient
saying, Quos Deus vult perdere, prius dementat! "Those whom God is
determined to destroy, he first infatuates." But this applies not
exclusively to the poor Jews: how miserably infatuated have the powers
of the continent of Europe been, in all their councils and measures, for
several years past! And what is the result? They have fallen - most
deplorably fallen!

[Deuteronomy 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 28:29</span></span>

Thou shalt be only oppressed, etc. - Perhaps no people under the sun
have been more oppressed and spoiled than the rebellious Jews. Indeed,
this has been their portion, with but little intermission, for nearly
1,800 years. And still they grope at noon day, as the blind gropeth in
darkness - they do not yet discover, notwithstanding the effulgence of
the light by which they are encompassed, that the rejection of their own
Messiah is the cause of all their calamities.

[Deuteronomy 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 28:30</span></span>

Thou shalt betroth a wife, etc. - Can any heart imagine any thing more
grievous than the evils threatened in this and the following verses? To
be on the brink of all social and domestic happiness, and then to be
suddenly deprived of all, and see an enemy possess and enjoy every thing
that was dear to them, must excite them to the utmost pitch of
distraction and madness. They have, it is true, grievously sinned; but,
O ye Christians, have they not grievously suffered for it? Is not the
stroke of God heavy enough upon them? Do not then, by unkind treatment
or cruel Oppression, increase their miseries. They are, above all
others, the men who have seen affliction by the stroke of his rod; [Lam
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001).

[Deuteronomy 28:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">deu 28:32</span></span>

Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given unto another people - In
several countries, particularly in Spain and Portugal, the children of
the Jews have been taken from them by order of government, and educated
in the Popish faith. There have been some instances of Jewish children
being taken from their parents even in Protestant countries.

[Deuteronomy 28:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">deu 28:35</span></span>

With a sore botch - שחין shechin, an inflammatory swelling, a burning
boil. See [Deu 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027).

[Deuteronomy 28:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">deu 28:36</span></span>

Can any thing be conceived more dreadful than the calamities threatened
in these verses?

[Deuteronomy 28:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">deu 28:48</span></span>

Therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies - Because they would not serve
God, therefore they became slaves to men.

[Deuteronomy 28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">deu 28:49</span></span>

A nation - from far - Probably the Romans.

As the eagle flieth - The very animal on all the Roman standards. The
Roman eagle is proverbial.

Whose tongue thou shalt not understand - The Latin language, than which
none was more foreign to the structure and idiom of the Hebrew.

[Deuteronomy 28:52](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">deu 28:52</span></span>

He - Nebuchadnezzar first, ([Kg2 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001),
[Kg2 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#002), etc)., and Titus next;
shall besiege thee - beset thee round on every side, and cast a trench
around thee: viz., lines of circumvallation, as our Lord predicted; (see
[Mat 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001), etc., and [Luk
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#005), etc.); in all thy gates
throughout all thy land - all thy fenced cities, which points out that
their subjugation should be complete, as both Jerusalem and all their
fortified places should be taken. This was done literally by
Nebuchadnezzar and the Romans.

[Deuteronomy 28:56](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">deu 28:56</span></span>

The tender and delicate woman - This was literally fulfilled when
Jerusalem was besieged by the Romans; a woman named Mary, of a noble
family, driven to distraction by famine, boiled and ate her own child!
See a similar case [Kg2 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#029) (note);
and [Lev 26:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#029) (note).

[Deuteronomy 28:57](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">deu 28:57</span></span>

Toward her young one - and toward her children which she shall bear -
There seems to be a species of tautology in the two clauses of this
verse, which may be prevented by translating the last word, שליתה
shilyathah, literally, her secondines, which is the meaning of the
Arabic sala, not badly understood by the Septuagint, χοριον αυτης, the
chorion or exterior membrane, which invests the fetus in the womb; and
still better translated by Luther, the after-birth; which saying of
Moses strongly marks the deepest distress, when the mother is
represented as feeling the most poignant regret that her child was
brought forth into such a state of suffering and death; and 2dly, that
it was likely, from the favorable circumstances after the birth, that
she herself should survive her inlaying. No words can more forcibly
depict the miseries of those dreadful times. On this ground I see no
absolute need for Kennicott's criticism, who, instead of ובשליתה
ubeshilyathah, against her secondines, reads ובשלה ubashelah, and she
shall boll, and translates the 56th and 57th verses as follows: "The
tender and delicate woman among you, who would not adventure to set the
sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her
eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son,
and toward her daughter. 57. And she shall boil that which cometh out
from between her feet, even her children, which she shall bear, for she
shall eat them, for want of all things, secretly." These words, says he,
being prophetical, are fulfilled in [Kg2
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#029), for we read there that two women
of Samaria having agreed to eat their own children, one was actually
boiled, where the very same word, בשל bashal is used. See Kennicott's
Dissertations on 1 Chronicles 11, etc., p. 421.

[Deuteronomy 28:64](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">deu 28:64</span></span>

The Lord shall scatter thee among all people - How literally has this
been fulfilled! The people of the Jews are scattered over every nation
under heaven.

[Deuteronomy 28:65](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">deu 28:65</span></span>

No ease - a trembling heart, and failing of eyes - The trembling of
heart may refer to their state of continual insecurity, being, under
every kind of government, proscribed, and, even under the most mild,
uncertain of toleration and protection; and the failing of eyes, to
their vain and ever-disappointed expectation of the Messiah.

[Deuteronomy 28:68](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#068)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_068">deu 28:68</span></span>

And the Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again - That is, into another
state of slavery and bondage similar to that of Egypt, out of which they
had been lately brought. And there ye shall be sold, that is, be exposed
to sale, or expose yourself to sale as the word התמכרתם hithmaccartem
may be rendered; they were vagrants, and wished to become slaves that
they might be provided with the necessaries of life. And no man shall
buy you; even the Romans thought it a reproach to have a Jew for a
slave, they had become so despicable to all mankind. When Jerusalem was
taken by Titus, many of the captives, which were above seventeen years
of age, were sent into the works in Egypt. See Josephus, Antiq., b. xii,
100:1, 2, War b. vi., c. 9, s. 2; and above all, see Bp. Newton's
Dissertations on the Prophecies.

The first verse of the next chapter, in some of the most correct Hebrew
Bibles, makes the 69th of this; and very properly, as the second verse
of the following chapter begins a new subject.

This is an astonishing chapter: in it are prophecies delivered more than
3,000 years ago, and now fulfilling.

O God, how immense is thy wisdom, and how profound thy counsels! To thee
alone are known all thy works from the beginning to the end. What an
irrefragable proof does this chapter, compared with the past and present
state of the Jewish people, afford of the truth and Divine origin of the
Pentateuch!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 29](deu029)

</div>
