<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc006)  [Next](ecc008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 7:0</span></span>

The value of a good name, [Ecc 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#001).
Advantages of sorrow and correction, [Ecc
7:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#002). The emptiness of a fool's joy,
[Ecc 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#006). Of oppression, [Ecc
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#007). The end better than the
beginning, [Ecc 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#008). Against hastiness
of spirit, [Ecc 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#009). Comparison of
former and present times, [Ecc 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#010).
Excellence of wisdom, [Ecc 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#011), [Ecc
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#012). Of the dispensations of
Providence, [Ecc 7:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#013). Against
extremes, [Ecc 7:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#016). The strength
of wisdom, [Ecc 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#019). Man is ever
liable to sin and mistake, [Ecc 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#020).
We should guard our words, [Ecc 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#021),
[Ecc 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#022). Difficulty of obtaining
wisdom, [Ecc 7:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#023), A bad woman
dangerous, [Ecc 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#026). There are few
who are really upright, [Ecc 7:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#027).

[Ecclesiastes 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 7:1</span></span>

A good name - Unsatisfactory as all sublunary things are, yet still
there are some which are of great consequence, and among them a good
name. The place is well paraphrased in the following verses:

"A spotless name,

By virtuous deeds acquired, is sweeter far

Than fragant balms, whose odors round diffused

Regale the invited guests. Well may such men

Rejoice at death's approach, and bless the hours

That end their toilsome pilgrimage; assured

That till the race of life is finish'd none

Can be completely blest."

[Ecclesiastes 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 7:2</span></span>

It is better to go to the house of mourning - Birthdays were generally
kept with great festivity, and to these the wise man most probably
refers; but according to his maxim, the miseries of life were so many
and so oppressive that the day of a man's death was to be preferred to
the day of his birth. But, in dependently of the allusion, it is much
more profitable to visit the house of mourning for the dead than the
house of festivity. In the former we find occasion for serious and
deeply edifying thoughts and reflections; from the latter we seldom
return with one profitable thought or one solid impression.

[Ecclesiastes 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 7:3</span></span>

Sorrow is better than laughter - The reason is immediately given; for by
the sorrow of the countenance - the grief of heart that shows itself in
the countenance: -

The heart is made better - In such cases, most men try themselves at the
tribunal of their own consciences, and resolve on amendment of life.

[Ecclesiastes 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 7:4</span></span>

The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning - A wise man loves
those occasions from which he can derive spiritual advantage; and
therefore prefers visiting the sick, and sympathizing with those who
have suffered privations by death. But the fool - the gay, thoughtless,
and giddy - prefers places and times of diversion and amusement. Here he
is prevented from seriously considering either himself or his latter
end. The grand fault and misfortune of youth.

[Ecclesiastes 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 7:6</span></span>

For as the crackling of thorns - They make a great noise, a great blaze;
and are extinguished in a few moments. Such indeed, comparatively, are
the joys of life; they are noisy, flashy, and transitory.

[Ecclesiastes 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 7:7</span></span>

Oppression maketh a wise man mad - This has been translated with good
show of reason, "Surely oppression shall give lustre to a wise man: but
a gift corrupteth the heart."

The chief difference here is in the word יהולל yeholel, which, from the
root הלל halal, signiffes to glister, irradiate, as well as to move
briskly, to be mad, furious, in a rage; and certainly the former meaning
suits this place best. We cannot think that the wise man - he that is
truly religious, (for this is its meaning in the language of Solomon),
can be made mad by any kind of oppression; but as he trusts in God, so
in patience he possesses his soul.

[Ecclesiastes 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 7:8</span></span>

Better is the end - We can then judge of the whole, and especially if
the matter relate to the conduct of Divine Providence. At the beginning
we are often apt to make very rash conjectures, and often suppose that
such and such things are against us; and that every thing is going
wrong. Dr. Byrom gives good advice on such a subject: -

"With patient mind thy course of duty run:

God nothing does, nor suffers to be done,

But thou wouldst do thyself, couldst thou but see

The and of all events, as well as He."

I may add, in the words of our paraphrast: -

"Wait the result, nor ask with frantic rage

Why God permits such things. His ways, though now

Involved in clouds and darkness, will appear

All right, when from thine eyes the mist is cleared.

Till then, to learn submission to his will

More wisdom shows, than vainly thus to attempt

Exploring what thou canst not comprehend,

And God for wisest ends thinks fit to hide."

C.

[Ecclesiastes 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 7:9</span></span>

Anger resteth in the bosom of fools - A wise man, off his guard, may
feel it for a moment: but in him it cannot rest: it is a fire which he
immediately casts out of his breast. But the fool - the man who is under
the dominion of his own tempers, harbors and fosters it, till it takes
the form of malice, and then excites him to seek full revenge on those
whom he deems enemies. Hence that class of dangerous and empty fools
called duellists.

[Ecclesiastes 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 7:10</span></span>

The former days were better than these? - This is a common saying; and
it is as foolish as it is common. There is no weight nor truth in it;
but men use it to excuse their crimes, and the folly of their conduct.
"In former times, say they, men might be more religious, use more
self-denial, be more exemplary." This is all false. In former days men
were wicked as they are now, and religion was unfashionable: God also is
the same now as he was then; as just, as merciful, as ready to help: and
there is no depravity in the age that will excuse your crimes, your
follies, and your carelessness.

Among the oriental proverbs I find the following:

"Many say, This is a corrupt age. This mode of speaking is not just, it
is not the age that is corrupt, but the men of the age."

[Ecclesiastes 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 7:11</span></span>

Wisdom is good with an inheritance - In this chapter Solomon introduces
many observations which appear to be made by objectors against his
doctrine; and as he was satisfied of their futility, he proposes them in
their own full strength, and then combats and destroys them. It is quite
necessary to attend to this; else we shall take the objector's words for
those of Solomon; and think, as some have done, that the wise man
contradicts and refutes himself. Observations, reflections, and
objections of friends and adversaries are frequently introduced in the
works of ancient authors, without mentioning them as such. This is
frequent, more particularly in ethic writers; and we have many specimens
in Horace, and without this distinction, it would be impossible to make
sense of some of his writings. Here, an objector who had listened to the
wise man declaiming in favor of wisdom, suddenly interrupts him, and
says in effect, "I grant the truth of what you have said. Wisdom is very
good in its place; but what is it without property? A man who has a good
inheritance may be profited by wisdom, because it will show him how to
manage it to the best advantage."

[Ecclesiastes 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 7:12</span></span>

Wisdom is a defense - To whom Solomon answers: All true wisdom is most
undoubtedly a great advantage to men in all circumstances; and money is
also of great use: but it cannot be compared to wisdom. Knowledge of
Divine and human things is a great blessing. Money is the means of
supporting our animal life: but wisdom - the religion of the true God -
gives life to them that have it. Money cannot procure the favor of God,
nor give life to the soul.

[Ecclesiastes 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ecc 7:13</span></span>

Consider the work of God - Such is the nature of his providence, that it
puts money into the hands of few: but wisdom is within the reach of all.
The first is not necessary to happiness; therefore, it is not offered to
men; the latter is; and therefore God, in his goodness, offers it to the
whole human race. The former can rarely be acquired, for God puts it out
of the reach of most men, and you cannot make that straight which he has
made crooked; the latter may be easily attained by every person who
carefully and seriously seeks it from God.

[Ecclesiastes 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 7:14</span></span>

In the day of prosperity be joyful - When ye receive these temporal
gifts from God, enjoy them, and be thankful to the Giver: but remember,
this sunshine will not always last. God has balanced prosperity and
adversity against each other; and were it not so, how many would put the
former in the place of God himself!

[Ecclesiastes 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ecc 7:15</span></span>

There is a just man that perisheth - This is another objection as if he
had said, "I also have had considerable experience; and I have not
discovered any marked approbation of the conduct of the righteous, or
disapprobation of that of the wicked. On the contrary, I have seen a
righteous man perish, while employed in the work of righteousness; and a
wicked man prosperous, and even exalted, while living wickedly. The
former is indeed a victim to his righteousness, while the life and
prosperity of the latter were preserved: hence I conclude, it is not
prudent, whatever good there may be in religion, and whatever excellence
in wisdom, that men should be overmuch righteous, or over-wise: for why
should they by austerity and hard study destroy themselves?" So far the
objector.

[Ecclesiastes 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ecc 7:16</span></span>

Why shouldest thou destroy thyself? - תשומם tishshomem, make thyself
desolate, so that thou shalt be obliged to stand alone; neither make
thyself over-wise, תתחכם tithchaccam, do not pretend to abundance of
wisdom. Why shouldest thou be so singular? In other words, and in modern
language, "There is no need of all this watching, fasting, praying,
self-denial, etc., you carry things to extremes. Why should you wish to
be reputed singular and precise?" To this the man of God answers:

[Ecclesiastes 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ecc 7:17</span></span>

Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish: why shouldest thou die
before thy time? - אל תרשע הרבה al tirsha harbeh. Do not multiply
wickedness, do not add direct opposition to godliness to the rest of
your crimes. Why should you provoke God to destroy you before your time?
Perdition will come soon enough. If you will not turn from your sins,
and avoid it finally, yet keep out of it as long as you can.

It cannot be supposed, except by those who are totally unacquainted with
the nature of true religion, that a man may have too much holiness, too
much of the life of God in his soul! And yet a learned doctor, in three
sermons on this text, has endeavored to show, out-doing Solomon's
infidel, "the sin, folly, and danger of being righteous overmuch." O
rare darkness!

[Ecclesiastes 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ecc 7:18</span></span>

It is good that thou shouldest take hold or this - Do not let such an
observation slip: take hold of this; do not forget that. Get what you
can in an honest way; but do not forget to get true religion; for he
that fears God will be saved from all evil.

[Ecclesiastes 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ecc 7:19</span></span>

Wisdom strengtheneth the wise - One wise, thoroughly learned, and
scientific man, may be of more use in fortifying and defending a city,
than ten princes. Witness the case of Syracuse, when attacked by the
Romans both by sea and land. Archimedes, by his engines, burnt and
dashed their fleet to pieces, and destroyed all that came near the
walls. And had not the city been betrayed and he killed, all their force
and skill could not have taken it.

[Ecclesiastes 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ecc 7:20</span></span>

There is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not -
לא יחטא lo yechta, that may not sin. There is not a man upon earth,
however just he may be, and habituated to do good, but is peccable -
liable to commit sin; and therefore should continually watch and pray,
and depend upon the Lord. But the text does not say, the just man does
commit sin, but simply that he may sin; and so our translators have
rendered it in [Sa1 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#025), twice in
[Kg1 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#031), [Kg1
8:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#046), and [Ch2
6:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#036); and the reader is requested to
consult the note on [Kg1 8:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#046), where
the proper construction of this word may be found, and the doctrine in
question is fully considered.

[Ecclesiastes 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ecc 7:21</span></span>

Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken - This is good advice,
and much for every man's peace through life.

Thy servant curse thee - מקללך mekallelecha, make light of thee, speak
evil of thee.

[Ecclesiastes 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ecc 7:22</span></span>

Thou thyself - hast cursed others - קללת kalalta, thou hast spoken evil;
hast vilified others. O, who is free from evil speaking, from
uncharitable speaking; from detailing their neighbor's faults, from
whispering, talebearing, and backbiting? Do not wonder if God, in his
justice, permit thee to be calumniated, seeing thou hast so frequently
calumniated others. See my discourse on [Psa
15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001) (note).

[Ecclesiastes 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ecc 7:23</span></span>

All this have I proved by wisdom - These rules I have laid down for my
own conduct, and sought after more wisdom; but have fallen far short of
what I wished to be.

[Ecclesiastes 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ecc 7:24</span></span>

That which is far off - Though the wisdom that is essential to our
salvation may be soon learned, through the teaching of the Spirit of
wisdom, yet in wisdom itself there are extents and depths which none can
reach or fathom.

[Ecclesiastes 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ecc 7:25</span></span>

I applied mine heart - I cast about, סבותי sabbothi, I made a circuit; I
circumscribed the ground I was to traverse; and all within my circle I
was determined to know, and to investigate, and to seek out wisdom, and
the reason of things. Has man reason and understanding? If so, then this
is his work. God as much calls him to use these powers in this way, as
to believe on the Lord Jesus that he may be saved; and he that does not,
according to the means in his power, is a slothful servant, from whom
God may justly take away the misemployed or not used talent, and punish
him for his neglect. Every doctrine of God is a subject both for reason
and faith to work on.

To know the wickedness of folly, even of foolishness and madness -

"And my own heart, with scrutiny severe,

By far the harder task survey'd; intent

To trace that wisdom which from heaven descends,

Fountain of living waters, and to explore

The source of human folly, whose foul streams

Intoxicate and kill."

\- C.

[Ecclesiastes 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ecc 7:26</span></span>

And I find more bitter than death the woman - After all his
investigation of the wickedness of folly, and the foolishness of
madness, he found nothing equally dangerous and ruinous with the
blandishments of cunning women. When once the affections are entangled,
escape without ruin is almost impossible.

Whoso pleaseth God - The man who walks with God, and he alone, shall
escape this sore evil: and even he that fears God, if he get with an
artful woman, may be soon robbed of his strength, and become like other
men. A bad or artful woman is represented as a company of hunters, with
nets, gins, etc., to catch their prey.

[Ecclesiastes 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">ecc 7:27</span></span>

Counting one by one - I have gone over every particular. I have compared
one thing with another; man with woman, his wisdom with her wiles; his
strength with her blandishments; his influence with her ascendancy; his
powers of reason with her arts and cunning; and in a thousand men, I
have found one thoroughly upright man; but among one thousand women I
have not found one such. This is a lamentable account of the state of
morals in Judea, in the days of the wise King Solomon. Thank God! it
would not be difficult to get a tithe of both in the same number in the
present day.

The Targum gives this a curious turn: "There is another thing which my
soul has sought, but could not find: a man perfect and innocent, and
without corruption, from the days of Adam until Abraham the just was
born; who was found faithful and upright among the thousand kings who
came together to construct the tower of Babel: but a woman like to Sarah
among the wives of all those kings I have not found."

[Ecclesiastes 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">ecc 7:29</span></span>

Lo, this only have I found, that God hath made man upright - Whatever
evil may be now found among men and women, it is not of God; for God
made them all upright. This is a singular verse, and has been most
variously translated:

עשה האלהים את האדם ישר והמה בקשו חשבנות רבים asah haelohim eth haadam
yashar vehemhah bikkeshu chishbonoth rabbim.

"Elohim has made mankind upright, and they have sought many
computations."

"He hath meddled with endless questions." - Vulgate.

"Many reasonings." - Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic.

"They seek dyverse sotylties." Coverdale.

And he himself mengide with questions without eend. - Old MS. Bible.

The Targum considers the text as speaking of Adam and Eve.

"This have I found out, that the Lord made the first man upright before
him, and innocent: but the serpent and Eve seduced him to eat of the
fruit of the tree, which gave the power to those who ate of it to
discern between good and evil; and was the cause that death came upon
him, and all the inhabitants of the earth; and they sought that they
might find out many stratagems to bring this evil upon all the
inhabitants of the world."

I doubt much whether the word חשבנות chishbonoth should be taken in a
bad sense. It may signify the whole of human devices, imaginations,
inventions, artifice, with all their products; arts, sciences, schemes,
plans, and all that they have found out for the destruction or
melioration of life. God has given man wondrous faculties; and of them
he has made strange uses, and sovereign abuses: and they have been, in
consequence, at one time his help, and at another his bane. This is the
fair way of understanding this question.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 8](ecc008)

</div>
