<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](eph003)  [Next](eph005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 4:0</span></span>

The apostle exhorts them to walk worthy of their vocation, and to live
in peace and unity, [Eph 4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001). Shows
that God has distributed a variety of gifts, and instituted a variety of
offices in his Church, for the building up and perfecting of the body of
Christ, [Eph 4:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007). Teaches them the
necessity of being well instructed and steady in Divine things, [Eph
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014). Teaches how the body or Church
of Christ is constituted, [Eph 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015),
[Eph 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016). Warns them against acting
like the Gentiles, of whose conduct he gives a lamentable description,
[Eph 4:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017). Points out how they had
been changed, in consequence of their conversion to Christianity, [Eph
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020), [Eph
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021). Gives various exhortations
relative to the purification of their minds, their conduct to each
other, and to the poor, [Eph 4:22-28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022).
Shows them that their conversation should be chaste and holy, that they
might not grieve the Spirit of God; that they should avoid all bad
tempers, be kindly affectioned one to another, and be of a forgiving
spirit, [Eph 4:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#029).

[Ephesians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 4:1</span></span>

I therefore - Therefore, because God has provided for you such an
abundant salvation, and ye have his testimonies among you, and have full
liberty to use all the means of grace;

The prisoner of the Lord - Who am deprived of my liberty for the Lord's
sake.

Beseech you that ye walk - Ye have your liberty, and may walk; I am
deprived of mine, and cannot. This is a fine stroke, and wrought up into
a strong argument. You who are at large can show forth the virtues of
him who called you into his marvellous light; I am in bondage, and can
only exhort others by my writing, and show my submission to God by my
patient suffering.

The vocation wherewith ye are called - The calling, κλησις, is the free
invitation they have had from God to receive the privileges of the
Gospel, and become his sons and daughters, without being obliged to
observe Jewish rites and ceremonies. Their vocation, or calling, took in
their Christian profession, with all the doctrines, precepts,
privileges, duties, etc., of the Christian religion.

Among us, a man's calling signifies his trade, or occupation in life;
that at which he works, and by which he gets his bread; and it is termed
his calling, because it is supposed that God, in the course of his
providence, calls the person to be thus employed, and thus to acquire
his livelihood. Now, as it is a very poor calling by which a man cannot
live, so it is a poor religion by which a man cannot get his soul saved.
If, however, a man have an honest and useful trade, and employ himself
diligently in labouring at it, he will surely be able to maintain
himself by it; but without care, attention, and industry, he is not
likely to get, even by this providential calling, the necessaries of
life. In like manner, if a man do not walk worthy of his heavenly
calling, i.e. suitable to its prescriptions, spirit, and design, he is
not likely to get his soul saved unto eternal life. The best trade,
unpractised, will not support any man; the most pure and holy religion
of the Lord Jesus, unapplied, will save no soul. Many suppose, because
they have a sound faith, that all is safe and well: as well might the
mechanic, who knows he has a good trade, and that he understands the
principles of it well, suppose it will maintain him, though he brings
none of its principles into action by honest, assiduous, and
well-directed labor.

Some suppose that the calling refers to the epithets usually given to
the Christians; such as children of Abraham, children of God, true
Israel of God, heirs of God, saints, fellow citizens with the saints,
etc., etc.; and that these honorable appellations must be a strong
excitement to the Ephesians to walk worthy of these exalted characters
But I do not find that the word κλησις, calling, is taken in this sense
any where in the New Testament; but that it has the meaning which I have
given it above is evident from [Co1
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#020) : Εκαστος εν τη κλησει ᾑ εκληθη,
εν ταυτῃ μενετω· Let every man abide in the calling to which he hath
been called. The context shows that condition, employment, or business
of life, is that to which the apostle refers.

[Ephesians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eph 4:2</span></span>

With all lowliness - It is by acting as the apostle here directs that a
man walks worthy of this high vocation; ταπεινοφροσυνη signifies
subjection or humility of mind.

Meekness - The opposite to anger and irritability of disposition.

Long-suffering - Μακροθυμια· Long-mindedness - never permitting a trial
or provocation to get to the end of your patience.

Forbearing one another - Ανεχομενοι αλληλων· Sustaining one another -
helping to support each other in all the miseries and trials of life:
or, if the word be taken in the sense of bearing with each other, it may
mean that, through the love of God working in our hearts, we should bear
with each other's infirmities, ignorance, etc., knowing how much others
have been or are still obliged to bear with us.

[Ephesians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eph 4:3</span></span>

Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace -
There can be no doubt that the Church at Ephesus was composed partly of
converted Jews, as well as Gentiles. Now, from the different manner in
which they had been brought up, there might be frequent causes of
altercation. Indeed, the Jews, though converted, might be envious that
the Gentiles were admitted to the same glorious privileges with
themselves, without being initiated into them by bearing the yoke and
burden of the Mosaic law. The apostle guards them against this, and
shows them that they should intensely labor (for so the word σπουδαζειν
implies) to promote and preserve peace and unity. By the unity of the
Spirit we are to understand, not only a spiritual unity, but also a
unity of sentiments, desires, and affections, such as is worthy of and
springs from the Spirit of God. By the bond of peace we are to
understand a peace or union, where the interests of all parties are
concentrated, cemented, and sealed; the Spirit of God being the seal
upon this knot.

[Ephesians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eph 4:4</span></span>

There is one body - Viz. of Christ, which is his Church.

One Spirit - The Holy Ghost, who animates this body.

One hope - Of everlasting glory, to which glory ye have been called by
the preaching of the Gospel; through which ye have become the body of
Christ, instinct with the energy of the Holy Ghost.

[Ephesians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eph 4:5</span></span>

One Lord - Jesus Christ, who is the governor of this Church.

One faith - One system of religion, proposing the same objects to the
faith of all.

One baptism - Administered in the name of the holy Trinity; indicative
of the influences, privileges, and effects of the Christian religion.

[Ephesians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eph 4:6</span></span>

One God - The fountain of all being, self-existent and eternal; and
Father of all, both Jews and Gentiles, because he is the Father of the
spirits of all flesh.

Who is above all - Ὁ επι παντων· Who is over all; as the King of kings,
and Lord of lords.

And through all - Pervading every thing; being present with every thing;
providing for all creatures; and by his energy supporting all things.

And in you all - By the energy of his Spirit, enlightening, quickening,
purifying, and comforting; in a word, making your hearts the temples of
the Holy Ghost. Some think the mystery of the blessed Trinity is
contained in this verse: God is over all, as Father; through all, by the
Logos or Word; and in all, by the Holy Spirit.

[Ephesians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eph 4:7</span></span>

Unto every one of us is given grace - Grace may here signify a
particular office; as if the apostle had said: Though we are all equal
in the respects already mentioned, yet we have all different offices and
situations to fill up in the Church and in the world; and we receive a
free gift from Christ, according to the nature of the office, that we
may be able to discharge it according to his own mind. So the free gift,
which we receive from Christ, is according to the office or function
which he has given us to fulfill; and the office is according to that
free gift, each suited to the other.

[Ephesians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 4:8</span></span>

Wherefore he saith - The reference seems to be to [Psa
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018), which, however it may speak of
the removal of the tabernacle, appears to have been intended to point
out the glorious ascension of Christ after his resurrection from the
dead. The expositions of various commentators have made the place
extremely difficult. I shall not trouble my reader with them; they may
be seen in Rosenmuller.

When he ascended up on high - The whole of this verse, as it stands in
the psalm, seems to refer to a military triumph. Take the following
paraphrase: Thou hast ascended on high: the conqueror was placed in a
very elevated chariot. Thou hast led captivity captive: the conquered
kings and generals were usually bound behind the chariot of the
conqueror, to grace the triumph. Thou host received gifts for (Paul,
given gifts unto) men: at such times the conqueror was wont to throw
money among the crowd. Even to the rebellious: those who had fought
against him now submit unto him, and share his munificence; for it is
the property of a hero to be generous. That the Lord God might dwell
among them: the conqueror being now come to fix his abode in the
conquered provinces, and subdue the people to his laws.

All this the apostle applies to the resurrection, ascension, and glory
of Christ; though it has been doubted by some learned men whether the
psalmist had this in view. I shall not dispute about this; it is enough
for me that the apostle, under the inspiration of God, applied the verse
in this way; and whatever David might intend, and of whatever event he
might have written, we see plainly that the sense in which the apostle
uses it was the sense of the Spirit of God; for the Spirit in the Old
and New Testaments is the same. I may venture a short criticism on a few
words in the original: Thou hast received gifts for men, לקחת מתנות באדם
lakachta mattanoth baadam, thou hast taken gifts in man, in Adam. The
gifts which Jesus Christ distributes to man he has received in man, in
and by virtue of his incarnation; and it is in consequence of his being
made man that it may be said, The Lord God dwells among them; for Jesus
was called Immanuel, God with us, in consequence of his incarnation.
This view of the subject is consistent with the whole economy of grace,
and suits well with the apostle's application of the words of the
psalmist in this place.

[Ephesians 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eph 4:9</span></span>

But that he also descended - The meaning of the apostle appears to be
this: The person who ascended is the Messiah, and his ascension plainly
intimates his descension; that is, his incarnation, humiliation, death,
and resurrection.

[Ephesians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eph 4:10</span></span>

He that descended - And he who descended so low is the same who has
ascended so high. He came to the lower parts of the earth - the very
deepest abasement; having emptied himself; taken upon him; the form of a
servant, and humbled himself unto death, even the death of the cross;
now he is ascended far above all heavens - higher than all height; he
has a name above every name. Here his descending into the lower parts of
the earth is put in opposition to his ascending far above all heavens.
His abasement was unparalleled; so also is his exaltation.

That he might fill all things - That he might be the fountain whence all
blessings might flow; dispensing all good things to all his creatures,
according to their several capacities and necessities; and,
particularly, fill both converted Jews and Gentiles with all the gifts
and graces of his Holy Spirit. Hence it follows:

[Ephesians 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 4:11</span></span>

He gave some, apostles - He established several offices in his Church;
furnished these with the proper officers; and, to qualify them for their
work, gave them the proper gifts. For a full illustration of this verse,
the reader is requested to refer to the notes on [Co1
12:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006) (note), [Co1
12:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028) (note); and to the concluding
observations at the end of that chapter.

[Ephesians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eph 4:12</span></span>

For the perfecting of the saints - For the complete instruction,
purification, and union of all who have believed in Christ Jesus, both
Jews and Gentiles. For the meaning of καταρτισμος, perfecting, see the
note on [Co2 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#009).

For the work of the ministry - All these various officers, and the gifts
and graces conferred upon them, were judged necessary, by the great Head
of the Church, for its full instruction in the important doctrines of
Christianity. The same officers and gifts are still necessary, and God
gives them; but they do not know their places. In most Christian
Churches there appears to be but one office, that of preacher; and one
gift, that by which he professes to preach. The apostles, prophets,
evangelists, pastors, and teachers, are all compounded in the class
preachers; and many, to whom God has given nothing but the gift of
exhortation, take texts to explain them; and thus lose their time, and
mar their ministry.

Edifying of the body - The body of Christ is his Church, see [Eph
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020), etc.; and its edification
consists in its thorough instruction in Divine things, and its being
filled with faith and holiness.

[Ephesians 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eph 4:13</span></span>

In the unity of the faith - Jews and Gentiles being all converted
according to the doctrines laid down in the faith - the Christian
system.

The knowledge of the Son of God - A trite understanding of the mystery
of the incarnation; why God was manifest in the flesh, and why this was
necessary in order to human salvation.

Unto a perfect man - Εις ανδρα τελειον· One thoroughly instructed; the
whole body of the Church being fully taught, justified, sanctified, and
sealed.

Measure of the stature - The full measure of knowledge, love, and
holiness, which the Gospel of Christ requires. Many preachers, and
multitudes of professing people, are studious to find out how many
imperfections and infidelities, and how much inward sinfulness, is
consistent with a safe state in religion but how few, very few, are
bringing out the fair Gospel standard to try the height of the members
of the Church; whether they be fit for the heavenly army; whether their
stature be such as qualifies them for the ranks of the Church militant!
The measure of the stature of the fullness is seldom seen; the measure
of the stature of littleness, dwarfishness, and emptiness, is often
exhibited.

[Ephesians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eph 4:14</span></span>

Be no more children - Children, here, are opposed to the perfect man in
the preceding verse; and the state of both is well explained by the
apostle's allusions. The man is grown up strong and healthy, and has
attained such a measure or height as qualifies him for the most
respectable place in the ranks of his country.

The child is ignorant, weak, and unsteady, tossed about in the nurse's
arms, or whirled round in the giddy sports or mazes of youth; this seems
to be the apostle's allusion. Being tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, refers to some kind of ancient play, but
what I cannot absolutely determine; probably to something similar to a
top, or to our paper kite.

By the sleight of men - The words εν τη κυβειᾳ refer to the arts used by
gamesters, who employ false dice that will always throw up one kind of
number, which is that by which those who play with them cannot win.

Cunning craftiness - It is difficult to give a literal translation of
the original words: εν πανουργιᾳ προς την μεθοδειαν της πλανης· "By
cunning, for the purpose of using the various means of deception."
Πανουργια signifies craft and subtlety in general, cheating and
imposition: μεθοδεια, from which we have our term method, signifies a
wile, a particular sleight, mode of tricking and deceiving; it is
applied to the arts which the devil uses to deceive and destroy souls;
see [Eph 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011), called there the Wiles
of the devil. From this it seems that various arts were used, both by
the Greek sophists and the Judaizing teachers, to render the Gospel of
none effect, or to adulterate and corrupt it.

[Ephesians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 4:15</span></span>

But, speaking the truth in love - The truth recommended by the apostle
is the whole system of Gospel doctrine; this they are to teach and
preach, and this is opposed to the deceit mentioned above. This truth,
as it is the doctrine of God's eternal love to mankind, must be preached
in love. Scolding and abuse from the pulpit or press, in matters of
religion, are truly monstrous. He who has the truth of God has no need
of any means to defend or propagate it, but those which love to God and
man provides.

Grow up into him - This is a continuance of the metaphor taken from the
members of a human body receiving nourishment equally and growing up,
each in its due proportion to other parts, and to the body in general.
The truth of God should be so preached to all the members of the Church
of God, that they may all receive an increase of grace and life; so that
each, in whatever state he may be, may get forward in the way of truth
and holiness. In the Church of Christ there are persons in various
states: the careless, the penitent, the lukewarm, the tempted, the
diffident, the little child, the young man, and the father. He who has
got a talent for the edification of only one of those classes should not
stay long in a place, else the whole body cannot grow up in all things
under his ministry.

[Ephesians 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eph 4:16</span></span>

From whom the whole body - Dr. Macknight has a just view of this
passage, and I cannot express my own in more suitable terms: "The
apostle's meaning is, that, as the human body is formed by the union of
all the members to each other, under the head, and by the fitness of
each member for its own office and place in the body, so the Church is
formed by the union of its members under Christ, the head. Farther, as
the human body increases till it arrives at maturity by the energy of
every part in performing its proper function, and by the sympathy of
every part with the whole, so the body or Church of Christ grows to
maturity by the proper exercise of the gifts and graces of individuals
for the benefit of the whole."

This verse is another proof of the wisdom and learning of the apostle.
Not only the general ideas here are anatomical, but the whole
phraseology is the same. The articulation of the bones, the composition
and action of the muscles, the circulation of the fluids, carrying
nourishment to every part, and depositing some in every place, the
energy of the system in keeping up all the functions, being particularly
introduced, and the whole terminating in the general process of
nutrition, increasing the body, and supplying all the waste that had
taken place in consequence of labor, etc. Let any medical man, who
understands the apostle's language, take up this verse, and he will be
convinced that the apostle had all these things in view. I am surprised
that some of those who have looked for the discoveries of the moderns
among the ancients, have not brought in the apostle's word επιχορηγια ,
supply, from επιχορηγεω, to lead up, lead along, minister, supply, etc.,
as some proof that the circulation of the blood was not unknown to St.
Paul!

[Ephesians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eph 4:17</span></span>

Walk not as other Gentiles walk - Ye are called to holiness by the
Gospel, the other Gentiles have no such calling; walk not as they walk.
In this and the two following verses the apostle gives a most awful
account of the conduct of the heathens who were without the knowledge of
the true God. I shall note the particulars.

1\. They walked in the vanity of their mind, εν ματαιοτητι του νοος
αὑτων· In the foolishness of their mind; want of genuine wisdom is that
to which the apostle refers, and it was through this that the Gentiles
became addicted to every species of idolatry; and they fondly imagined
that they could obtain help from gods which were the work of their own
hands! Here their foolishness was manifested.

[Ephesians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eph 4:18</span></span>

2\. Having the understanding darkened - This is the second instance
alleged by the apostle of the degradation of the Gentiles. Having no
means of knowledge, the heart, naturally dark, became more and more so
by means of habitual transgression; every thing in the Gentile system
having an immediate tendency to blind the eyes and darken the whole
soul.

3\. Being alienated from the life of God - The original design of God
was to live in man; and the life of God in the soul of man was that by
which God intended to make man happy, and without which true happiness
was never found by any human spirit: from this through the ignorance
that was in them, δια την αγνοιαν την ουσαν, through the substantial or
continually existing ignorance, which there was nothing to instruct,
nothing to enlighten; for the most accurate writings of their best
philosophers left them entirely ignorant of the real nature of God. And
if they had no correct knowledge of the true God they could have no
religion; and if no religion, no morality. Their moral state became so
wretched that they are represented as abhorring every thing spiritual
and pure, for this is the import of the word απηλλοτριωμενοι (which we
translate alienated) in some of the best Greek writers. They abhorred
every thing that had a tendency to lay any restraint on their vicious
passions and inclinations.

4\. Blindness of their heart - Δια την πωρωσιν· Because of the
callousness of their hearts. Callous signifies a thickening of the
outward skin of any particular part, especially on the hands and feet,
by repeated exercise or use, through which such parts are rendered
insensible. This may be metaphorically applied to the conscience of a
sinner, which is rendered stupid and insensible by repeated acts of
iniquity.

[Ephesians 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eph 4:19</span></span>

5\. Who being past feeling - Οιτινες απηλγηκοτες. The verb απαλγειν
signifies,

1\. To throw off all sense of shame, and to be utterly devoid of pain,
for committing unrighteous acts.

2\. To be desperate, having neither hope nor desire of reformation; in a
word, to be without remorse, and to be utterly regardless of conduct,
character, or final blessedness.

Instead of απηλγηκοτες, several excellent MSS. and versions have
απηλπικοτες, being without hope; that is, persons who, from their manner
of life in this world, could not possibly hope for blessedness in the
world to come, and who might feel it their interest to deny the
resurrection of the body, and even the immortality of the soul.

6\. Have given themselves over unto lasciviousness - Lasciviousness,
ασελγεια, is here personified; and the Gentiles in question are
represented as having delivered themselves over to her jurisdiction.
This is a trite picture of the Gentile world: uncleanness, lechery, and
debauchery of every kind, flourished among them without limit or
restraint. Almost all their gods and goddesses were of this character.

7\. To work all uncleanness with greediness - This is a complete finish
of the most abandoned character; to do an unclean act is bad, to labor
in it is worse, to labor in all uncleanness is worse still; but to do
all this in every case to the utmost extent, εν πλεονεξια, with a desire
exceeding time, place, opportunity, and strength, is worst of all, and
leaves nothing more profligate or more abandoned to be described or
imagined; just as Ovid paints the drunken Silenus, whose wantonness
survives his strength and keeps alive his desires, though old age has
destroyed the power of gratification: -

Te quoque, inextinctae Silene libidinis, urunt:

Nequitia est, quae te non sinit esse senem.

Fast., lib. i. v. 413.

Thee also, O Silenus, of inextinguishable lust,

they inflame; Thou art old in every thing except in lust.

Such was the state of the Gentiles before they were blessed with the
light of the Gospel; and such is the state of those nations who have not
yet received the Gospel; and such is the state of multitudes of those in
Christian countries who refuse to receive the Gospel, endeavor to decry
it, and to take refuge in the falsities of infidelity against the
testimony of eternal truth.

[Ephesians 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eph 4:20</span></span>

But ye have not so learned Christ - Ye have received the doctrines of
Christianity, and therefore are taught differently; ye have received the
Spirit of Christ, and therefore are saved from such dispositions. Some
would point and translate the original thus: Ὑμεις δε ουχ οὑτως· εμαθετε
τον Χριστον· But ye are not thus; ye have learned Christ.

[Ephesians 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eph 4:21</span></span>

If so be that ye have heard him - Ειγε, Seeing that, since indeed, ye
have heard us proclaim his eternal truth; we have delivered it to you as
we received it from Jesus.

[Ephesians 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eph 4:22</span></span>

That ye put off - And this has been one especial part of our teaching,
that ye should abandon all these, and live a life totally opposite to
what it was before.

The old man - See the note on [Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006), and especially see the notes on
[Rom 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013), [Rom
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014) (note).

Which is corrupt - The whole of your former life was corrupt and
abominable; ye lived in the pursuit of pleasure and happiness; ye sought
this in the gratification of the lusts of the flesh; and were ever
deceived by these lusts, and disappointed in your expectations.

[Ephesians 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eph 4:23</span></span>

And be renewed in the spirit of your mind - Their old mode of living was
to be abandoned; a new one to be assumed. The mind is to be renovated;
and not only its general complexion, but the very spirit of it; all its
faculties and powers must be thoroughly, completely, and universally
renewed. Plautus uses a similar expression describing deep distress, and
answerable to our phrase innermost soul: -

Paupertas, pavor territat mentem animi.

Poverty and dread alarm my innermost soul.

Epid., l. 519.

[Ephesians 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eph 4:24</span></span>

Put on the new man - Get a new nature; for in Christ Jesus - under the
Christian dispensation, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, hut a new creation. Therefore ye must be renewed in the
spirit of your mind.

Which after God is created in righteousness - Here is certainly an
allusion to the creation of man. Moses tells us, [Gen
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027), that God created man in his own
image; that is, God was the model according to which he was formed in
the spirit of his mind. St. Paul says here that they should put on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness,
or, ὁσιοτητι της αληθειας, in the holiness of truth. Both certainly
refer to the same thing, and the one illustrates the other. From the
apostle we learn what Moses meant by the image of God; it was
righteousness and the truth of holiness. See the note on [Gen
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026). It is not this or the other
degree of moral good which the soul is to receive by Jesus Christ, it is
the whole image of God; it is to be formed κατα Θεον, according to God;
the likeness of the Divine Being is to be traced upon his soul, and he
is to bear that as fully as his first father Adam bore it in the
beginning.

[Ephesians 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eph 4:25</span></span>

Wherefore putting away lying - All falsity, all prevarication, because
this is opposite to the truth as it is in Jesus, [Eph
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021), and to the holiness of truth,
[Eph 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024).

Speak every man truth with his neighbor - Truth was but of small account
among many of even the best heathens, for they taught that on many
occasions a lie was to be preferred to the truth itself. Dr. Whitby
collects some of their maxims on this head.

Κρειττον δε ελεσθαι ψευδος, η αληθες κακον· "A lie is better than a
hurtful truth." - Menander.

Το γαρ αγαθον κρειττον εστι της αληθειας· "Good is better than truth." -
Proclus.

Ενθα γαρ τι δει και ψευδος λεγεσθαι, λεγεσθω. "When telling a lie will
be profitable, let it be told." - Darius in Herodotus, lib. iii. p. 101.

"He may lie who knows how to do it εν δεοντι καιρῳ, in a suitable time."
- Plato apud Stob., ser. 12.

"There is nothing decorous in truth but when it is profitable; yea,
sometimes και ψευδος ωνησεν ανθρωπους, και τ' αληθες εβλαψεν, truth is
hurtful, and lying is profitable to men." - Maximus Tyrius, Diss. 3, p.
29.

Having been brought up in such a loose system of morality, these
converted Gentiles had need of these apostolic directions; Put away
lying; speak the truth: Let lying never come near you; let truth be ever
present with you.

We are members one of another - Consider yourselves as one body, of
which Jesus Christ is the head; and as a man's right hand would not
deceive or wrong his left hand, so deal honestly with each other; for ye
are members one of another.

[Ephesians 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eph 4:26</span></span>

Be ye angry, and sin not - Οργιζεσθε, here, is the same as ει μεν
οργιζεσθε, If Ye be angry, do not sin. We can never suppose that the
apostle delivers this as a precept, if we take the words as they stand
in our version. Perhaps the sense is, Take heed that ye be not angry,
lest ye sin; for it would be very difficult, even for an apostle
himself, to be angry and not sin. If we consider anger as implying
displeasure simply, then there are a multitude of cases in which a man
may be innocently, yea, laudably angry; for he should be displeased with
every thing which is not for the glory of God, and the good of mankind.
But, in any other sense, I do not see how the words can be safely taken.

Let not the sun go down upon your wrath - That is: If you do get angry
with any one, see that the fire be cast with the utmost speed out of
your bosom. Do not go to sleep with any unkind or unbrotherly feeling;
anger, continued in, may produce malice and revenge. No temper of this
kind can consist with peace of conscience, and the approbation of God's
Spirit in the soul.

[Ephesians 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eph 4:27</span></span>

Neither give place to the devil - Your adversary will strive to
influence your mind, and irritate your spirit; watch and pray that he
may not get any place in you, or ascendancy over you.

As the word διαβολος is sometimes used to signify a calumniator,
tale-bearer, whisperer, or backbiter; (see in the original, [Ti1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011); [Ti2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#003), and [Tit
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#003)); here it may have the same
signification. Do not open your ear to the tale-bearer, to the
slanderer, who comes to you with accusations against your brethren, or
with surmisings and evil speakings. These are human devils; they may be
the means of making you angry, even without any solid pretense;
therefore give them no place, that you may not be angry at any time; but
if, unhappily, you should be overtaken in this fault, let not the sun go
down upon your wrath; go to your brother, against whom you have found
your spirit irritated; tell him what you have heard, and what you fear;
let your ears be open to receive his own account; carefully listen to
his own explanation; and, if possible, let the matter be finally
settled, that Satan may not gain advantage over either.

[Ephesians 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eph 4:28</span></span>

Let him that stole steal no more - It is supposed that, among the
rabbins, stealing was not entirely discountenanced, provided a portion
was given to the poor. The apostle here teaches them a different
doctrine: as they should speak truth every man with his neighbor, so
they should in every respect act honestly, for nothing contrary to truth
and righteousness could be tolerated under the Christian system. Let no
man, under pretense of helping the poor, defraud another; but let him
labor, working with his hands to provide that which is good, that he may
have to give to him who is in necessity. Stealing, overreaching,
defrauding, purloining, etc., are consistent with no kind of religion
that acknowledges the true God. If Christianity does not make men
honest, it does nothing for them. Those who are not saved from
dishonesty fear not God, though they may dread man.

[Ephesians 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eph 4:29</span></span>

Let no corrupt communication - Πας λογος σαπρος. Kypke observes that
λογος σαπρος signifies a useless, putrid, unsavory, and obscene word or
conversation.

1\. Useless, particularly that which has been rendered so by old age and
corruption.

2\. Putrid, impure; so Aristophanes in Lysistrat., p. 859, calls a bad
woman σαπρα: εμοι συ λουτρον, ω σαπρα· Tune, Spurca! balneum mihi
parabis?

3\. Calumnious, or reproachful; whatever has a tendency to injure the
name, fame, or interest of another.

In short, it appears to mean any word or thing obscene, any thing that
injures virtue, countenances vice, or scoffs at religion. In the
parallel place, [Col 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#006), the apostle
exhorts that our speech may be seasoned with salt, to preserve it from
putrefaction. See Kypke and Macknight.

But that which is good to the use of edifying - To be good for a thing
is a Graecism, as well as an Anglicism, for, to be fit, proper,
suitable, etc.; so Achilles Tatius, lib. iv. p. 231: Αγαθον εις φιλιαν
οιδα σε· I know thee to be good (formed) for friendship. And Appian, de
Bell. Hisp., p. 439, terms both the Scipios, Ανδρας ες παντα αγαθους
γενομενους, men who were good (suitable) for all things. And also
Lucian, in Toxari, p. 53: Ου μονον αρα τοξευειν αγαθοι ησαν Σκυθαι· The
Scythians were not good (expert) in archery only. See Kypke, from whom I
quote.

That it may minister grace - Ἱνα δῳ χαριν. This may be understood thus:

1\. Let your conversation be pure, wise, and holy, that it may he the
means of conveying grace, or Divine influences, to them that hear.

2\. Let it be such as to be grateful or acceptable to the hearers. This
is the meaning of Ἱνα δῳ χαριν in some of the most correct Greek
writers. Never wound modesty, truth, or religion with your discourse;
endeavor to edify those with whom you converse; and if possible, speak
so as to please them.

[Ephesians 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eph 4:30</span></span>

Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God - By giving way to any wrong temper,
unholy word, or unrighteous action. Even those who have already a
measure of the light and life of God, both of which are not only brought
in by the Holy Spirit, but maintained by his constant indwelling, may
give way to sin, and so grieve this Holy Spirit that it shall withdraw
both its light and presence; and, in proportion as it withdraws, then
hardness and darkness take place; and, what is still worse, a state of
insensibility is the consequence; for the darkness prevents the fallen
state from being seen, and the hardness prevents it from being felt.

Whereby ye are sealed - The Holy Spirit in the soul of a believer is
God's seal, set on his heart to testify that he is God's property, and
that he should be wholly employed in God's service. It is very likely
that the apostle had in view the words of the prophet, [Isa
63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010) : But they rebelled, and Vexed
his Holy Spirit; therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and fought
against them. The psalmist refers to the same fact in nearly the same
words, [Psa 78:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#040) : How oft did they
Provoke him in the wilderness, and Grieve him in the desert! Let every
man, therefore, take heed that he grieve not the Spirit of God, lest God
turn to be his enemy, and fight against him.

[Ephesians 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eph 4:31</span></span>

Let all bitterness - Πασα πικρια. It is astonishing that any who profess
the Christian name should indulge bitterness of spirit. Those who are
censorious, who are unmerciful to the failings of others, who have fixed
a certain standard by which they measure all persons in all
circumstances, and unchristian every one that does not come up to this
standard, these have the bitterness against which the apostle speaks. In
the last century there was a compound medicine, made up from a variety
of drastic acrid drugs and ardent spirits, which was called Hiera Picra,
ἱερα πικρα, the holy bitter; this medicine was administered in a
multitude of cases, where it did immense evil, and perhaps in scarcely
any case did it do good. It has ever appeared to me to furnish a proper
epithet for the disposition mentioned above, the holy bitter; for the
religiously censorious act under the pretense of superior sanctity. I
have known such persons do much evil in a Christian society, but never
knew an instance of their doing any good.

And wrath - Θυμος is more properly anger, which may be considered the
commencement of the passion.

Anger - Οργν is more properly wrath - the passion carried to its highest
pitch, accompanied with injurious words and outrageous acts, some of
which are immediately specified.

And clamor - Κραυγη Loud and obstreperous speaking, brawling, railing,
boisterous talk, often the offspring of wrath; all of which are highly
unbecoming the meek, loving, quiet, sedate mind of Christ and his
followers.

And evil speaking - Βλασφημια· Blasphemy; that is, injurious speaking -
words which tend to hurt those of whom or against whom they are spoken.

With all malice - Κακια· All malignity; as anger produces wrath, and
wrath clamor, so all together produce malice; that is, settled, sullen,
fell wrath, which is always looking out for opportunities to revenge
itself by the destruction of the object of its indignation. No state of
society can be even tolerable where these prevail; and, if eternity were
out of the question, it is of the utmost consequence to have these
banished from time.

[Ephesians 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eph 4:32</span></span>

Be ye kind one to another - Γινεσθε - χρηστοι· Be kind and obliging to
each other; study good breeding and gentleness of manners. A Christian
cannot be a savage, and he need not be a boor. Never put any person to
needless pain.

Tender-hearted - Ευσπλαγχνοι· Compassionate; having the bowels easily
moved (as the word implies) to commiserate the state of the wretched and
distressed.

Forgiving one another - Should you receive any injury from a brother, or
from any man, be as ready to forgive him, on his repentance and
acknowledgment, as God was, for Christ's sake, to forgive you when you
repented of your sins, and took refuge in his mercy.

1\. The exhortations given in this chapter, if properly attended to,
have the most direct tendency to secure the peace of the individual, the
comfort of every family, and the welfare and unity of every Christian
society. That God never prohibits any thing that is useful to us, is an
unshaken truth. And that he never commands what has not the most pointed
relation to our present and eternal welfare, is not less so. How is it,
then, that we do not glory in his commandments and rejoice in his
prohibitions? If the gratification of our fleshly propensities could do
us good, that gratification had never been forbidden. God plants thorns
in the way that would lead us to death and perdition.

2\. From the provision which God has made for the soul's salvation, we
may see the nature, and in some sense the extent, of the salvation
provided. Much on this subject has been said in the preceding chapter,
and the same subject is continued here. God requires that the Church
shall be holy, so that it may be a proper habitation for himself; and he
requires that each believer should be holy, and that he should, under
the influences of his grace, arrive at the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ! [Eph 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013). This is
astonishing; but God is able to make all grace abound towards us.

3\. It is the will of God that Christians should be well instructed;
that they should become wise and intelligent; and have their
understandings well cultivated and improved. Sound learning is of great
worth, even in religion; the wisest and best instructed Christians are
the most steady, and may be the most useful. If a man be a child in
knowledge, he is likely to be tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of doctrine; and often lies at the mercy of interested,
designing men: the more knowledge he has, the more safe is his state. If
our circumstances be such that we have few means of improvement, we
should turn them to the best account. "Partial knowledge is better than
total ignorance; he who cannot get all he may wish, must take heed to
acquire all that he can." If total ignorance be a bad and dangerous
thing, every degree of knowledge lessens both the evil and the danger.
It must never be forgotten that the Holy Scriptures themselves are
capable of making men wise unto salvation, if read and studied with
faith in Christ.

4\. Union among the followers of Christ is strongly recommended. How can
spiritual brethren fall out by the way? Have they not all one Father,
all one Head? Do they not form one body, and are they not all members of
each other? Would it not be monstrous to see the nails pulling out the
eyes, the hands tearing off the flesh from the body, the teeth biting
out the tongue, etc., etc.? And is it less so to see the members of a
Christian society bite and devour each other, till they are consumed one
of another? Every member of the mystical body of Christ should labor for
the comfort and edification of the whole, and the honor of the Head. He
that would live a quiet life, and keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace, must be as backward to take offense as to give it. Would
all act on this plan (and surely it is as rational as it is Christian)
we should soon have glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace and
good will among men.

5\. A roughness of manners is to some unavoidable; it is partly owing to
the peculiar texture of their mind, and partly to their education. But
there are others who glory in, and endeavor to cultivate, this ungentle
disposition; under this is often concealed a great degree of spiritual
pride, and perhaps some malignity; for they think that this roughness
gives them a right to say grating, harsh, and severe things. They should
be taught another lesson; and if they will not demean themselves as they
ought, they should be left to themselves, and no man should associate
with them. They are not Christians, and they act beneath the character
of men.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 5](eph005)

</div>
