<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](gal006)  [Next](eph001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Ephesians

Ephesus was a city of Ionia, in Asia Minor, and once the metropolis of
that part of the world. The ancient city was situated at the mouth of
the river Cayster, on the shore of the Aegean Sea, about 50 miles south
of Smyrna. The Ephesus in which St. Paul founded a Church, and which for
a time flourished gloriously, was not the ancient Ephesus; for that was
destroyed, and a new city of the same name was built by Lysimachus.

This most famous of all the Asiatic cities is now a miserable village,
composed of mean huts formed out of the ruins of its once magnificent
structures; and these huts are now the residence of about forty or fifty
Turkish families, without a single Christian among them! For other
particulars see the note on [Act
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#019).

It is, however, a doubt with many learned men, whether this epistle was
sent to the Church at Ephesus. They think that the proper direction is,
The Epistle of St. Paul to the Laodiceans; and suppose it to be the same
which the apostle mentions, [Col 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#016)
: "When this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also in
the Church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the epistle from
Laodicea." Dr. Paley's arguments in the affirmative are entitled to much
regard.

"Although it does not appear to have ever been disputed that the epistle
before us was written by St. Paul, yet it is well known that a doubt has
long been entertained concerning the persons to whom it was addressed.
The question is founded partly in some ambiguity in the external
evidence. Marcion, a heretic of the second century, as quoted by
Tertullian, a father in the beginning of the third, calls it, The
Epistle to the Laodiceans. From what we know of Marcion, his judgment is
little to be relied upon; nor is it perfectly clear that Marcion was
rightly understood by Tertullian. If, however, Marcion be brought to
prove that some copies in his time gave εν Λαοδικειᾳ in the
superscription, his testimony, if it be truly interpreted, is not
diminished by his heresy; for, as Grotius observes, 'cur in ea re
mentiretur nihil erat causae.' The name εν Εφεσῳ, in Ephesus, in the
first verse, upon which word singly depends the proof that the epistle
was written to the Ephesians, is not read in all the manuscripts now
extant. I admit, however, that the external evidence preponderates with
a manifest excess on the side of the received reading. The objection
therefore principally arises from the contents of the epistle itself,
which, in many respects militate with the supposition that it was
written to the Church of Ephesus. According to the history, St. Paul had
passed two whole years at Ephesus, [Act
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#010). And in this point, viz. of St.
Paul having preached for a considerable length of time at Ephesus, the
history is confirmed by the two epistles to the Corinthians, and by the
two epistles to Timothy: 'I will tarry at Ephesus until pentecost;' [Co1
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#008). 'We would not have you ignorant
of our trouble which came to us in Asia;' [Co2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008). 'As I besought thee to abide
still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia;' [Ti1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003). 'And in how many things he
ministered to me at Ephesus thou knowest well;' [Ti2
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#018). I adduce these testimonies
because, had it been a competition of credit between the history and the
epistle, I should have thought myself bound to have preferred the
epistle. Now, every epistle which St. Paul wrote to Churches which he
himself had founded, or which he had visited, abounds with references
and appeals to what had passed during the time that he was present
amongst them; whereas there is not a text in the Epistle to the
Ephesians from which we can collect that he had ever been at Ephesus at
all. The two epistles to the Corinthians, the Epistle to the Galatians,
the Epistle to the Philippians, and the two Epistles to the
Thessalonians, are of this class; and they are full of allusions to the
apostle's history, his reception, and his conduct whilst amongst them;
the total want of which in the epistle before us is very difficult to
account for, if it was in truth written to the Church of Ephesus, in
which city he had resided for so long a time. This is the first and
strongest objection. But farther, the Epistle to the Colossians was
addressed to a Church in which St. Paul had never been, This we infer
from the first verse of the second chapter: 'For I would that ye knew
what great conflict I have for you and for them at Laodicea, and for as
many as have not seen my face in the flesh.' There could be no propriety
in thus joining the Colossians and Laodiceans with those 'who had not
seen his face in the flesh,' if they did not also belong to the same
description. Now, his address to the Colossians, whom he had not
visited, is precisely the same as his address to the Christians to whom
he wrote in the epistle which we are now considering: 'We give thanks to
God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you,
since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye
have to all the saints;' [Col 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#003).
Thus he speaks to the Christians, in the epistle before us, as follows:
'Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and
love unto all the saints, cease not to give thanks for you in my
prayers; [Eph 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015). The terms of this
address are observable. The words, 'having heard of your faith and
love,' are the very words, we see, which he uses towards strangers; and
it is not probable that he should employ the same in accosting a Church
in which he had long exercised his ministry, and whose 'faith and love'
he must have personally known. The Epistle to the Romans was written
before St. Paul had been at Rome; and his address to them runs in the
same strain with that just now quoted: 'I thank my God, through Jesus
Christ, for you all, that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole
world;' [Rom 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008). Let us now see what
was the form in which our apostle was accustomed to introduce his
epistles, when he wrote to those with whom he was already acquainted. To
the Corinthians it was this: 'I thank my God always on your behalf, for
the grace of God which is given you by Christ Jesus;' [Co1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004). To the Philippians: 'I thank my
God upon every remembrance of you;' [Phi
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#003). To the Thessalonians: 'We give
thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers,
remembering without ceasing your work of faith and labor of love;' [Th1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#003). To Timothy: 'I thank God, whom I
serve from my forefathers with a pure conscience, that without ceasing I
have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day;' [Ti2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#003). In these quotations it is usually
his remembrance, and never his hearing of them, which he makes the
subject of his thankfulness to God.

As great difficulties stand in the way, supposing the epistle before us
to have been written to the Church of Ephesus; so I think it probable
that it is actually the epistle to the Laodiceans, referred to in the
fourth chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians. The text which contains
that reference is this: 'When this epistle is read among you, cause that
it be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and that ye likewise
read the epistle from Laodicea;' [Col
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#016). The epistle from Laodicea was an
epistle sent by St. Paul to that Church, and by them transmitted to
Colosse. The two Churches were mutually to communicate the epistles they
had received. This is the way in which the direction is explained by the
greater part of commentators, and is the most probable sense that can be
given to it. It is also probable that the epistle alluded to was an
epistle which had been received by the Church of Laodicea lately. It
appears, then, with a considerable degree of evidence, that there
existed an epistle of St. Paul nearly of the same date with the Epistle
to the Colossians, and an epistle directed to a Church (for such the
Church of Laodicea was) in which St. Paul had never been. What has been
observed concerning the epistle before us, shows that it answers
perfectly to that character.

"Nor does the mistake seem very difficult to account for. Whoever
inspects the map of Asia Minor will see, that a person proceeding from
Rome to Laodicea would probably land at Ephesus, as the nearest
frequented seaport in that direction. Might not Tychicus, then, in
passing through Ephesus, communicate to the Christians of that place the
letter with which he was charged? And might not copies of that letter be
multiplied and preserved at Ephesus? Might not some of the copies drop
the words of designation εν τῃ Λαοδικειᾳ, which it was of no consequence
to an Ephesian to retain? Might not copies of the letter come out into
the Christian Church at large from Ephesus; and might not this give
occasion to a belief that the letter was written to that Church? And,
lastly, might not this belief produce the error which we suppose to have
crept into the inscription?

"And it is remarkable that there seem to have been some ancient copies
without the words of designation, either the words in Ephesus, or the
words in Laodicea. St. Basil, a writer of the fourth century, speaking
of the present epistle, has this very singular passage: 'And writing to
the Ephesians, as truly united to him who is through knowledge, he
(Paul) calleth them in a peculiar sense such who are; saying, to the
saints who are and (or even) the faithful in Christ Jesus; for so those
before us have transmitted it, and we have found it in ancient copies.'
Dr. Mill interprets (and, notwithstanding some objections that have been
made to him, in my opinion, rightly interprets) these words of Basil, as
declaring that this father had seen certain copies of the epistle in
which the words 'in Ephesus' were wanting. And the passage, I think,
must be considered as Basil's fanciful way of explaining what was really
a corrupt and defective reading; for I do not believe it possible that
the author of the epistle could have originally written ἁγιοις τοις
ουσιν, without any name of place to follow it."

It must be allowed that the arguments of Dr. Paley, the sum of which may
be found in Wetstein, that this is the epistle to the Laodiceans, are
both plausible and strong; and yet almost the whole of antiquity, with
the exceptions which those learned men mention, is in favor of the
epistle being sent originally to the Church at Ephesus. Puzzled with
these two considerations, some critics have pointed out a middle way.
They suppose that several copies of this epistle were directed to no
particular Church, but were intended for all the Churches in Asia Minor;
and that different copies might have different directions, from this
circumstance, that St. Paul, in writing the first verse Παυλος αποστολος
Ιησου Χριστου - τοις ἁγιοις τοις ουσιν, Paul, an apostle of Jesus
Christ, to the saints which are, left a blank after ουσιν, are, which
was in some cases filled up with εν Εφεσῳ, in Ephesus; in others, with
εν Λαοδικειᾳ, in Laodicea; though there might be one copy expressly sent
by him to the Church of the Laodiceans, while he wished that others
should be directed to the different Churches through Asia Minor. That
there were copies which had no place specified, we learn from St. Basil;
and the arguments in favor of Laodicea are certainly the strongest; the
circumstance, that the apostle salutes no person, agrees well with
Laodicea, where he had never been, [Col
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001); but cannot agree with Ephesus,
where he was well known, and where, in preaching the Gospel, he had
spent three years. See [Act 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031).

As this point is very dubious, and men of great abilities and learning
have espoused different sides of the question, I judge myself
incompetent to determine any thing; but I felt it my duty to bring the
arguments for Laodicea fairly before the reader; those in favor of
Ephesus may be met with every where. The passages in the body of the
epistle, alleged by critics who espouse opposite sides of this subject,
I have seldom noticed in a controversial way; and the notes on those
passages are constructed as though no controversy existed.

Many expositors, and particularly Drs. Chandler and Macknight, have
thought that they have perceived a great number of references to the
temple of Diana at Ephesus; to the sacred mysteries among the Greeks; to
the Hierophants, Mystagogues, Neocoroi, etc., in the temple of the
celebrated goddess. It may appear strange that, with these opinions
before me, I have not referred to the same things; nor adduced them by
way of illustration; the truth is, I have not been able to discover
them, nor do I believe that any such allusions exist. I see many
allusions to the temple of God at Jerusalem, but none to the temple of
Diana at Ephesus. I find also many references to the sacred service and
sacerdotal officers in the Jewish temple; but none to Mystagogues, etc.,
among the heathens. I find much said about, what is to be understood
most literally, the mystery which had been hidden from all ages, viz. of
uniting Jews and Gentiles in one Church, but no reference to the
Eleusinian, Bacchic, or other mysteries in the abominable worship of the
Greeks, was suggesting to the mind of the apostle any parallel between
their mysteries and those of the Almighty. My reasons for my dissent
from these respectable authorities I have given in the notes.

June 20th, 1815.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 1](eph001)

</div>
