<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est001)  [Next](est003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 2:0</span></span>

The counsellors advise that a selection of virgins should be made
throughout the empire, out of whom the king should choose one to be
queen in place of Vashti, [Est 2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#001).
Account of Mordecai and his cousin Esther, [Est
2:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#005). She is chosen among the young
women, and is placed under the care of Hegai, the king's chamberlain, to
go through a year's purification, [Est
2:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#008). The manner in which these
young women were introduced to the king, and how those were disposed of
who were not called again to the king's bed, [Est
2:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#012). Esther pleases the king, and
is set above all the women; and he makes her queen in the place of
Vashti, and does her great honor, [Est
2:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#015). Mordecai, sitting at the
king's gate, discovers a conspiracy formed against the king's life by
two of his chamberlains; he informs the king, the matter is
investigated, they are found guilty and hanged, and the transaction is
recorded, [Est 2:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#021).

[Esther 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 2:2</span></span>

Let there be fair young virgins sought for the king - This was the usual
way in which the harem or seraglio was furnished: the finest women in
the land, whether of high or low birth, were sought out, and brought to
the harem. They all became the king's concubines: but one was raised, as
chief wife or sultana, to the throne; and her issue was specially
entitled to inherit.

[Esther 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 2:3</span></span>

Hege the king's chamberlain - הגא סריס המלך Hege seris hammelech, "Hege,
the king's eunuch;" so the Septuagint, Vulgate, Targum, and Syriac. In
the Eastern countries the women are intrusted to the care of the eunuchs
only.

Let their things for purification be given them - תמרקיהן tamrukeyhen,
their cosmetics. What these were we are told in [Est
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#012); oil of myrrh, and sweet odours.
The myrrh was employed for six months, and the odours for six months
more, after which the person was brought to the king. This space was
sufficient to show whether the young woman had been chaste; whether she
were with child or not, that the king might not be imposed on, and be
obliged to father a spurious offspring, which might have been the case
had not this precaution been used.

Instead of the oil or myrrh, the Targum says it was the oil of unripe
olives which caused the hair to fall off, and rendered the skin
delicate.

[Esther 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 2:5</span></span>

Whose name was Mordecai - The Targum says, "He was the son of Jair, the
son of Shimea, the son of Gera, the son of Kish." And "this was the same
Shimea that cursed David; and whom David forbade Joab to slay because he
saw, in the spirit of prophecy, that he was to be the predecessor of
Esther and Mordecai; but when he became old, and incapable of having
children, David ordered Solomon to put him to death.

[Esther 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">est 2:7</span></span>

He brought up Hadassah - הדשה hadassah signifies a myrtle in Chaldee:
this was probably her first or Babylonish name. When she came to the
Persian court, she was called Esther, aster, or sitara, which signifies
a star in Persian: the name is undoubtedly Persian. Esther was the
daughter of Abihail, the uncle of Mordecai, and therefore must have been
Mordecai's cousin, though the Vulgate and Josephus make her Mordecai's
niece: but it is safest here to follow the Hebrew.

[Esther 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 2:9</span></span>

The maiden pleased him - He conceived a partiality for her above the
rest, probably because of the propriety of her deportment, and her
engaging though unassuming manners.

Seven maidens - These were to attend her to the bath, to anoint and
adorn her, and be her servants in general.

[Esther 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 2:10</span></span>

Esther had not showed her people - This might have prejudiced her with
the king; for it was certainly no credit at the Persian court to be a
Jew; and we shall find from the sequel that those who were in the
Persian dominions were far from being reputable, or in a safe state.
Besides, had her lineage been known, envy might have prevented her from
ever having access to the king.

[Esther 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">est 2:12</span></span>

Six months with oil of myrrh - See on [Est
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#003) (note). The reason of this
purification seems not to be apprehended by any writer I have seen. The
most beautiful of all the young virgins of all the provinces of Babylon
were to be selected; and these were taken out of all classes of the
people, indiscriminately; consequently there must have been many who
were brought up in low life. Now we know that those who feed on coarse
strong food, which is not easily digested, have generally a copious
perspiration, which is strongly odorous; and in many, though in every
respect amiable, and even beautiful, this odour is far from being
pleasant. Pure, wholesome, easily digested, and nourishing aliment, with
the frequent use of the hot bath, continued for twelve months, the body
frequently rubbed with olive oil, will in almost every case remove all
that is disagreeable of this kind. This treatment will give a healthy
action to all the subcutaneous vessels, and in every respect promote
health and comfort.

[Esther 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 2:13</span></span>

Whatsoever she desired - When any of the young women were called to go
to the king, it appears that it was an ordinance that whatever kind of
dress stuff, color, jewels, etc., they thought best to set off their
persons, and render them more engaging, should be given them.

[Esther 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">est 2:14</span></span>

She returned into the second house - This was the place where the king's
concubines were kept. They went out no more, and were never given in
marriage to any man, and saw the king's face no more unless specially
called.

Custody of Shaashgaz - This is probably another Persian name;
sheshkhunj, beardless, a proper epithet of a eunuch; or sestgunj, weak
loins, for the same reason. Names of this kind at once show the reason
of their imposition, by describing the state of the person.

[Esther 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">est 2:15</span></span>

She required nothing - She left this entirely to her friend Hege, who
seems to have been intent on her success. She therefore left her
decorations to his judgment alone, and went in that dress and in those
ornaments which he deemed most suitable.

[Esther 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">est 2:16</span></span>

The tenth month - Tebeth - Answering to part of our December and
January.

[Esther 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">est 2:17</span></span>

Set the royal crown upon her head - Made her what is now called in the
East the Sultana, the queen. She was the mistress of all the rest of the
wives, all of whom were obliged to pay her the most profound respect.

[Esther 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">est 2:18</span></span>

Made a release to the provinces - Remitted some kind of tribute or
impost, in honor of Esther, at her coronation, as our kings generally do
when they are crowned, ordering a discharge from prison of many who are
confined for minor offenses. As it was the custom of the Persian kings
to give their queens something like what is called with us the aurum
reginae, "queen gold," which was a tenth of all fines, etc., above what
was given to the king; (for they gave them such a city to buy them
clothes, another for their hair, a third for their necklaces, a fourth
for their pearls, etc.); it is probable that, on this occasion, Esther
so wishing, he relieved those cities and provinces which had before paid
this queen gold from all these expenses; and this would tend greatly to
make the queen popular.

[Esther 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">est 2:21</span></span>

Mordecai sat in the kings gate - Mordecai might have been one of the
officers of the king, as the gate was the place where such usually
attended to await the king's call. It is not likely that he was the
porter; had he been only such, Haman could have removed him at once.

Two of the king's chamberlains - Eunuchs. Why they conspired against the
life of the king, we are not informed. The Targum says that they found
out that Esther had intended to use her influence with the king to get
them removed from their office, and Mordecai put in their place;
therefore they determined to poison Esther, and slay the king in his
bedchamber. It is very likely that they were creatures of Haman, who
probably affected the kingdom, and perhaps were employed by him to
remove the king, and so make his way open to the throne.

[Esther 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">est 2:22</span></span>

Was known to Mordecai - Josephus says that a Jew, named Barnabasus,
overheard the plot, told it to Mordecai, Mordecai to Esther, and Esther
to the king, in Mordecai's name; and he was registered as the
discoverer.

[Esther 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">est 2:23</span></span>

It was found out - It was proved against them, in consequence of which
they were hanged. Perhaps the words ויתלו על עץ vaiyittalu al ets, they
were hung upon wood or a tree, may refer to their being impaled. A
pointed stake is set upright in the ground, and the culprit is taken,
placed on the sharp point, and then pulled down by his legs till the
stake that went in at the fundament passes up through the body and comes
out by the side of the neck. A most dreadful species of punishment, in
which revenge and cruelty may glut the utmost of their malice. The
culprit lives a considerable time in excruciating agonies.

It has been observed that the name of God does not once occur in this
book. This is true of the Hebrew text, and all translations from it; but
in the Septuagint we find the following words, in [Est
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#020), after, Esther had not showed her
kindred: Οὑτως γαρ ενετειλατο αυτῃ Μαρδοχαιος, φοβεισθαι τον Θεον, και
ποιειν τα προσταγματα αυτου, καθως ην μετ' αυτου; "For so Mordecai had
charged her to fear God, and to keep his commandments, as she did when
with him." This, as far as the Septuagint is concerned, takes away the
strange reproach from this book. It must be owned that it was not
because there were not many fair opportunities that the sacred name has
not been introduced.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 3](est003)

</div>
