<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est009)  [Next](job000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 10:0</span></span>

Ahasuerus lays a tribute on his dominions, [Est
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001). Mordecai's advancement under
him, [Est 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#002). His character, [Est
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#003).

[Esther 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 10:1</span></span>

Laid a tribute upon the land - On the one hundred and twenty-seven
provinces of which we have already heard.

The isles of the sea - Probably the isles of the Aegean sea, which were
conquered by Darius Hystaspes. Calmet supposes that this Hystaspes is
the Ahasuerus of Esther.

[Esther 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 10:2</span></span>

The book of the chronicles of Media and Persia? - The Persians have ever
been remarkable for keeping exact chronicles of all public events. Their
Tareekhs, which are compositions of this kind, are still very numerous,
and indeed very important.

[Esther 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 10:3</span></span>

Was next unto king Ahasuerus - He was his prime minister; and, under
him, was the governor of the whole empire.

The Targum is extravagant in its encomiums upon Mordecai: "All the kings
of the earth feared and trembled before him: he was as resplendent as
the evening star among the stars; and was as bright as Aurora beaming
forth in the morning; and he was chief of the kings."

Seeking the wealth of his people - Studying to promote the Jewish
interest to the utmost of his power.

Speaking peace to all his seed - Endeavoring to settle their prosperity
upon such a basis, that it might be for ever permanent. Here the Hebrew
text ends; but in the ancient Vulgate, and in the Greek, ten verses are
added to this chapter, and six whole chapters besides, so that the
number of chapters in Esther amounts to sixteen. A translation of these
may be found in the Apocrypha, bound up with the sacred text, in most of
our larger English Bibles. On any part of this work it is not my
province to add any comment.

This is the last of the historical books of the Old Testament, for from
this time to the birth of Christ they had no inspired writers; and the
interval of their history must be sought among the apocryphal writers
and other historians who have written on Jewish affairs. The most
complete supplement to this history will be found in that most excellent
work of Dean Prideaux, entitled The Old and New Testaments connected, in
the History of the Jews and Neighbouring Nations, from the Declension of
the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah to the time of Christ, 4 vols. 8vo.
1725. The editions prior to this date are not so complete.

We have already seen what the Feast of Purim means, and why it was
instituted; if the reader is desirous of farther information on this
subject, he may find it in the works of Buxtorf, Leusden, Stehlin, and
Calmet's Dictionary, article Pur.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Introduction](job000)

</div>
