<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo000)  [Next](exo002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

The names and number of the children of Israel that went down into
Egypt, [Exo 1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001). Joseph and all his
brethren of that generation die, [Exo
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#006). The great increase of their
posterity, [Exo 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#007). The cruel policy
of the king of Egypt to destroy them, [Exo
1:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#008). They increase greatly,
notwithstanding their affliction, [Exo
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#012). Account of their hard bondage,
[Exo 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#013), [Exo
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014). Pharaoh's command to the Hebrew
midwives to kill all the male children, [Exo
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#015), [Exo
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#016). The midwives disobey the king's
command, and, on being questioned, vindicate themselves, [Exo
1:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#017). God is pleased with their
conduct, blesses them, and increases the people, [Exo
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#020), [Exo
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#021). Pharaoh gives a general command
to the Egyptians to drown all the male children of the Hebrews, [Exo
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#022).

[Exodus 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 1:1</span></span>

These are the names - Though this book is a continuation or the book of
Genesis, with which probably it was in former times conjoined, Moses
thought it necessary to introduce it with an account of the names and
number of the family of Jacob when they came to Egypt, to show that
though they were then very few, yet in a short time, under the especial
blessing of God, they had multiplied exceedingly; and thus the promise
to Abraham had been literally fulfilled. See the notes on Genesis 46
(note).

[Exodus 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 1:6</span></span>

Joseph died, and all his brethren - That is, Joseph had now been some
time dead, as also all his brethren, and all the Egyptians who had known
Jacob and his twelve sons; and this is a sort of reason why the
important services performed by Joseph were forgotten.

[Exodus 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 1:7</span></span>

The children of Israel were fruitful - פרו paru, a general term,
signifying that they were like healthy trees, bringing forth an
abundance of fruit.

And increased - ישרץ yishretsu, they increased like fishes, as the
original word implies. See [Gen 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020)
(note), and the note there.

Abundantly - ירבו yirbu, they multiplied; this is a separate term, and
should not have been used as an adverb by our translators.

And waxed exceeding mighty - ויעצמו במאד מאד vaiyaatsmu bimod meod, and
they became strong beyond measure - superlatively, superlatively - so
that the land (Goshen) was filled with them. This astonishing increase
was, under the providence of God, chiefly owing to two causes:

1\. The Hebrew women were exceedingly fruitful, suffered very little in
parturition, and probably often brought forth twins.

2\. There appear to have been no premature deaths among them. Thus in
about two hundred and fifteen years they were multiplied to upwards of
600,000, independently of old men, women, and children.

[Exodus 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 1:8</span></span>

There arose up a new king - Who this was it is difficult to say. It was
probably Ramesses Miamun, or his son Amenophis, who succeeded him in the
government of Egypt about A. M. 2400, before Christ 1604.

Which knew not Joseph - The verb ידע yada, which we translate to know,
often signifies to acknowledge or approve. See [Jdg
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#010); [Psa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006); [Psa
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#007); [Hos
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#008); [Amo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002). The Greek verbs ειδω and γινωσκω
are used precisely in the same sense in the New Testament. See [Mat
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012), and [Jo1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001). We may therefore understand by
the new king's not knowing Joseph, his disapproving of that system of
government which Joseph had established, as well as his haughtily
refusing to acknowledge the obligations under which the whole land of
Egypt was laid to this eminent prime minister of one of his
predecessors.

[Exodus 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 1:9</span></span>

He said unto his people - He probably summoned a council of his nobles
and elders to consider the subject; and the result was to persecute and
destroy them, as is afterwards stated.

[Exodus 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 1:10</span></span>

They join also unto our enemies - It has been conjectured that Pharaoh
had probably his eye on the oppressions which Egypt had suffered under
the shepherd-kings, who for a long series of years had, according to
Manetho, governed the land with extreme cruelty. As the Israelites were
of the same occupation, (viz., shepherds), the jealous, cruel king found
it easy to attribute to them the same motives; taking it for granted
that they were only waiting for a favorable opportunity to join the
enemies of Egypt, and so overrun the whole land.

[Exodus 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 1:11</span></span>

Set over them task-masters - שרי מסים sarey missim, chiefs or princes of
burdens, works, or tribute; επιστατας των εργων, Sept. overseers of the
works. The persons who appointed them their work, and exacted the
performance of it. The work itself being oppressive, and the manner in
which it was exacted still more so, there is some room to think that
they not only worked them unmercifully, but also obliged them to pay an
exorbitant tribute at the same time.

Treasure cities - ערי מסכנות arey miscenoth, store cities - public
granaries. Calmet supposes this to be the name of a city, and translates
the verse thus: "They built cities, viz., Miscenoth, Pithom, and
Rameses." Pithom is supposed to be that which Herodotus calls Patumos.
Raamses, or rather Rameses, (for it is the same Hebrew word as in [Gen
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011), and should be written the same
way here as there), is supposed to have been the capital of the land of
Goshen, mentioned in the book of Genesis by anticipation; for it was
probably not erected till after the days of Joseph, when the Israelites
were brought under that severe oppression described in the book of
Exodus. The Septuagint add here, και Ων, ἡ εστιν Ἡλιουπολις· and On,
which is Heliopolis; i.e., the city of the Sun. The same reading is
found also in the Coptic version.

Some writers suppose that beside these cities the Israelites built the
pyramids. If this conjecture be well founded, perhaps they are intended
in the word מסכנות miscenoth, which, from סכן sachan, to lay up in
store, might be intended to signify places where Pharaoh laid up his
treasures; and from their structure they appear to have been designed
for something of this kind. If the history of the pyramids be not found
in the book of Exodus, it is nowhere else extant; their origin, if not
alluded to here, being lost in their very remote antiquity. Diodorus
Siculus, who has given the best traditions he could find relative to
them, says that there was no agreement either among the inhabitants or
the historians concerning the building of the pyramids - Bib. Hist.,
lib. 1., cap. lxiv.

Josephus expressly says that one part of the oppression suffered by the
Israelites in Egypt was occasioned by building pyramids. See Clarke's
note on [Exo 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014).

In the book of Genesis, and in this book, the word Pharaoh frequently
occurs, which, though many suppose it to be a proper name peculiar to
one person, and by this supposition confound the acts of several
Egyptian kings, yet is to be understood only as a name of office.

It may be necessary to observe that all the Egyptian kings, whatever
their own name was, took the surname of Pharaoh when they came to the
throne; a name which, in its general acceptation, signified the same as
king or monarch, but in its literal meaning, as Bochart has amply
proved, it signifies a crocodile, which being a sacred animal among the
Egyptians, the word might be added to their kings in order to procure
them the greater reverence and respect.

[Exodus 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 1:12</span></span>

But the more they afflicted them - The margin has pretty nearly
preserved the import of the original: And as they afflicted them, so
they multiplied and so they grew That is, in proportion to their
afflictions was their prosperity; and had their sufferings been greater,
their increase would have been still more abundant.

[Exodus 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 1:13</span></span>

To serve with rigour - בפרך bepharech, with cruelty, great oppression;
being ferocious with them. The word fierce is supposed by some to be
derived from the Hebrew, as well as the Latin ferox, from which we more
immediately bring our English term. This kind of cruelty to slaves, and
ferociousness, unfeelingness, and hard-heartedness, were particularly
forbidden to the children of Israel. See [Lev
25:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#043), [Lev
25:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#046), where the same word is used:
Thou shalt not rule over him with Rigor, but shalt fear thy God.

[Exodus 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 1:14</span></span>

They made their lives bitter - So that they became weary of life,
through the severity of their servitude.

With hard bondage - בעבדה קשה baabodah kashah, with grievous servitude.
This was the general character of their life in Egypt; it was a life of
the most painful servitude, oppressive enough in itself, but made much
more so by the cruel manner of their treatment while performing their
tasks.

In mortar, and in brick - First, in digging the clay, kneading, and
preparing it, and secondly, forming it into bricks, drying them in the
sun, etc.

Service in the field - Carrying these materials to the places where they
were to be formed into buildings, and serving the builders while
employed in those public works. Josephus says "The Egyptians contrived a
variety of ways to afflict the Israelites; for they enjoined them to cut
a great number of channels for the river, and to build walls for their
cities and ramparts, that they might restrain the river, and hinder its
waters from stagnating upon its overrunning its own banks; they set them
also to build pyramids, (πυραμιδας τε ανοικοδομουντες), and wore them
out, and forced them to learn all sorts of mechanic arts, and to
accustom themselves to hard labor." - Antiq., lib. ii., cap. ix., sec.
1. Philo bears nearly the same testimony, p. 86, Edit. Mangey.

[Exodus 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 1:15</span></span>

Hebrew midwives - Shiphrah and Puah, who are here mentioned, were
probably certain chiefs, under whom all the rest acted, and by whom they
were instructed in the obstetric art. Aben Ezra supposes there could not
have been fewer than five hundred midwives among the Hebrew women at
this time, but that very few were requisite see proved on [Exo
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#019) (note).

[Exodus 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 1:16</span></span>

Upon the stools - על האבנים al haobnayim. This is a difficult word, and
occurs nowhere else in the Hebrew Bible but in [Jer
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#003), where we translate it the
potter's wheels. As אכי signifies a stone, the obnayim has been supposed
to signify a stone trough, in which they received and washed the infant
as soon as born. Jarchi, in his book of Hebrew roots, gives a very
different interpretation of it; he derives it from בן ben, a son, or
בנים banim, children; his words must not be literally translated, but
this is the sense: "When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew
women, and ye see that the birth is broken forth, if it be a son, then
ye shall kill him." Jonathan ben Uzziel gives us a curious reason for
the command given by Pharaoh to the Egyptian women: "Pharaoh slept, and
saw in his sleep a balance, and behold the whole land of Egypt stood in
one scale, and a lamb in the other; and the scale in which the lamb was
outweighed that in which was the land of Egypt. Immediately he sent and
called all the chief magicians, and told them his dream. And Janes and
Jimbres, (see [Ti2 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008)). who were
chief of the magicians, opened their mouths and said to Pharaoh, 'A
child is shortly to be born in the congregation of the Israelites, whose
hand shall destroy the whole land of Egypt.' Therefore Pharaoh spake to
the midwives, etc."

[Exodus 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 1:17</span></span>

The midwives feared God - Because they knew that God had forbidden
murder of every kind; for though the law was not yet given, [Exo
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013), being Hebrews they must have
known that God had from the beginning declared, Whosoever sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed, [Gen
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006). Therefore they saved the male
children of all to whose assistance they were called. See Clarke's note
on [Exo 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#019).

[Exodus 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 1:19</span></span>

The Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women - This is a simple
statement of what general experience shows to be a fact, viz., that
women, who during the whole of their pregnancy are accustomed to hard
labor, especially in the open air, have comparatively little pain in
parturition. At this time the whole Hebrew nation, men and women, were
in a state of slavery, and were obliged to work in mortar and brick, and
all manner of service In The Field, [Exo
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014), and this at once accounts for
the ease and speediness of their travail. With the strictest truth the
midwives might say, The Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women: the
latter fare delicately, are not inured to labor, and are kept shut up at
home, therefore they have hard, difficult, and dangerous labors; but the
Hebrew women are lively, חיות chayoth, are strong, hale, and vigorous,
and therefore are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them. In such
cases we may naturally conclude that the midwives were very seldom even
sent for. And this is probably the reason why we find but two mentioned;
as in such a state of society there could be but very little employment
for persons of that profession, as a mother, an aunt, or any female
acquaintance or neighbor, could readily afford all the assistance
necessary in such cases. Commentators, pressed with imaginary
difficulties, have sought for examples of easy parturition in Ethiopia,
Persia, and India, as parallels to the case before us; but they might
have spared themselves the trouble, because the case is common in all
parts of the globe where the women labor hard, and especially in the
open air. I have known several instances of the kind myself among the
laboring poor. I shall mention one: I saw a poor woman in the open field
at hard labor; she stayed away in the afternoon, but she returned the
next morning to her work with her infant child, having in the interim
been safely delivered! She continued at her daily work, having
apparently suffered no inconvenience!

I have entered more particularly into this subject because, through want
of proper information, (perhaps from a worse motive), certain persons
have spoken very unguardedly against this inspired record: "The Hebrew
midwives told palpable lies, and God commends them for it; thus we may
do evil that good may come of it, and sanctify the means by the end."
Now I contend that there was neither lie direct nor even prevarication
in the case. The midwives boldly state to Pharaoh a fact, (had it not
been so, he had a thousand means of ascertaining the truth), and they
state it in such a way as to bring conviction to his mind on the subject
of his oppressive cruelty on the one hand, and the mercy of Jehovah on
the other. As if they had said, "The very oppression under which,
through thy cruelty, the Israelites groan, their God has turned to their
advantage; they are not only fruitful, but they bring forth with
comparatively no trouble; we have scarcely any employment among them."
Here then is a fact, boldly announced in the face of danger; and we see
that God was pleased with this frankness of the midwives, and he blessed
them for it.

[Exodus 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 1:20</span></span>

Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people multiplied,
and waxed very mighty - This shows an especial providence and blessing
of God; for though in all cases where females are kept to hard labor
they have comparatively easy and safe travail, yet in a state of slavery
the increase is generally very small, as the children die for want of
proper nursing, the women, through their labor, being obliged to neglect
their offspring; so that in the slave countries the stock is obliged to
be recruited by foreign imports: yet in the case above it was not so;
there was not one barren among their tribes, and even their women,
though constantly obliged to perform their daily tasks, were neither
rendered unfruitful by it, nor taken off by premature death through the
violence and continuance of their labor, when even in the delicate
situation mentioned above.

[Exodus 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 1:21</span></span>

He made them houses - Dr. Shuckford thinks that there is something wrong
both in the punctuation and translation of this place, and reads the
passage thus, adding the 21st to the 20th verse: "And they multiplied
and waxed mighty; and this happened (ויהי vayehi) because the midwives
feared God; and he (Pharaoh) made (להם lahem, masc.). them (the
Israelites) houses; and commanded all his people, saying, Every son that
is born, etc." The doctor supposes that previously to this time the
Israelites had no fixed dwellings, but lived in tents, and therefore had
a better opportunity of concealing their children; but now Pharaoh built
them houses, and obliged them to dwell in them, and caused the Egyptians
to watch over them, that all the male children might be destroyed, which
could not have been easily effected had the Israelites continued to live
in their usual scattered manner in tents. That the houses in question
were not made for the midwives, but for the Israelites in general, the
Hebrew text seems pretty plainly to indicate, for the pronoun להם lahem,
to them, is the masculine gender; had the midwives been meant, the
feminine pronoun להן lahen would have been used. Others contend that by
making them houses, not only the midwives are intended, but also that
the words mark an increase of their families, and that the objection
taken from the masculine pronoun is of no weight, because these pronouns
are often interchanged; see [Kg1
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#017), where להם lahem is written, and
in the parallel place, [Ch2 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#016), להן
lahen is used. So בהם bahem, in [Ch1
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#007), is written בהן bahen, [Sa1
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#007), and in several other places.
There is no doubt that God did bless the midwives, his approbation of
their conduct is strictly marked; and there can be no doubt of his
prospering the Israelites, for it is particularly said that the people
multiplied and waxed very mighty. But the words most probably refer to
the Israelites, whose houses or families were built up by an
extraordinary in crease of children, notwithstanding the cruel policy of
the Egyptian king. Vain is the counsel of man when opposed to the
determinations of God! All the means used for the destruction of this
people became in his hand instruments of their prosperity and increase.
How true is the saying, If God be for us, who can be against us?

[Exodus 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 1:22</span></span>

Ye shall cast into the river - As the Nile, which is here intended, was
a sacred river among the Egyptians, it is not unlikely that Pharaoh
intended the young Hebrews as an offering to his god, having two objects
in view:

1\. To increase the fertility of the country by thus procuring, as he
might suppose, a proper and sufficient annual inundation; and

2\. To prevent an increase of population among the Israelites, and in
process of time procure their entire extermination.

It is conjectured, with a great show of probability, that the edict
mentioned in this verse was not made till after the birth of Aaron, and
that it was revoked soon after the birth of Moses; as, if it had
subsisted in its rigour during the eighty-six years which elapsed
between this and the deliverance of the Israelites, it is not at all
likely that their males would have amounted to six hundred thousand, and
those all effective men.

In the general preface to this work reference has been made to Origen's
method of interpreting the Scriptures, and some specimens promised. On
the plain account of a simple matter of fact, related in the preceding
chapter, this very eminent man, in his 2d Homily on Exodus, imposes an
interpretation of which the following is the substance.

"Pharaoh, king of Egypt, represents the devil; the male and female
children of the Hebrews represent the animal and rational faculties of
the soul. Pharaoh, the devil, wishes to destroy all the males, i.e., the
seeds of rationality and spiritual science through which the soul tends
to and seeks heavenly things; but he wishes to preserve the females
alive, i.e., all those animal propensities of man, through which he
becomes carnal and devilish.

Hence," says he, "when you see a man living in luxury, banquetings,
pleasures, and sensual gratifications, know that there the king of Egypt
has slain all the males, and preserved all the females alive. The
midwives represent the Old and New Testaments: the one is called
Sephora, which signifies a sparrow, and means that sort of instruction
by which the soul is led to soar aloft, and contemplate heavenly things;
the other is called Phua, which signifies ruddy or bashful, and points
out the Gospel, which is ruddy with the blood of Christ, spreading the
doctrine of his passion over the earth. By these, as midwives, the souls
that are born into the Church, are healed, for the reading of the
Scriptures corrects and heals what is amiss in the mind. Pharaoh, the
devil, wishes to corrupt those midwives, that all the males - the
spiritual propensities, may be destroyed; and this he endeavors to do by
bringing in heresies and corrupt opinions. But the foundation of God
standeth sure. The midwives feared God, therefore he builded them
houses. If this be taken literally, it has little or no meaning, and is
of no importance; but it points out that the midwives - the law and the
Gospel, by teaching the fear of God, build the houses of the Church, and
fill the whole earth with houses of prayer. Therefore these midwives,
because they feared God, and taught the fear of God, did not fulfill the
command of the king of Egypt - they did not kill the males, and I dare
confidently affirm that they did not preserve the females alive; for
they do not teach vicious doctrines in the Church, nor preach up luxury,
nor foster sin, which are what Pharaoh wishes in keeping the females
alive; for by these virtue alone is cultivated and nourished. By
Pharaoh's daughter I suppose the Church to be intended, which is
gathered from among the Gentiles; and although she has an impious and
iniquitous father, yet the prophet says unto her, Hearken, O daughter,
and consider, incline thine ear; forget also thine own people, and thy
father's house, so shall the king greatly desire thy beauty, [Psa
45:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010), [Psa
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011). This therefore is she who is
come to the waters to bathe, i.e., to the baptismal font, that she may
be washed from the sins which she has contracted in her father's house.
Immediately she receives bowels of commiseration, and pities the infant;
that is, the Church, coming from among the Gentiles, finds Moses - the
law, lying in the pool, cast out, and exposed by his own people in an
ark of bulrushes, daubed over with pitch - deformed and obscured by the
carnal and absurd glosses of the Jews, who are ignorant of its spiritual
sense; and while it continues with them is as a helpless and destitute
infant; but as soon as it enters the doors of the Christian Church it
becomes strong and vigorous; and thus Moses - the law, grows up, and
becomes, through means of the Christian Church, more respectable even in
the eyes of the Jews themselves, according to his own prophecy: I will
move them to jealousy with those which are not a people; I will provoke
them to anger with a foolish nation, [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021). Thus taught by the Christian
Church, the synagogue forsakes idolatry; for when it sees the Gentiles
worshipping the true God, it is ashamed of its idols, and worships them
no more. In like manner, though we have had Pharaoh for our father -
though the prince of this world has begotten us by wicked works, yet
when we come unto the waters of baptism we take unto us Moses - the law
of God, in its true and spiritual meaning; what is low or weak in it we
leave, what is strong and perfect we take and place in the royal palace
of our heart. Then we have Moses grown up - we no longer consider the
law as little or mean; all is magnificent, excellent, elegant, for all
is spiritually understood. Let us beseech the Lord Jesus Christ that he
may reveal himself to us more and more and show us how great and sublime
Moses is; for he by his Holy Spirit reveals these things to whomsoever
he will. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever! Amen.

Neither the praise of piety nor the merit of ingenuity can be denied to
this eminent man in such interpretations as these. But who at the same
time does not see that if such a mode of exposition were to be allowed,
the trumpet could no longer give a certain sound? Every passage and fact
might then be obliged to say something, any thing, every thing, or
nothing, according to the fancy, peculiar creed, or caprice of the
interpreter.

I have given this large specimen from one of the ancients, merely to
save the moderns, from whose works on the sacred writings I could
produce many specimens equally singular and more absurd. Reader, it is
possible to trifle with the testimonies of God, and all the while speak
serious things; but if all be not done according to the pattern shown in
the mount, much evil may be produced, and many stumbling blocks thrown
in the way of others, which may turn them totally out of the way of
understanding; and then what a dreadful account must such interpreters
have to give to that God who has pronounced a curse, not only on those
who take away from his word, but also on those who add to it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 2](exo002)

</div>
