<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo039)  [Next](lev000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 40:0</span></span>

Moses is commanded to set up the tabernacle, the first day of the first
month of the second year of their departure from Egypt, [Exo
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001), [Exo
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#002). The ark to be put into it, [Exo
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#003). The table and candlestick to be
brought in also with the golden altar, [Exo
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#004), [Exo
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#005). The altar of burnt-offering to
be set up before the door, and the laver between the tent and the altar,
[Exo 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#006), [Exo
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#007). The court to be set up, [Exo
40:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#008). The tabernacle and its utensils
to be anointed, [Exo 40:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#009). Aaron
and his sons to be washed, clothed, and anointed, [Exo
40:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#012). All these things are done
accordingly, [Exo 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#016). The
tabernacle is erected; and all its utensils, etc., placed in it on the
first of the first month of the second year, vv. 17-33. The cloud covers
the tent, and the glory of the Lord fills the tabernacle, so that even
Moses is not able to enter, [Exo
40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034), [Exo
40:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#035). When they were to journey, the
cloud was taken up; when to encamp, the cloud rested on the tabernacle,
[Exo 40:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#036), [Exo
40:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#037). A cloud by day and a fire by
night was upon the tabernacle, in the sight of all the Israelites,
through the whole course of the journeyings, [Exo
40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038).

[Exodus 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 40:2</span></span>

The first day of the first month - It Is generally supposed that the
Israelites began the work of the tabernacle about the sixth month after
they had left Egypt; and as the work was finished about the end of the
first year of their exodus, (for it was set up the first day of the
second year), that therefore they had spent about six months in making
it: so that the tabernacle was erected one year all but fifteen days
after they had left Egypt. Such a building, with such a profusion of
curious and costly workmanship, was never got up in so short a time. But
it was the work of the Lord, and the people did service as unto the
Lord; for the people had a mind to work.

[Exodus 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 40:4</span></span>

Thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things, etc. - That
is, Thou shalt place the twelve loaves upon the table in the order
before mentioned. See Clarke's note on [Exo
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#030).

[Exodus 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 40:15</span></span>

For their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood - By this
anointing a right was given to Aaron and his family to be high priests
among the Jews for ever; so that all who should be born of this family
should have a right to the priesthood without the repetition of this
unction, as they should enjoy this honor in their father's right, who
had it by a particular grant from God. But it appears that the high
priest, on his consecration, did receive the holy unction; see [Lev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#003); [Lev
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#022); [Lev
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010). And this continued till the
destruction of the first temple, and the Babylonish captivity; and
according to Eusebius, Cyril of Jerusalem, and others, this custom
continued among the Jews to the advent of our Lord, after which there is
no evidence it was ever practiced. See Calmet's note [Exo
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#007) (note). The Jewish high priest
was a type of Him who is called the high priest over the house of God,
[Heb 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#021); and when he came, the
functions of the other necessarily ceased. This case is worthy of
observation. The Jewish sacrifices were never resumed after the
destruction of their city and temple, for they hold it unlawful to
sacrifice anywhere out of Jerusalem; and the unction of their high
priest ceased from that period also: and why? Because the true priest
and the true sacrifice were come, and the types of course were no longer
necessary after the manifestation of the antitype.

[Exodus 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 40:19</span></span>

He spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle - By the tent, in this and
several other places, we are to understand the coverings made of rams'
skins, goats' hair, etc., which were thrown over the building; for the
tabernacle had no other kind of roof.

[Exodus 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 40:20</span></span>

And put the testimony into the ark - That is, the two tables on which
the ten commandments had been written. See [Exo
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#016). The ark, the golden table with
the shew-bread, the golden candlestick, and the golden altar of incense,
were all in the tabernacle, within the veil or curtains, which served as
a door, [Exo 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#022), [Exo
40:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#024), [Exo
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#026). And the altar of burnt-offering
was by the door, [Exo 40:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#029). And the
brazen laver, between the tent of the congregation and the brazen altar,
[Exo 40:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#030); still farther outward,
that it might be the first thing the priests met with when entering into
the court to minister, as their hands and feet must be washed before
they could perform any part of the holy service, [Exo
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#031), [Exo
40:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#032). When all these things were thus
placed, then the court that surrounded the tabernacle, which consisted
of posts and hangings, was set up, [Exo
40:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#033).

[Exodus 40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 40:34</span></span>

Then a cloud covered the tent - Thus God gave his approbation of the
work; and as this was visible, so it was a sign to all the people that
Jehovah was among them.

And the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle - How this was
manifested we cannot tell; it was probably by some light or brightness
which was insufferable to the sight, for Moses himself could not enter
in because of the cloud and the glory, [Exo
40:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#035). Precisely the same happened
when Solomon had dedicated his temple; for it is said that the cloud
filled the house of the Lord, so that the priests could not stand to
minister because of the cloud; for the glory of the Lord had filled the
house of the Lord; [Kg1 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#010), [Kg1
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#011). Previously to this the cloud of
the Divine glory had rested upon that tent or tabernacle which Moses had
pitched without the camp, after the transgression in the matter of the
molten calf; but now the cloud removed from that tabernacle and rested
upon this one, which was made by the command and under the direction of
God himself. And there is reason to believe that this tabernacle was
pitched in the center of the camp, all the twelve tribes pitching their
different tents in a certain order around it.

[Exodus 40:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">exo 40:36</span></span>

When the cloud was taken up - The subject of these three last verses has
been very largely explained in the notes on [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021), to which, as well as to the
general remarks on that chapter, the reader is requested immediately to
refer. See Clarke's note on [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021).

[Exodus 40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">exo 40:38</span></span>

For the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day - This daily
and nightly appearance was at once both a merciful providence, and a
demonstrative proof of the Divinity of their religion: and these tokens
continued with them throughout all their journeys; for, notwithstanding
their frequently repeated disobedience and rebellion, God never withdrew
these tokens of his presence from them, till they were brought into the
promised land. When, therefore, the tabernacle became fixed, because the
Israelites had obtained their inheritance, this mark of the Divine
presence was no longer visible in the sight of all Israel, but appears
to have been confined to the holy of holies, where it had its fixed
residence upon the mercy-seat between the cherubim; and in this place
continued till the first temple was destroyed, after which it was no
more seen in Israel till God was manifested in the flesh.

As in the book of Genesis we have God's own account of the commencement
of the World, the origin of nations, and the peopling of the earth; so
in the book of Exodus we have an account, from the same source of
infallible truth, of the commencement of the Jewish Church, and the
means used by the endless mercy of God to propagate and continue his
pure and undefiled religion in the earth, against which neither human
nor diabolic power or policy have ever been able to prevail! The
preservation of this religion, which has ever been opposed by the great
mass of mankind, is a standing proof of its Divinity. As it has ever
been in hostility against the corrupt passions of men, testifying
against the world that its deeds were evil, these passions have ever
been in hostility to it. Cunning and learned men have argued to render
its authority dubious, and its tendency suspicious; whole states and
empires have exerted themselves to the uttermost to oppress and destroy
it; and its professed friends, by their conduct, have often betrayed it:
yet librata ponderibus suis, supported by the arm of God and its own
intrinsic excellence, it lives and flourishes; and the river that makes
glad the city of God has run down with the tide of time 5800 years, and
is running on with a more copious and diffusive current.

Labitur, et labetur in omne volubilis aevum.

"Still glides the river, and will ever glide."

We have seen how, by the miraculous cloud, all the movements of the
Israelites were directed. They struck or pitched their tents, as it
removed or became stationary. Every thing that concerned them was under
the direction and management of God. But these things happened unto them
for ensamples; and it is evident, from [Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005), that all these things typified
the presence and influence of God in his Church, and in the souls of his
followers. His Church can possess no sanctifying knowledge, no
quickening power but from the presence and influence of his Spirit. By
this influence all his followers are taught, enlightened, led,
quickened, purified, and built up on their most holy faith; and without
the indwelling of his Spirit, light, life, and salvation are impossible.
These Divine influences Are necessary, not only for a time, but through
all our journeys, [Exo 40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038); though
every changing scene of providence, and through every step in life. And
these the followers of Christ are to possess, not by inference or
inductive reasoning, but consciously. The influence is to be felt, and
the fruits of it to appear as fully as the cloud of the Lord by day, and
the fire by night, appeared in the sight of all the house of Israel.
Reader, hast thou this Spirit? Are all thy goings and comings ordered by
its continual guidance? Does Christ, who was represented by this
tabernacle, and in whom dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead bodily,
dwell in thy heart by faith? If not, call upon God for that blessing
which, for the sake of his Son, he is ever disposed to impart; then
shalt thou be glorious, and on all thy glory there shall be a defense.
Amen, Amen.

On the ancient division of the law into fifty-four sections, see the
notes at the end of Genesis ([Gen
50:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#026) (note)). Of these fifty-four
sections Genesis contains twelve; and the commencement and ending of
each has been marked in the note already referred to. Of these sections
Exodus contains eleven, all denominated, as in the former case, by the
words in the original with which they commence. I shall point these out
as in the former, carrying the enumeration from Genesis.

The Thirteenth section, called שמות shemoth, begins [Exo
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001), and ends [Exo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001).

The Fourteenth, called וארא vaera, begins [Exo
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#002), and ends [Exo
9:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#035).

The Fifteenth, called בא bo, begins [Exo
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#001), and ends [Exo
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#016).

The Sixteenth, called בשלח beshallach, begins [Exo
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017), and ends [Exo
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#016).

The Seventeenth, called יתרו yithro, begins [Exo
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#001), and ends [Exo
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#026).

The Eighteenth, called משפטים mishpatim, begins [Exo
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#001), and ends [Exo
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018).

The Nineteenth, called תרומה terumah, begins [Exo
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#002), and ends [Exo
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#019).

The Twentieth, called תצוה tetsavveh, begins [Exo
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020), and ends [Exo
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#010).

The Twenty-First, called תשא tissa, begins [Exo
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#011), and ends [Exo
34:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#035).

The Twenty-Second, called ויקהל vaiyakhel, begins [Exo
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#001), and ends [Exo
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#020).

The Twenty-Third, called פקודי pekudey, begins [Exo
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#021), and ends [Exo
40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038).

It will at once appear to the reader that these sections have their
technical names from some remarkable word, either in the first or second
verse of their commencement.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Introduction](lev000)

</div>
