<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo014)  [Next](exo016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 15:0</span></span>

Moses and the Israelites sing a song of praise to God for their late
deliverance, in which they celebrate the power of God, gloriously
manifested in the destruction of Pharaoh and his host, [Exo
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001); express their confidence in him
as their strength and protector, [Exo
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002), [Exo
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#003); detail the chief circumstances
in the overthrow of the Egyptians, [Exo
15:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#004); and relate the purposes they
had formed for the destruction of God's people, [Exo
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#009), and how he destroyed them in the
imaginations of their hearts, [Exo
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010). Jehovah is celebrated for the
perfections of his nature and his wondrous works, [Exo
15:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011). A prediction of the effect
which the account of the destruction of the Egyptians should have on the
Edomites, Moabites, and Canaanites, [Exo
15:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#014). A prediction of the
establishment of Israel in the promised land, [Exo
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017). The full chorus of praise, [Exo
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#018). Recapitulation of the
destruction of the Egyptians, and the deliverance of Israel, [Exo
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#019). Miriam and the women join in
and prolong the chorus, [Exo 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020),
[Exo 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021). The people travel three
days in the wilderness of Shur, and find no water, [Exo
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022). Coming to Marah, and finding
bitter waters, they murmur against Moses, [Exo
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#023), [Exo
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#024). In answer to the prayer of
Moses, God shows him a tree by which the waters are sweetened, [Exo
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#025). God gives them statutes and
gracious promises, [Exo 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#026). They
come to Elim, where they find twelve wells of water and seventy palm
trees, and there they encamp, [Exo
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#027).

[Exodus 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 15:1</span></span>

Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song - Poetry has been
cultivated in all ages and among all people, from the most refined to
the most barbarous; and to it principally, under the kind providence of
God, we are indebted for most of the original accounts we have of the
ancient nations of the universe. Equally measured lines, with a
harmonious collocation of expressive, sonorous, and sometimes highly
metaphorical terms, the alternate lines either answering to each other
in sense, or ending with similar sounds, were easily committed to
memory, and easily retained. As these were often accompanied with a
pleasing air or tune, the subject being a concatenation of striking and
interesting events, histories formed thus became the amusement of youth,
the softeners of the tedium of labor, and even the solace of age. In
such a way the histories of most nations have been preserved. The
interesting events celebrated, the rhythm or metre, and the accompanying
tune or recitativo air, rendered them easily transmissible to posterity;
and by means of tradition they passed safely from father to son through
the times of comparative darkness, till they arrived at those ages in
which the pen and the press have given them a sort of deathless duration
and permanent stability, by multiplying the copies. Many of the ancient
historic and heroic British tales are continued by tradition among the
aboriginal inhabitants of Ireland to the present day; and the repetition
of them constitutes the chief amusement of the winter evenings. Even the
prose histories, which were written on the ground of the poetic, copied
closely their exemplars, and the historians themselves were obliged to
study all the beauties and ornaments of style, that their works might
become popular; and to this circumstance we owe not a small measure of
what is termed refinement of language. How observable is this in the
history of Herodotus, who appears to have closely copied the ancient
poetic records in his inimitable and harmonious prose; and, that his
books might bear as near a resemblance as possible to the ancient and
popular originals, he divided them into nine, and dedicated each to one
of the muses! His work therefore seems to occupy the same place between
the ancient poetic compositions and mere prosaic histories, as the
polype does between plants and animals. Much even of our sacred records
is written in poetry, which God has thus consecrated to be the faithful
transmitter of remote and important events; and of this the song before
the reader is a proof in point. Though this is not the first specimen of
poetry we have met with in the Pentateuch, (see Lamech's speech to his
wives, [Gen 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#023), [Gen
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#024); Noah's prophecy concerning his
sons, [Gen 9:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025); and Jacob's
blessing to the twelve patriarchs, Genesis 49:2-27 (note)), yet it is
the first regular ode of any considerable length, having but one
subject; and it is all written in hemistichs, or half lines, the usual
form in Hebrew poetry; and though this form frequently occurs, it is not
attended to in our common printed Hebrew Bibles, except in this and
three other places, (Deuteronomy 32, Judges 5, and 2 Samuel 22)., all of
which shall be noticed as they occur. But in Dr. Kennicott's edition of
the Hebrew Bible, all the poetry, wheresoever it occurs, is printed in
its own hemistich form.

After what has been said it is perhaps scarcely necessary to observe,
that as such ancient poetic histories commemorated great and
extraordinary displays of providence, courage, strength, fidelity,
heroism, and piety; hence the origin of Epic poems, of which the song in
this chapter is the earliest specimen. And on the principle of
preserving the memory of such events, most nations have had their epic
poets, who have generally taken for their subject the most splendid or
most remote events of their country's history, which either referred to
the formation or extension of their empire, the exploits of their
ancestors, or the establishment of their religion. Hence the ancient
Hebrews had their Shir Mosheh, the piece in question: the Greeks, their
Ilias; the Hindoos, their Mahabarat; the Romans, their Aeneid; the
Norwegians, their Edda; the Irish and Scotch, their Fingal and
Chronological poems; the Welsh, their Taliessin and his Triads; the
Arabs, their Nebiun-Nameh (exploits of Mohammed) and Hamleh Heedry,
(exploits of Aly); the Persians, their Shah Nameh, (book of kings); the
Italians, their Gerusalemme Liberata; the Portuguese, their Lusiad; the
English, their Paradise Lost; and, in humble imitation of all the rest,
(etsi non passibus aequis), the French, their Henriade.

The song of Moses has been in the highest repute in the Church of God
from the beginning; the author of the Book of The Wisdom of Solomon
attributes it in a particular manner to the wisdom of God, and says that
on this occasion God opened the mouth of the dumb, and made the tongues
of infants eloquent; The Wisdom of Solomon 10:21. As if he had said,
Every person felt an interest in the great events which had taken place,
and all labored to give Jehovah that praise which was due to his name.
"With this song of victory over Pharaoh," says Mr. Ainsworth, "the Holy
Ghost compares the song of those who have gotten the victory over the
spiritual Pharaoh, the beast, (Antichrist), when they stand by the sea
of glass mingled with fire, (as Israel stood here by the Red Sea),
having the harps of God, (as the women here had timbrels, [Exo
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020)), and they sing the song of
Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, the Son of God,"
[Rev 15:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#002).

I will sing unto the Lord - Moses begins the song, and in the two first
hemistichs states the subject of it; and these two first lines became
the grand chorus of the piece, as we may learn from [Exo
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021). See Dr. Kennicott's arrangement
and translation of this piece at the end of this chapter. See Clarke's
note on [Exo 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#026).

Triumphed gloriously - כי גאה גאה ki gaoh gaah, he is exceedingly
exalted, rendered by the Septuagint, Ενδοξως γαρ δεδοξασται, He is
gloriously glorified; and surely this was one of the most signal
displays of the glorious majesty of God ever exhibited since the
creation of the world. And when it is considered that the whole of this
transaction shadowed out the redemption of the human race from the
thraldom and power of sin and iniquity by the Lord Jesus, and the final
triumph of the Church of God over all its enemies, we may also join in
the song, and celebrate Him who has triumphed so gloriously, having
conquered death, and opened the kingdom of heaven to all believers.

[Exodus 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 15:2</span></span>

The Lord is my strength and song - How judiciously are the members of
this sentence arranged! He who has God for his strength, will have him
for his song; and he to whom Jehovah is become salvation, will exalt his
name. Miserably and untunably, in the ears of God, does that man sing
praises, who is not saved by the grace of Christ, nor strengthened by
the power of his might.

It is worthy of observation that the word which we translate Lord here,
is not יהוה JEHOVAH in the original, but יה Jah; "as if by
abbreviation," says Mr. Parkhurst, "for יהיה yeheieh or יהי yehi. It
signifies the Essence Ὁ ΩΝ, He who Is, simply, absolutely, and
independently. The relation between יה Jah and the verb היה to subsist,
exist, be, is intimated to us the first time יה Jah is used in
Scripture, ([Exo 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002)): 'My strength
and my song is יה Jah, and he is become (ויהי vajehi) to me salvation.'"
See [Psa 68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005); [Psa
89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006); [Psa
94:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#007); [Psa
115:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#017), [Psa
115:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#018); [Psa
118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017).

Jah יה is several times joined with the name Jehovah יהוה so that we may
be sure that it is not, as some have supposed, a mere abbreviation of
that word. See [Isa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002); [Isa
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#004). Our blessed Lord solemnly claims
to himself what is intended in this Divine name יה Jah, [Joh
8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058) : "Before Abraham was, (γενεσθαι,
was born), εγω ειμι, I Am," not I was, but I am, plainly intimating his
Divine eternal existence. Compare [Isa
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#013). And the Jews appear to have
well understood him, for then took they up stones to cast at him as a
blasphemer. Compare [Col 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016), [Col
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017), where the Apostle Paul, after
asserting that all things that are in heaven and that are in earth,
visible and invisible, were created, εκτισται, by and for Christ, adds
And He Is (αυτος εστι, not ην, was) before all things, and by him all
things συνεστηκε, have subsisted, and still subsist. See Parkhurst.

From this Divine name יה Jah the ancient Greeks had their Ιη, Ιη, in
their invocations of the gods, particularly of Apollo (the uncompounded
One) the light; and hence ei, written after the oriental manner from
right to left, afterwards ie, was inscribed over the great door of the
temple at Delphi! See Clarke's note on [Exo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014), and the concluding observations
there.

I will prepare him a habitation - ואנוהו veanvehu. It has been supposed
that Moses, by this expression, intended the building of the tabernacle;
but it seems to come in very strangely in this place. Most of the
ancient versions understood the original in a very different sense. The
Vulgate has et glorificabo eum; the Septuagint δοξασω αυτον, I will
Glorify him; with which the Syriac, Coptic, the Targum of Jonathan, and
the Jerusalem Targum, agree. From the Targum of Onkelos the present
translation seems to have been originally derived; he has translated the
place ואבני לה מקדש veebnei leh makdash, "And I will build him a
sanctuary," which not one of the other versions, the Persian excepted,
acknowledges. Our own old translations are generally different from the
present: Coverdale, "This my God, I will magnify him;" Matthew's,
Cranmer's, and the Bishops' Bible, render it glorify, and the sense of
the place seems to require it. Calmet, Houbigant, Kennicott, and other
critics, contend for this translation.

My father's God - I believe Houbigant to be right, who translates the
original, אלהי אבי Elohey abi, Deus meus, pater meus est, "My God is my
Father." Every man may call the Divine Being his God; but only those who
are his children by adoption through grace can call him their Father.
This is a privilege which God has given to none but his children. See
[Gal 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006).

[Exodus 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 15:3</span></span>

The Lord is a man of war - Perhaps it would be better to translate the
words, Jehovah is the man or hero of the battle. As we scarcely ever
apply the term to any thing but first-rate armed vessels, the change of
the translation seems indispensable, though the common rendering is
literal enough. Besides, the object of Moses was to show that man had no
part in this victory, but that the whole was wrought by the miraculous
power of God, and that therefore he alone should have all the glory.

The Lord is his name - That is, Jehovah. He has now, as the name
implies, given complete existence to all his promises. See Clarke on
[Gen 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004) (note), and [Exo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003) (note).

[Exodus 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 15:4</span></span>

Pharaoh's chariots - his host - his chosen captains - On such an
expedition it is likely that the principal Egyptian nobility accompanied
their king, and that the overthrow they met with here had reduced Egypt
to the lowest extremity. Had the Israelites been intent on plunder, or
had Moses been influenced by a spirit of ambition, how easily might both
have gratified themselves, as, had they returned, they might have soon
overrun and subjugated the whole land.

[Exodus 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 15:6</span></span>

Thy right hand - Thy omnipotence, manifested in a most extraordinary
way.

[Exodus 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 15:7</span></span>

In the greatness of thine excellency - To this wonderful deliverance the
Prophet Isaiah refers, [Isa 63:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#011) :
"Then he remembered the days of old, Moses and his people, saying, Where
is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherd of his
flock? Where is he that put his Holy Spirit within him? That led them by
the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm, dividing the water before
them, to make himself an everlasting name? That led them through the
deep, as a horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble? As a
beast goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of the Lord caused him to
rest; so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name."

[Exodus 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 15:8</span></span>

The depths were congealed - The strong east wind ([Exo
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021)) employed to dry the bottom of
the sea, is here represented as the blast of God's nostrils that had
congealed or frozen the waters, so that they stood in heaps like a wall
on the right hand and on the left.

[Exodus 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 15:9</span></span>

The enemy said - As this song was composed by Divine inspiration, we may
rest assured that these words were spoken by Pharaoh and his captains,
and the passions they describe felt, in their utmost sway, in their
hearts; but how soon was their boasting confounded? "Thou didst blow
with thy wind, and the sea covered them: they sank as lead in the mighty
waters!"

[Exodus 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 15:11</span></span>

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods? - We have already seen
that all the Egyptian gods, or the objects of the Egyptians' idolatry,
were confounded, and rendered completely despicable, by the ten plagues,
which appear to have been directed principally against them. Here the
people of God exult over them afresh: Who among these gods is like unto
Thee? They can neither save nor destroy; Thou dost both in the most
signal manner.

As the original words מי כמכה באלם יהוה mi chamochah baelim Yehovah are
supposed to have constituted the motto on the ensign of the Asmoneans,
and to have furnished the name of Maccabeus to Judas, their grand
captain, from whom they were afterwards called Maccabeans, it may be
necessary to say a few words on this subject It is possible that Judas
Maccabeus might have had this motto on his ensign, or at least the
initial letters of it, for such a practice was not uncommon. For
instance, on the Roman standard the letters S. P. Q. R. stood for
Senatus Populus Que Romanus, i.e. the Senate and Roman People, and מ כ ב
י M. C. B. I. might have stood for Mi Chamochah Baelim Jehovah, "Who
among the gods (or strong ones) is like unto thee, O Jehovah!" But it
appears from the Greek Μακκαβαιος, and also the Syriac makabi, that the
name was written originally with ק koph, not כ caph. It is most likely,
as Michaelis has observed, that the name must have been derived from מקב
makkab, a hammer or mallet; hence Judas, because of his bravery and
success, might have been denominated the hammer or mallet by which the
enemies of God had been beaten, pounded, and broken to pieces. Judas,
the hammer of the Lord.

Glorious in holiness - Infinitely resplendent in this attribute,
essential to the perfection of the Divine nature.

Fearful in praises - Such glorious holiness cannot be approached without
the deepest reverence and fear, even by angels, who veil their faces
before the majesty of God. How then should man, who is only sin and
dust, approach the presence of his Maker!

Doing wonders? - Every part of the work of God is wonderful; not only
miracles, which imply an inversion or suspension of the laws of nature,
but every part of nature itself. Who can conceive how a single blade of
grass is formed; or how earth, air, and water become consolidated in the
body of the oak? And who can comprehend how the different tribes of
plants and animals are preserved, in all the distinctive characteristics
of their respective natures? And who can conceive how the human being is
formed, nourished, and its different parts developed? What is the true
cause of the circulation of the blood? or, how different ailments
produce the solids and fluids of the animal machine? What is life,
sleep, death? And how an impure and unholy soul is regenerated,
purified, refined, and made like unto its great Creator? These are
wonders which God alone works, and to himself only are they fully known.

[Exodus 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 15:12</span></span>

The earth swallowed them - It is very likely there was also an
earthquake on this occasion, and that chasms were made in the bottom of
the sea, by which many of them were swallowed up, though multitudes were
overwhelmed by the waters, whose dead bodies were afterward thrown
ashore. The psalmist strongly intimates that there was an earthquake on
this occasion: The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven; the
lightnings lightened the world; the Earth Trembled and Shook; [Psa
77:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#018).

[Exodus 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 15:13</span></span>

Thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation - As this
ode was dictated by the Spirit of God, It is most natural to understand
this and the following verses, to the end of the 18th, as containing a
prediction of what God would do for this people which he had so
miraculously redeemed. On this mode of interpretation it would be better
to read several of the verbs in the future tense.

[Exodus 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 15:15</span></span>

The dukes of Edom - Idumea was governed at this time by those called
אלפים alluphim, heads, chiefs, or captains. See Clarke's note on [Gen
36:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015).

[Exodus 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 15:16</span></span>

Till thy people pass over - Not over the Red Sea, for that event had
been already celebrated; but over the desert and Jordan, in order to be
brought into the promised land.

[Exodus 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 15:17</span></span>

Thou shalt bring them in - By thy strength and mercy alone shall they
get the promised inheritance.

And plant them - Give them a fixed habitation in Canaan, after their
unsettled wandering life in the wilderness.

In the mountain - Meaning Canaan, which was a very mountainous country,
[Deu 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#011); or probably Mount Zion, on
which the temple was built. Where the pure worship of God was
established, there the people might expect both rest and safety.
Wherever the purity of religion is established and preserved, and the
high and the low endeavor to regulate their lives according to its
precepts, the government of that country is likely to be permanent.

[Exodus 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 15:18</span></span>

The Lord shall reign for ever and ever - This is properly the grand
chorus in which all the people joined. The words are expressive of God's
everlasting dominion, not only in the world, but in the Church; not only
under the law, but also under the Gospel; not only in time, but through
eternity. The original לעלם ועד leolam vaed may be translated, for ever
and onward; or, by our very expressive compound term, for Evermore, i.e.
for ever and more - not only through time, but also through all
duration. His dominion shall be ever the same, active and infinitely
extending. With this verse the song seems to end, as with it the
hemistichs or poetic lines terminate. The 20th and beginning of the 21st
are in plain prose, but the latter part of the 21st is in hemistichs, as
it contains the response made by Miriam and the Israelitish women at
different intervals during the song. See Dr. Kennicott's arrangement of
the parts at the end of this chapter.

[Exodus 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 15:20</span></span>

And Miriam the prophetess - We have already seen that Miriam was older
than either Moses or Aaron: for when Moses was exposed on the Nile, she
was a young girl capable of managing the stratagem used for the
preservation of his life; and then Aaron was only three years and three
months old, for he was fourscore and three years old when Moses was but
fourscore, (see [Exo 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#007)); so that
Aaron was older than Moses, and Miriam considerably older than either,
not less probably than nine or ten years of age. See Clarke's notes on
[Exo 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#002). There is great diversity of
opinion on the origin of the name of Miriam, which is the same with the
Greek Μαριαμ, the Latin Maria, and the English Mary. Some suppose it to
be compounded of מר mar, a drop, ([Isa
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015)), and ים yam, the sea, and that
from this etymology the heathens formed their Venus, whom they feign to
have sprung from the sea. St. Jerome gives several etymologies for the
name, which at once show how difficult it is to ascertain it: she who
enlightens me, or she who enlightens them, or the star of the sea.
Others, the lady of the sea, the bitterness of the sea, etc. It is
probable that the first or the last is the true one, but it is a matter
of little importance, as we have not the circumstance marked, as in the
case of Moses and many others, that gave rise to the name.

The prophetess - הנביאה hannebiah. For the meaning of the word prophet,
נביא nabi, see the note on [Gen 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007).
It is very likely that Miriam was inspired by the Spirit of God to
instruct the Hebrew women, as Moses and Aaron were to instruct the men;
and when she and her brother Aaron sought to share in the government of
the people with Moses, we find her laying claim to the prophetic
influence, [Num 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#002) : Hath the Lord
indeed spoken only by Moses? Hath he not Spoken Also By Us? And that she
was constituted joint leader of the people with her two brothers, we
have the express word of God by the Prophet Micah, [Mic
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#004) : For I brought thee up out of the
land of Egypt - and I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. Hence
it is very likely that she was the instructress of the women, and
regulated the times, places, etc., of their devotional acts; for it
appears that from the beginning to the present day the Jewish women all
worshipped apart.

A timbrel - תף toph, the same word which is translated tabret, [Gen
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#027), on which the reader is desired
to consult the note. See Clarke's note on [Gen
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#027).

And with dances - מחלת mecholoth. Many learned men suppose that this
word means some instruments of wind music, because the word comes from
the root חלל chalal, the ideal meaning of which is to perforate,
penetrate, pierce, stab, and hence to wound. Pipes or hollow tubes, such
as flutes, hautboys, and the like, may be intended. Both the Arabic and
Persian understand it as meaning instruments of music of the pipe, drum,
or sistrum kind; and this seems to comport better with the scope and
design of the place than the term dances. It must however be allowed
that religious dances have been in use from the remotest times; and yet
in most of the places where the term occurs in our translation, an
instrument of music bids as fair to be its meaning as a dance of any
kind. Miriam is the first prophetess on record, and by this we find that
God not only poured out his Spirit upon men, but upon women also; and we
learn also that Miriam was not only a prophetess, but a poetess also,
and must have had considerable skill in music to have been able to
conduct her part of these solemnities. It may appear strange that during
so long an oppression in Egypt, the Israelites were able to cultivate
the fine arts; but that they did so there is the utmost evidence from
the Pentateuch. Not only architecture, weaving, and such necessary arts,
were well known among them, but also the arts that are called
ornamental, such as those of the goldsmith, lapidary, embroiderer,
furrier, etc., of which we have ample proof in the construction of the
tabernacle and its utensils. However ungrateful, rebellious, etc., the
Jews may have been, the praise of industry and economy can never be
denied them. In former ages, and in all places even of their
dispersions, they appear to have been frugal and industrious, and
capable of great proficiency in the most elegant and curious arts; but
they are now greatly degenerated.

[Exodus 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 15:22</span></span>

The wilderness of Shur - This was on the coast of the Red Sea on their
road to Mount Sinai. See the map.

[Exodus 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 15:23</span></span>

Marah - So called from the bitter waters found there. Dr. Shaw
conjectures that this place is the same as that now called Corondel,
where there is still a small rill which, if not diluted with dews or
rain, continues brackish. See his account at the end of Exodus ([Exo
40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038) (note)).

[Exodus 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 15:24</span></span>

The people murmured - They were in a state of great mental degradation,
owing to their long and oppressive vassalage, and had no firmness of
character. See Clarke's note on [Exo
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017).

[Exodus 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 15:25</span></span>

He cried unto the Lord - Moses was not only their leader, but also their
mediator. Of prayer and dependence on the Almighty, the great mass of
the Israelites appear to have had little knowledge at this time. Moses,
therefore, had much to bear from their weakness, and the merciful Lord
was long-suffering.

The Lord showed him a tree - What this tree was we know not: some think
that the tree was extremely bitter itself, such as the quassia; and that
God acted in this as he generally does, correcting contraries by
contraries, which, among the ancient physicians, was a favourite maxim,
Clavus clavo expellitur. The Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem say that,
when Moses prayed, "the Word of the Lord showed him the tree ארדפני
ardiphney, on which he wrote the great and precious name of (Jehovah),
and then threw it into the waters, and the waters thereby became sweet"
But what the tree ardiphney was we are not informed.

Many suppose that this tree which healed the bitter waters was
symbolical of the cross of our blessed Redeemer, that has been the means
of healing infected nature, and through the virtue of which the evils
and bitters of life are sweetened, and rendered subservient to the best
interests of God's followers. Whatever may be in the metaphor, this is
true in fact; and hence the greatest of apostles gloried in the cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the world was crucified to him and he
unto the world.

It appears that these waters were sweetened only for that occasion, as
Dr. Shaw reports them to be still brackish, which appears to be
occasioned by the abundance of natron which prevails in the surrounding
soil. Thus we may infer that the natural cause of their bitterness or
brackishness was permitted to resume its operations, when the occasion
that rendered the change necessary had ceased to exist. Thus Christ
simply changed that water into wine which was to be drawn out to be
carried to the master of the feast; the rest of the water in the pots
remaining as before. As the water of the Nile was so peculiarly
excellent, to which they had been long accustomed, they could not easily
put up with what was indifferent. See Clarke's note on [Exo
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#018).

There he made for them - Though it is probable that the Israelites are
here intended, yet the word לו lo should not be translated for them, but
to him, for these statutes were given to Moses that he might deliver
them to the people.

There he proved them - נסהו nissahu, he proved Him. By this murmuring of
the people he proved Moses, to see, speaking after the manner of men,
whether he would be faithful, and, in the midst of the trials to which
he was likely to be exposed, whether he would continue to trust in the
Lord, and seek all his help from him.

[Exodus 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 15:26</span></span>

If thou wilt diligently hearken - What is contained in this verse
appears to be what is intended by the statute and ordinance mentioned in
the preceding: If thou wilt diligently hearken unto the voice of the
Lord thy God, and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt
give ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none
of these diseases upon thee, etc. This statute and ordinance implied the
three following particulars:

1\. That they should acknowledge Jehovah for their God, and thus avoid
all idolatry.

2\. That they should receive his word and testimony as a Divine
revelation, binding on their hearts and lives, and thus be saved from
profligacy of every kind, and from acknowledging the maxims or adopting
the customs of the neighboring nations.

3\. That they should continue to do so, and adorn their profession with
a holy life. T

hese things being attended to, then the promise of God was, that they
should have none of the diseases of the Egyptians put on them; that they
should be kept in a state of health of body and peace of mind; and if at
any time they should be afflicted, on application to God the evil should
be removed, because he was their healer or physician - I am the Lord
that healeth thee. That the Israelites had in general a very good state
of health, their history warrants us to believe; and when they were
afflicted, as in the case of the fiery serpents, on application to God
they were all healed. The Targum of Jonathan ben Uzziel states that the
statutes which Moses received at this time were commandments concerning
the observance of the Sabbath, duty to parents, the ordinances
concerning wounds and bruises, and the penalties which sinners should
incur by transgressing them. But it appears that the general ordinances
already mentioned are those which are intended here, and this seems to
be proved beyond dispute by [Jer 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022),
[Jer 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023) : "For I spake not unto your
fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the
land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifices: but this thing
commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye
shall be my people; walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you,
that it may be well unto you."

[Exodus 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 15:27</span></span>

They came to Elim - This was in the desert of Sin, and, according to Dr.
Shaw, about two leagues from Tor, and thirty from Marah or Corondel.

Twelve wells of water - One for each of the tribes of Israel, say the
Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem.

And threescore and ten palm trees - One for each of the seventy elders -
Ibid.

Dr. Shaw found nine of the twelve wells, the other three having been
choked up with sand; and the seventy palm trees multiplied into more
than 2000, the dates of which bring a considerable revenue to the Greek
monks at Tor. See his account at the end of this book, ([Exo
40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038) (note)) and see also the map.
Thus sufficient evidence of the authenticity of this part of the sacred
history remains, after the lapse of more than 3000 years.

In the preceding notes the reader has been referred to Dr. Kennicott's
translation and arrangement of the song of Moses. To this translation he
prefixes the following observations: -

"This triumphant ode was sung by Moses and the sons of Israel: and the
women, headed by Miriam, answered the men by repeating the two first
lines of the song, altering only the first word, which two lines were
probably sung more than once as a chorus.

"The conclusion of this ode seems very manifest; and yet, though the
ancient Jews had sense enough to write this song differently from prose;
and though their authority has prevailed even, to this day in this and
three other poems in the Old Testament, (Deut. 22; Judges 5; and 2 Sam.
22)., still expressed by them as poetry; yet have these critics carried
their ideas of the song here to the end of [Exo
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#019). The reason why the same has
been done by others probably is, they thought that the particle כי for,
which begins [Exo 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#019), necessarily
connected it with the preceding poetry. But this difficulty is removed
by translating כי when, especially if we take [Exo
15:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#019) as being a prose explanation
of the manner in which this song of triumph was performed. For these
three verses say that the men singers were answered in the chorus by
Miriam and the women, accompanying their words with musical instruments.
'When the horse of Pharaoh had gone into the sea, and the Lord had
brought the sea upon them; and Israel had passed, on dry land, in the
midst of the sea; then Miriam took a timbrel, and all the women went out
after her with timbrels and dances; and Miriam (with the women) answered
them (להם lahem, the men, by way of chorus) in the words, O sing ye,
etc.' That this chorus was sung more than Once is thus stated by Bishop
Lowth: Maria, cum mulieribus, virorum choro identidem succinebat -
Praelect. 19.

"I shall now give what appears to me to be an exact translation of this
whole song: -

Moses. Part I

1\. I will sing to Jehovah, for he hath triumphed gloriously; The horse
and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.

2\. My strength and my song is Jehovah; And he is become to me for
salvation: This is my God, and I will celebrate him; The God of my
father, and I will exalt him.

3\. (Perhaps a chorus sung by the men)Jehovah is mighty in battleJehovah
is his name!(Chorus, by Miriam and the women. Perhaps sung first in this
place. )O sing ye to Jehovah, for he hath triumphed gloriously: The
horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.

Moses. Part II

4\. Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea; And his
chosen captains are drowned in the Red Sea.

5\. The depths have covered them, they went down; (They sank) to the
bottom as a stone.

6\. Thy right hand, Jehovah, is become glorious in power; Thy right
hand, Jehovah, dasheth in pieces the enemy.

7\. And in the greatness of thine excellence thou overthrowest them that
rise against thee. Thou sendest forth thy wrath, which consumeth them as
stubble.

8\. Even at the blast of thy displeasure the waters are gathered
together; The floods stand upright as a heap, Congealed are the depths
in the very heart of the sea. O sing ye to Jehovah, etc. Chorus by the
women.

Moses. Part III

9\. The enemy said: 'I will pursue, I shall overtake; I shall divide the
spoil, my soul shall be satiated with them; I will draw my sword, my
hand shall destroy them.'

10\. Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them; They sank as
lead in the mighty waters.

11\. Who is like thee among the gods, O Jehovah? Who is like thee,
glorious in holiness!

12\. Fearful in praises; performing wonders! Thou stretchest out thy
right hand, the earth swalloweth them!

13\. Thou in thy mercy leadest the people whom thou hast redeemed; Thou
in thy strength guidest to the habitation of thy holiness! O sing ye to
Jehovah, etc. Chorus by the women.

Moses. Part IV

14\. The nations have heard, and are afraid; Sorrow hath seized the
inhabitants of Palestine.

15\. Already are the dukes of Edom in consternation, And the mighty men
of Moab, trembling hath seized them; All the inhabitants of Canaan do
faint.

16\. Fear and dread shall fall upon them; Through the greatness of thine
arm they shall be still as a stone.

17\. Till thy people, Jehovah, pass over \[Jordan\]; Till the people
pass over whom thou hast redeemed.

18\. Thou shalt bring them and plant them in the mount of thine
inheritance: The place for thy rest which thou, Jehovah, hast made; The
sanctuary, Jehovah, which thy hands have established.

Grand Chorus by All.

Jehovah for ever and ever shall reign."

1\. When poetry is consecrated to the service of God, and employed as
above to commemorate his marvellous acts, it then becomes a very useful
handmaid to piety, and God is honored by his gifts. God inspired the
song of Moses, and perhaps from this very circumstance it has passed for
current among the most polished of the heathen nations, that a poet is a
person Divinely inspired; and hence the epithet of προφητης, prophet,
and vates, of the same import, was given them among the Greeks and
Romans.

2\. The song of Moses is a proof of the miraculous passage of the
Israelites through the Red Sea. There has been no period since the
Hebrew nation left Egypt in which this song was not found among them, as
composed on that occasion, and to commemorate that event. It may be
therefore considered as completely authentic as any living witness could
be who had himself passed through the Red Sea, and whose life had been
protracted through all the intervening ages to the present day.

3\. We have already seen that it is a song of triumph for the
deliverance of the people of God, and that it was intended to point out
the final salvation and triumph of the whole Church of Christ; so that
in the heaven of heavens the redeemed of the Lord, both among the Jews
and the Gentiles, shall unite together to sing the song of Moses and the
song of the Lamb. See [Rev 15:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#002).
Reader, implore the mercy of God to enable thee to make thy calling and
election sure, that thou mayest bear thy part in this glorious and
eternal triumph.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 16](exo016)

</div>
