<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo011)  [Next](exo013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 12:0</span></span>

The month Abib is to be considered as the commencement of the year, [Exo
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001), [Exo
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#002). The Passover instituted; the
lamb or kid to be used on the occasion to be taken from the flock the
tenth day of the month, and each family to provide one, [Exo
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003), [Exo
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#004). The lamb or kid to be a male of
the first year without blemish, [Exo
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#005). To be killed on the fourteenth
day, [Exo 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006), and the blood to be
sprinkled on the side posts and lintels of the doors, [Exo
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#007). The flesh to be prepared by
roasting, and not to be eaten either sodden or raw, [Exo
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008), [Exo
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#009); and no part of it to be left
till the morning, [Exo 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#010). The
people to eat it with their loins girded, etc., as persons prepared for
a journey, [Exo 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011). Why called the
Passover, [Exo 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012). The blood
sprinkled on the door posts, etc., to be a token to them of preservation
from the destroying angel, [Exo 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013).
The fourteenth day of the month Abib to be a feast for ever, [Exo
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014). Unleavened bread to be eaten
seven days, [Exo 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015). This also to
be observed in all their generations for ever, [Exo
12:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#017). Moses instructs the elders
of Israel how they are to offer the lamb and sprinkle his blood, and for
what purpose, [Exo 12:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021). He binds
them to instruct their children in the nature of this rite, [Exo
12:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#024). The children of Israel act
as commanded, [Exo 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#028). All the
first-born of Egypt slain, [Exo 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029),
[Exo 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#030). Pharaoh and the Egyptians
urge Moses, Aaron, and the Israelites to depart, [Exo
12:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#031). They prepare for their
departure, and get gold, silver, and raiment from the Egyptians, [Exo
12:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#034). They journey from Rameses to
Succoth, in number six hundred thousand men, besides women and children,
and a mixed multitude, [Exo 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037),
[Exo 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#038). They bake unleavened cakes
of the dough they brought with them out of Egypt, [Exo
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#039). The time in which they
sojourned in Egypt, [Exo 12:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040).
Different ordinances concerning the Passover, [Exo
12:43-49](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#043); which are all punctually
observed by the people, who are brought out of Egypt the same day, [Exo
12:50](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#050), [Exo
12:51](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#051).

[Exodus 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 12:2</span></span>

This month shall be unto you the beginning of months - It is supposed
that God now changed the commencement of the Jewish year. The month to
which this verse refers, the month Abib, answers to a part of our March
and April; whereas it is supposed that previously to this the year began
with Tisri, which answers to a part of our September; for in this month
the Jews suppose God created the world, when the earth appeared at once
with all its fruits in perfection. From this circumstance the Jews have
formed a twofold commencement of the year, which has given rise to a
twofold denomination of the year itself, to which they afterwards
attended in all their reckonings: that which began with Tisri or
September was called their civil year; that which began with Abib or
March was called the sacred or ecclesiastical year.

As the exodus of the Israelites formed a particular era, which is
referred to in Jewish reckonings down to the building of the temple, I
have marked it as such in the chronology in the margin; and shall carry
it down to the time in which it ceased to be acknowledged.

Some very eminently learned men dispute this; and especially Houbigant,
who contends with great plausibility of argument that no new
commencement of the year is noted in this place; for that the year had
always begun in this month, and that the words shall be, which are
inserted by different versions, have nothing answering to them in the
Hebrew, which he renders literally thus. Hic mensis vobis est caput
mensium; hic vobis primus est anni mensis. "This month is to you the
head or chief of the months; it is to you the first month of the year."
And he observes farther that God only marks it thus, as is evident from
the context, to show the people that this month, which was the beginning
of their year, should be so designated as to point out to their
posterity on what month and on what day of the month they were to
celebrate the passover and the fast of unleavened bread. His words are
these: "Ergo superest, et Hebr. ipso ex contextu efficitur, non hic novi
ordinis annum constitui, sed eum anni mensem, qui esset primus, ideo
commemorari, ut posteris constaret, quo mense, et quo die mensis paseha
et azyma celebranda essent."

[Exodus 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 12:3</span></span>

In the tenth day of this month - In after times they began their
preparation on the thirteenth day or day before the Passover, which was
not celebrated till the fourteenth day, see [Exo
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006) : but on the present occasion, as
this was their first passover, they probably required more time to get
ready in; as a state of very great confusion must have prevailed at this
time. Mr. Ainsworth remarks that on this day the Israelites did
afterwards go through Jordan into the land of Canaan; [Jos
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019). And Christ, our Paschal Lamb, on
this day entered Jerusalem, riding on an ass; the people bearing palm
branches, and crying, Hosanna, [Joh
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001), [Joh
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#012), [Joh
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#013), etc.: and in him this type was
truly fulfilled.

A lamb - The original word שה seh signifies the young of sheep and of
goats, and may be indifferently translated either lamb or kid. See [Exo
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#005).

A lamb for a house - The whole host of Israel was divided into twelve
tribes, these tribes into families, the families into houses, and the
houses into particular persons; Numbers 1, [Jos
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#014) - Ainsworth.

[Exodus 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 12:4</span></span>

If the household be too little - That is, if there be not persons enough
in one family to eat a whole lamb, then two families must join together.
The rabbins allow that there should be at least ten persons to one
paschal lamb, and not more than twenty.

Take it, according to the number of the souls - The persons who were to
eat of it were to be first ascertained, and then the lamb was to be
slain and dressed for that number.

[Exodus 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 12:5</span></span>

Without blemish - Having no natural imperfection, no disease, no
deficiency or redundancy of parts. On this point the rabbins have
trifled most egregiously, reckoning fifty blemishes that render a lamb
or kid, or any animal, improper to be sacrificed: five in the ear, three
in the eyelid, eight in the eye, three in the nose, six in the mouth,
etc., etc.

A male of the first year - That is, any age in the first year between
eight days and twelve months.

From the sheep, or from the goats - The שה seh means either; and either
was equally proper if without blemish. The Hebrews however in general
preferred the lamb to the kid.

[Exodus 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 12:6</span></span>

Ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day - The lamb or kid was to be
taken from the flock on the tenth day, and kept up and fed by itself
till the fourteenth day, when it was to be sacrificed. This was never
commanded nor practiced afterwards. The rabbins mark four things that
were required in the first passover that were never required afterwards:

1\. The eating of the lamb in their houses dispersed through Goshen.

2\. The taking the lamb on the tenth day.

3\. The striking of its blood on the door posts and lintels of their
houses. And,

4\. Their eating it in haste. These things were not required of the
succeeding generations.

The whole assembly - shall kill it - Any person might kill it, the
sacrificial act in this case not being confined to the priests.

In the evening - בין הערבים beyn haarbayim, "between the two evenings."
The Jews divided the day into morning and evening: till the sun passed
the meridian all was morning or fore-noon; after that, all was afternoon
or evening. Their first evening began just after twelve o'clock, and
continued till sunset; their second evening began at sunset and
continued till night, i.e., during the whole time of twilight; between
twelve o'clock, therefore, and the termination of twilight, the passover
was to be offered.

"The day among the Jews had twelve hours, [Joh
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#009). Their first hour was about six
o'clock in the morning with us. Their sixth hour was our noon. Their
ninth hour answered to our three o'clock in the afternoon. By this we
may understand that the time in which Christ was crucified began at the
third hour, that is, at nine o'clock in the morning, the ordinary time
for the daily morning sacrifice, and ended at the ninth hour, that is,
three o'clock in the afternoon, the time of the evening sacrifice, [Mar
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#025), [Mar
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#033), [Mar
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#034), [Mar
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#037). Wherefore their ninth hour was
their hour of prayer, when they used to go into the temple at the daily
evening sacrifice, [Act 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001); and this
was the ordinary time for the passover. It is worthy of remark that God
sets no particular hour for the killing of the passover: any time
between the two evenings, i.e., between twelve o'clock in the day and
the termination of twilight, was lawful. The daily sacrifice (see [Exo
29:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038), [Exo
29:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#039)) was killed at half past the
eighth hour, that is, half an hour Before three in the afternoon; and it
was offered up at half past the ninth hour, that is, half an hour After
three. In the evening of the passover it was killed at half past the
seventh hour, and offered at half past the eighth, that is, half an hour
Before three: and if the evening of the passover fell on the evening of
the Sabbath, it was killed at half past the Sixth hour, and offered at
half past the Seventh, that is, half an hour Before two in the
afternoon. The reason of this was, they were first obliged to kill the
daily sacrifice, and then to kill and roast the paschal lamb, and also
to rest the evening before the passover. Agreeably to this Maimonides
says 'the killing of the passover is after mid-day, and if they kill it
before it is not lawful; and they do not kill it till after the daily
evening sacrifice, and burning of incense: and after they have trimmed
the lamps they begin to kill the paschal lambs until the end of the
day.' By this time of the day God foreshowed the sufferings of Christ in
the evening of times or in the last days, [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002); [Pe1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019), [Pe1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020) : and about the same time of the
day, when the paschal lamb ordinarily died, He died also, viz., at the
ninth hour; [Mat 27:46-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)." See
Ainsworth.

[Exodus 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 12:7</span></span>

Take of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts - This was to be
done by dipping a bunch of hyssop into the blood, and thus sprinkling it
upon the posts, etc.; see [Exo 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022).
That this sprinkling of the blood of the paschal lamb was an emblem of
the sacrifice and atonement made by the death of Jesus Christ, is most
clearly intimated in the sacred writings, [Pe1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002); [Heb
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013), [Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014); [Heb
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010). It is remarkable that no blood
was to be sprinkled on the threshold, to teach, as Mr. Ainsworth
properly observes, a reverent regard for the blood of Christ, that men
should not tread under foot the Son of God, nor count the blood of the
covenant wherewith they were sanctified an unholy thing; [Heb
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029).

[Exodus 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 12:8</span></span>

They shall eat the flesh - roast with fire - As it was the ordinary
custom of the Jews to boil their flesh, some think that the command
given here was in opposition to the custom of the Egyptians, who ate raw
flesh in honor of Osiris. The Ethiopians are to this day remarkable for
eating raw flesh, as is the case with most savage nations.

Unleavened bread - מצות matstsoth, from מצה matsah, to squeeze or
compress, because the bread prepared without leaven or yeast was
generally compressed, sad or heavy, as we term it. The word here
properly signifies unleavened cakes; the word for leaven in Hebrew is
חמץ chamets, which simply signifies to ferment. It is supposed that
leaven was forbidden on this and other occasions, that the bread being
less agreeable to the taste, it might be emblematical of their bondage
and bitter servitude, as this seems to have been one design of the
bitter herbs which were commanded to be used on this occasion; but this
certainly was not the sole design of the prohibition: leaven itself is a
species of corruption, being produced by fermentation, which in such
cases tends to putrefaction. In this very light St. Paul considers the
subject in this place; hence, alluding to the passover as a type of
Christ, he says: Purge out therefore the old leaven - for Christ our
passover is sacrificed for us: therefore let us keep the feast, not with
old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with
the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth; [Co1
5:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006).

Bitter herbs - What kind of herbs or salad is intended by the word מררים
merorim, which literally signifies bitters, is not well known. The Jews
think chicory, wild lettuce, horehound, and the like are intended.
Whatever may be implied under the term, whether bitter herbs or bitter
ingredients in general, it was designed to put them in mind of their
bitter and severe bondage in the land of Egypt, from which God was now
about to deliver them.

[Exodus 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 12:9</span></span>

With the purtenance thereof - All the intestines, for these were abused
by the heathens to purposes of divination; and when roasted in the
manner here directed they could not be thus used. The command also
implies that the lamb was to be roasted whole; neither the head or legs
were to be separated, nor the intestines removed. I suppose that these
last simply included the heart, lungs, liver, kidneys, etc., and not the
intestinal canal.

[Exodus 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 12:10</span></span>

Ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning - Merely to prevent
putrefaction; for it was not meet that a thing offered to God should be
subjected to corruption, which in such hot countries it must speedily
undergo. Thus the body of our blessed Lord saw no corruption, [Psa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010); [Act
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#027), because, like the paschal lamb,
it was a sacrifice offered to God.

It appears that from the Jewish passover the heathens borrowed their
sacrifice termed Propter Viam. It was their custom previously to their
undertaking a journey, to offer a sacrifice to their gods, and to eat
the whole if possible, but if any part was left they burned it with
fire; and this was called propter viam, because it was made to procure a
prosperous journey. It was in reference to this that Cato is said to
have rallied a person called Q. Albidius, who, having eaten up all his
goods, set fire to his house, his only remaining property. "He has
offered his sacrifice propter viam," says Cato, "because he has burned
what he could not eat." This account is given by Macrobius, Saturn.,
lib. ii., 2, edit. Bipont., vol. 1, p. 333; and is a remarkable instance
how closely some of the religious observances of the people of God have
been copied by the heathen nations.

[Exodus 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 12:11</span></span>

And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded - As in the eastern
countries they wear long loose garments, whenever they travel they tuck
up the fore parts of their garments in the girdle which they wear round
their loins.

Your shoes on your feet - This seems particularly mentioned because not
customary. "The easterns throw off their shoes when they eat, because it
would be troublesome," says Sir J. Chardin, "to keep their shoes upon
their feet, they sitting cross-legged on the floor, and having no hinder
quarters to their shoes, which are made like slippers; and as they do
not use tables and chairs as we do in Europe, but have their floors
covered with carpets, they throw off their shoes when they enter their
apartments, lest they should soil those beautiful pieces of furniture."
On the contrary the Israelites were to have their shoes on, because now
about to commence their journey. It was customary among the Romans to
lay aside their shoes when they went to a banquet. The servants took
them off them when they entered the house, and returned them when they
departed to their own habitations.

Your staff in your hand - The same writer observes that the eastern
people universally make use of a staff when they travel on foot.

Ye shall eat it in haste - Because they were suddenly to take their
departure: the destroying angel was at hand, their enemies were coming
against them, and they had not a moment to lose.

It is the Lord's passover - That is, Jehovah is now about to pass over
the land, and the houses only where the blood is sprinkled shall be safe
from the stroke of death. The Hebrew word פסח pesach, which we very
properly translate Passover, and which should always be pronounced as
two words, has its name from the angel of God passing by or over the
houses of the Israelites, on the posts and lintels of which the blood of
the lamb was sprinkled, while he stopped at the houses of the Egyptians
to slay their first-born.

[Exodus 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 12:12</span></span>

Against all the gods of Egypt, etc. - As different animals were sacred
among the Egyptians, the slaying of the first-born of all the beasts
might be called executing judgment upon the gods of Egypt. As this
however does not appear very clear and satisfactory, some have imagined
that the word אלהי elohey should be translated princes, which is the
rendering in our margin; for as these princes, who were rulers of the
kingdom under Pharaoh, were equally hostile to the Hebrews with Pharaoh
himself, therefore these judgments fell equally heavy on them also. But
we may ask, Did not these judgments fall equally on all the families of
Egypt, though multitudes of them had no particular part either in the
evil counsel against the Israelites or in their oppression? Why then
distinguish those in calamities in which all equally shared? None of
these interpretations therefore appear satisfactory. Houbigant, by a
very simple and natural emendation, has, he thinks, restored the whole
passage to sense and reason. He supposes that אלהי elohey, Gods, is a
mistake for אהלי ahley, Tents or habitations, the ה he and the ל lamed
being merely interchanged. This certainly gives a very consistent sense,
and points out the universality of the desolation to which the whole
context continually refers. He therefore contends that the text should
be read thus: And on all the Tents (or Habitations) of Egypt I will
execute judgment; by which words the Lord signified that not one
dwelling in the whole land of Egypt should be exempted from the judgment
here threatened. It is but justice to say that however probable this
criticism may appear, it is not supported by any of the ancient
versions, nor by any of the MSS. collated by Kennicott and De Rossi. The
parallel place also, [Num 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#004), is
rather against Houbigant's interpretation: For the Egyptians buried all
their first-born, which the Lord had smitten among them: upon their gods
also \[ובאלהיהם ubeloheyhem\] the Lord executed judgments. But Houbigant
amends the word in this place in the same way as he does that in Exodus.
There appears also to be an allusion to this former judgment in [Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001) : Behold, the Lord - shall come
into Egypt, and the idols \[אלילי eliley\] of Egypt shall be moved at
his presence. And in [Jer 43:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#013) : The
houses of the gods \[בתי אלהי bottey elohey\] of the Egyptians shall he
burn with fire. The rabbins say that "when Israel came out of Egypt, the
holy blessed God threw down all the images of their abominations, and
they were broken to pieces." When a nation was conquered, it was always
supposed that their gods had either abandoned them or were overcome.
Thus Egypt was ruined, and their gods confounded and destroyed by
Jehovah. See Clarke's note on [Exo
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#007).

[Exodus 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 12:13</span></span>

The blood shall be to you for a token - It shall be the sign to the
destroying angel, that the house on which he sees this blood sprinkled
is under the protection of God, and that no person in it is to be
injured. See Clarke on [Exo 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)
(note).

[Exodus 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 12:14</span></span>

A memorial - To keep up a remembrance of the severity and goodness, or
justice and mercy, of God. Ye shall keep it a feast - it shall be
annually observed, and shall be celebrated with solemn religious joy,
throughout your generations - as long as ye continue to be a distinct
people; an ordinance - a Divine appointment, an institution of God
himself, neither to be altered nor set aside by any human authority.

For ever - חקת עולם chukkath olam, an everlasting or endless statute,
because representative of the Lamb of God who taketh away the sin of the
world; whose mediation, in consequence of his sacrifice, shall endure
while time itself lasts; and to whose merits and efficacy the salvation
of the soul shall be ascribable throughout eternity. This, therefore, is
a statute and ordinance that can have no end, either in this world or in
the world to come. It is remarkable that though the Jews have ceased
from the whole of their sacrificial system, so that sacrifices are no
longer offered by them in any part of the world, yet they all, in all
their generations and in all countries, keep up the remembrance of the
passover, and observe the feast of unleavened bread. But no lamb is
sacrificed. Their sacrifices have all totally ceased, ever since the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. Even the flesh that is used on
this occasion is partly roasted and partly boiled, that it may not even
resemble the primitive sacrifice; for they deem it unlawful to sacrifice
out of Jerusalem. The truth is, the true Lamb of God that taketh away
the sin of the world has been offered, and they have no power to restore
the ancient type. See Clarke on [Exo
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027) (note).

[Exodus 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 12:15</span></span>

Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread - This has been considered as a
distinct ordinance, and not essentially connected with the passover. The
passover was to be observed on the fourteenth day of the first month;
the feast of unleavened bread began on the fifteenth and lasted seven
days, the first and last of which were holy convocations.

That soul shall be cut off - There are thirty-six places in which this
excision or cutting off is threatened against the Jews for neglect of
some particular duty; and what is implied in the thing itself is not
well known. Some think it means a violent death, some a premature death,
and some an eternal death. It is very likely that it means no more than
a separation from the rights and privileges of an Israelite; so that
after this excision the person was considered as a mere stranger, who
had neither lot nor part in Israel, nor any right to the blessings of
the covenant. This is probably what St. Paul means, [Rom
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003). But we naturally suppose this
punishment was not inflicted but on those who had showed a marked and
obstinate contempt for the Divine authority. This punishment appears to
have been nearly the same with excommunication among the Christians; and
from this general notion of the cutting off, the Christian
excommunication seems to have been borrowed.

[Exodus 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 12:16</span></span>

In the first day and in the seventh day there shall be a holy
convocation - This is the first place where we meet with the account of
an assembly collected for the mere purpose of religious worship. Such
assemblies are called holy convocations, which is a very appropriate
appellation for a religious assembly; they were called together by the
express command of God, and were to be employed in a work of holiness.
מקרא mikra, convocation, is a word of similar import with the Greek
εκκλησια, which we commonly translate Church, and which properly
signifies an assembly convened by public call.

[Exodus 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 12:17</span></span>

Self-same day - בעצם beetsem, in the body of this day, or in the
strength of this day; probably they began their march about day-break,
called here the body or strength of the day, and in [Deu
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001), by night - sometime before the
sun rose.

[Exodus 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 12:19</span></span>

No leaven found in your houses - To meet the letter of this precept in
the fullest manner possible, the Jews, on the eve of this festival,
institute the most rigorous search through every part of their houses,
not only removing all leavened bread, but sweeping every part clean,
that no crumb of bread shall be left that had any leaven in it. And so
strict were they in the observance of the letter of this law, that if
even a mouse was seen to run across the floor with a crumb of bread in
its mouth, they considered the whole house as polluted, and began their
purification afresh. We have already seen that leaven was an emblem of
sin, because it proceeded from corruption; and the putting away of this
implied the turning to God with simplicity and uprightness of heart. See
on [Exo 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008) (note), and [Exo
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027) (note).

[Exodus 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 12:21</span></span>

Kill the passover - That is, the lamb, which was called the paschal or
passover lamb. The animal that was to be sacrificed on this occasion got
the name of the institution itself: thus the word covenant is often put
for the sacrifice offered in making the covenant; so the rock was
Christ, [Co1 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004); bread and wine the
body and blood of Christ, [Mar 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022),
[Mar 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#024). St. Paul copies the
expression, [Co1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007) : Christ our
passover (that is, our paschal lamb) is sacrificed for us.

[Exodus 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 12:22</span></span>

A bunch of hyssop - The original word אזוב ezob has been variously
translated musk, rosemary, polypody of the wall, mint, origanum,
marjoram, and Hyssop: the latter seems to be the most proper. Parkhurst
says it is named from its detersive and cleansing qualities, whence it
was used in sprinkling the blood of the paschal lamb, in cleansing the
leprosy, [Lev 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#004), [Lev
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#006), [Lev
14:51](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#051), [Lev
14:52](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#052); in composing the water of
purification, [Num 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#006), and
sprinkling it, [Num 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#018). It was a
type of the purifying virtue of the bitter sufferings of Christ. And it
is plain, from [Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007), that the
psalmist understood its meaning. Among botanists hyssop is described as
"a genus of the gymnospermia (naked-seeded) order, belonging to the
didynamia class of plants. It has under-shrubby, low, bushy stalks,
growing a foot and a half high, small, spear-shaped, close-sitting,
opposite leaves, with several smaller ones rising from the same joint;
and all the stalks and branches terminated by erect whorled spikes of
flowers of different colors, in the varieties of the plant. The leaves
have an aromatic smell, and a warm pungent taste. The leaves of this
plant are particularly recommended in humoral asthmas, and other
disorders of the breast and lungs, and greatly promote expectoration."
Its medicinal qualities were probably the reason why this plant was so
particularly recommended in the Scriptures.

[Exodus 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 12:26</span></span>

What mean ye by this service? - The establishment of this service
annually was a very wise provision to keep up in remembrance this
wonderful deliverance. From the remotest antiquity the institution of
feasts, games, etc., has been used to keep up the memory of past grand
events. Hence God instituted the Sabbath, to keep up the remembrance of
the creation; and the passover to keep up the remembrance of the
deliverance from Egypt. All the other feasts were instituted on similar
reasons. The Jews never took their sons to the tabernacle or temple till
they were twelve years of age, nor suffered them to eat of the flesh of
any victim till they had themselves offered a sacrifice at the temple,
which they were not permitted to do before the twelfth year of their
age. It was at this age that Joseph and Mary took our blessed Lord to
the temple, probably for the first time, to offer his sacrifice. See
Calmet.

[Exodus 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 12:27</span></span>

It is the sacrifice of the Lord's passover - We have already intimated
that the paschal lamb was an illustrious type of Christ; and we shall
find that every thing in this account is typical or representative. The
bondage and affliction of the people of Israel may be considered as
emblems of the hard slavery and wretchedness consequent on a state of
sinfulness. Satan reigns over both body and soul, bringing the whole
into subjection to the law of sin and death; while various evil tempers,
passions, lusts, and irregular appetites, act as subordinate tormentors,
making the lives of the vassals of sin bitter, because of the rigour by
which they are obliged to serve. Reader, is this thy case? The mercy of
God projects the redemption of man from this cruel bondage and
oppression; and a sacrifice is appointed for the occasion by God
himself, to be offered with particular and significant rites and
ceremonies, all of which represent the passion and death of our blessed
Lord, and the great end for which he became a sacrifice, viz., the
redemption of a lost world from the power, the guilt, and the pollution
of sin, etc. And it is worthy of remark,

1\. That the anniversary or annual commemoration of the passover was
strictly and religiously kept by the Jews on the day, and hour of the
day, on which the original transaction took place, throughout all their
succeeding generations.

2\. That on one of these anniversaries, and, as many suppose, on the
very day and hour on which the paschal lamb was originally offered, our
blessed Lord expired on the cross for the salvation of the world.

3\. That after the destruction of Jerusalem the paschal lamb ceased to
be offered by the Jews throughout the world, though they continue to
hold the anniversary of the passover, but without any sacrifice,
notwithstanding their deep-rooted, inveterate antipathy against the
author and grace of the Gospel.

4\. That the sacrament of the Lord's Supper was instituted to keep this
true paschal sacrifice in commemoration, and that this has been
religiously observed by the whole Christian world (one very small class
of Christians excepted) from the foundation of Christianity to the
present day!

5\. That the Jews were commanded to eat the paschal lamb; and our Lord,
commemorating the passover, commanded his disciples, saying, Take, eat,
This is my body, which is given for you; do this in remembrance of Me.
In the communion service of the Church of England, the spirit and design
both of the type and antitype are most expressly condensed into one
point of view, in the address to the communicant: "Take and eat this in
remembrance that Christ died for Thee; and Feed upon Him, in thy heart,
by Faith with Thanksgiving. Thus God continues the memorial of that
grand transaction which he has said should be an ordinance for ever;
evidently meaning thereby, that the paschal lamb should be the
significator till the passion and death of Christ; and that afterwards
bread and wine taken sacramentally, in commemoration of his crucifixion,
should be the continual representatives of that sacrifice till the end
of the world. Thus the passover in itself, and in its reference, is an
ordinance for ever; and thus the words of the Lord are literally
fulfilled.

Reader, learn from this,

1\. That if thou art not rescued from the thraldom of sin, thou must
perish for ever.

2\. That nothing less than the power and mercy of God can set thee free.

3\. That God will save thee in no other way than by bringing thee out of
thy sinful state, and from thy wicked practices and companions.

4\. That in order to thy redemption it was absolutely necessary that the
Son of God should take thy nature upon him, and die in thy stead.

5\. That unless the blood of this sacrifice be sprinkled, in its atoning
efficacy and merits, on thy heart and conscience, the guilt and power of
thy sin cannot be taken away.

6\. That as the blood of the paschal lamb must be sprinkled on every
house, in order to the preservation of its inhabitants, so there must be
a personal application of the blood of the cross to thy conscience, to
take away thy sins.

7\. As it was not enough that the passover was instituted, but the blood
must be sprinkled on the lintels and door posts of every house to make
the rite effectual to the salvation of each individual, so it is not
enough that Christ should have taken human nature upon him, and died for
the sin of the world; for no man who has the opportunity of hearing the
Gospel is saved by that death, who does not, by faith, get a personal
application of it to his own heart.

8\. That those who wish for an application of the atoning blood, must
receive this spiritual passover with a perfect readiness to depart from
the land of their captivity, and travel to the rest that remains for the
people of God; it being impossible, not only to a gross sinner,
continuing such, to be finally saved, (however he may presume upon the
mercy of God), but also to a worldly-minded man to get to the kingdom of
God; for Christ died to save us from the present evil world, according
to the will of God.

9\. That in order to commemorate aright, in the sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, the great atonement made for the sin of the world, all leaven of
malice, bitterness, and insincerity, must be put away; as God will have
no man to partake of this mystery who does not fully enter into its
spirit and meaning. See [Co1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007), [Co1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008).

[Exodus 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 12:29</span></span>

Smote all the first born - If we take the term first-born in its literal
sense only, we shall be led to conclude that in a vast number of the
houses of the Egyptians there could have been no death, as it is not at
all likely that every first-born child of every Egyptian family was
still alive, and that all the first-born of their cattle still remained.
And yet it is said, [Exo 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#030), that
there was not a house where there was not one dead. The word therefore
must not be taken in its literal sense only. From its use in a great
variety of places in the Scriptures it is evident that it means the
chief, most excellent, best beloved, most distinguished, etc. In this
sense our blessed Lord is called the First-Born of every creature, [Col
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015), and the First-Born among many
brethren, [Rom 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029); that is, he is
more excellent than all creatures, and greater than all the children of
men. In the same sense we may understand [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005), where Christ is called the
First-Begotten from the dead, i.e., the chief of all that have ever
visited the empire of death, and on whom death has had any power; and
the only one who by his own might quickened himself. In the same sense
wisdom is represented as being brought forth before all the creatures,
and being possessed by the Lord in the beginning of his ways, [Pro
8:22-30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022); that is, the wisdom of God is
peculiarly conspicuous in the production, arrangement, and government of
every part of the creation. So Ephraim is called the Lord's First-Born,
[Jer 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009). And the people of Israel
are often called by the same name, see [Exo
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022) : Israel is my son, my
First-Born; that is, the people in whom I particularly delight, and whom
I will especially support and defend. And because the first-born are in
general peculiarly dear to their parents, and because among the Jews
they had especial and peculiar privileges, whatever was most dear, most
valuable, and most prized, was thus denominated. So [Mic
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#007) : Shall I give my First-Born for
my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? Shall I
give up the most beloved child I have, he that is most dear and most
necessary to me, in order to make an atonement for my sins! In like
manner the Prophet Zechariah, speaking of the conversion of the Jews to
the Gospel of Christ, represents them as looking on him whom they have
pierced, and being as one that is in bitterness for his First-Born; that
is, they shall feel distress and anguish as those who had lost their
most beloved child. So the Church triumphant in the kingdom of God are
called, [Heb 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023), the general
assembly and Church of the First-Born, i.e., the most noble and
excellent of all human if not created beings. So Homer, Il. iv., ver.
102: Αρνων πρωτογονων ρεξειν κλειτην ἑκατομβην· "A hecatomb of lambs all
firstlings of the flock." That is, the most excellent of their kind.

In a contrary sense, when the word first-born is joined to another that
signifies any kind of misery or disgrace, it then signifies the depth of
misery, the utmost disgrace. So the First-Born of the poor, [Isa
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#030), signifies the most abject,
destitute, and impoverished. The First-Born of death, [Job
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#013), means the most horrible kind of
death. So in the threatening against Pharaoh, [Exo
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#005), where he informs him that he
will slay all the first-born, from the first-born of Pharaoh that
sitteth upon the throne; to the first born of the maid-servant that is
behind the mill, he takes in the very highest and lowest conditions of
life. As there was no state in Egypt superior to the throne, so there
was none inferior to that of the female slave that ground at the mill.
The Prophet Habakkuk seems to fix this as the sense in which the word is
used here; for speaking of the plagues of Egypt in general, and the
salvation which God afforded his people, he says, [Hab
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013) : Thou wentest forth for the
salvation of thy people - thou woundedst the Head (ראש rosh, the chief,
the most excellent) of the house of the wicked - of Pharaoh and the
Egyptians. And the author of the book of The Wisdom of Solomon
understood it in the same way: The master and the servant were punished
after one manner; and like as the king, so suffered the common people -
for in one moment the Noblest Offspring of them was destroyed, The
Wisdom of Solomon 18:11, 12. And in no other sense can we understand the
word in [Psa 89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027), where, among the
promises of God to David, we find the following: Also I will make him my
First-Born, higher than the kings of the earth; in which passage the
latter clause explains the former; David, as king, should be the
First-Born, of God, i.e., he should be higher than the kings of the
earth - the Most Eminent potentate in the universe. In this sense,
therefore, we should understand the passage in question; the most
eminent person in every family in Egypt, as well as those who were
literally the first-born, being slain in this plague. Calmet and some
other critics particularly contend for this sense.

[Exodus 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 12:30</span></span>

There was a great cry - No people in the universe were more remarkable
for their mournings than the Egyptians, especially in matters of
religion; they whipped, beat, tore themselves, and howled in all the
excess of grief. When a relative died, the people left the house, ran
into the streets, and howled in the most lamentable and frantic manner.
See Diod. Sicul., lib. i., and Herod., lib. ii., c. 85, 86. And this
latter author happening to be in Egypt on one of their solemnities, saw
myriads of people whipping and beating themselves in this manner, lib.
ii., c. 60; and see Mr. Bryant on the Plagues of Egypt, where many
examples are given, p. 162, etc. How dreadful then must the scene of
horror and distress appear when there was not one house or family in
Egypt where there was not one dead; and according to their custom, all
the family running out into the streets bewailing this calamity!

[Exodus 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 12:31</span></span>

Called for Moses and Aaron - That is, he sent the message here mentioned
to them; for it does not appear that he had any farther interview with
Moses and Aaron, after what is mentioned [Exo
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#028), [Exo
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#029), and [Exo
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#008). See Clarke's notes [Exo
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#028), [Exo
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#029) (note), and [Exo
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#008) (note).

[Exodus 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 12:33</span></span>

The Egyptians were urgent upon the people - They felt much, they feared
more; and therefore wished to get immediately rid of a people on whose
account they found they were smitten with so many and such dreadful
plagues.

[Exodus 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 12:34</span></span>

The people took their dough before it was leavened, etc. - There was no
time now to make any regular preparation for their departure, such was
the universal hurry and confusion. The Israelites could carry but little
of their household utensils with them; but some, such as they kneaded
their bread and kept their meal in, they were obliged to carry with
them. The kneading troughs of the Arabs are comparatively small wooden
bowls, which, after kneading their bread in, serve them as dishes out of
which they eat their victuals. And as to these being bound up in their
clothes, no more may be intended than their wrapping them up in their
long, loose garments, or in what is still used among the Arabs, and
called hykes, which is a long kind of blanket, something resembling a
highland plaid, in which they often carry their provision, wrap
themselves by day, and sleep at night. Dr. Shaw has been particular in
his description of this almost entire wardrobe of an Arab. He says they
are of different sizes and of different qualities, but generally about
six yards in length, and five or six feet broad. He supposes that what
we call Ruth's veil, [Rut 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#015), was a
hyke, and that the same is to be understood of the clothes of the
Israelites mentioned in this verse. See his Travels, p. 224, 4th
edition.

[Exodus 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 12:35</span></span>

They borrowed of the Egyptians - See Clarke's note on [Exo
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#022), where the very exceptionable
term borrow is largely explained.

[Exodus 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">exo 12:37</span></span>

From Rameses to Succoth - Rameses appears to have been another name for
Goshen, though it is probable that there might have been a chief city or
village in that land, where the children of Israel rendezvoused
previously to their departure, called Rameses. As the term Succoth
signifies booths or tents, it is probable that this place was so named
from its being the place of the first encampment of the Israelites.

Six hundred thousand - That is, There was this number of effective men,
twenty years old and upwards, who were able to go out to war. But this
was not the whole number, and therefore the sacred writer says they were
about 600,000; for when the numbers were taken about thirteen months
after this they were found to be six hundred and three thousand five
hundred and fifty, without reckoning those under twenty years of age, or
any of the tribe of Levi; see [Num
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#045), [Num
1:46](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#046). But besides those on foot, or
footmen, there were no doubt many old and comparatively infirm persons,
who rode on camels, horses, or asses, besides the immense number of
women and children, which must have been at least three to one of the
others; and the mixed multitude, [Exo
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#038), probably of refugees in Egypt,
who came to sojourn there, because of the dearth which had obliged them
to emigrate from their own countries; and who now, seeing that the hand
of Jehovah was against the Egyptians and with the Israelites, availed
themselves of the general consternation, and took their leave of Egypt,
choosing Israel's God for their portion, and his people for their
companions. Such a company moving at once, and emigrating from their own
country, the world never before nor since witnessed; no doubt upwards of
two millions of souls, besides their flocks and herds, even very much
cattle; and what but the mere providence of God could support such a
multitude, and in the wilderness, too, where to this day the necessaries
of life are not to be found?

Suppose we take them at a rough calculation thus, two millions will be
found too small a number.

Effective men, 20 years old and upward 600,000 Two-thirds of whom we may
suppose were married, in which case their wives would amount to 400,000
These, on an average, might have 5 children under 20 years of age, an
estimate which falls considerably short of the number of children each
family must have averaged in order to produce from 75 persons, in A. M.
2298, upwards of 600,000 effective men in A. M. 2494, a period of only
196 years 2,000,000 The Levites, who probably were not included among
the effective men 45,000 Their wives 33,000 Their children 165,000 The
mixed multitude probably not less than 20,000
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Total 3,263,000

Besides a multitude of old and infirm persons who would be obliged to
ride on camels and asses, etc., and who must, from the proportion that
such bear to the young and healthy, amount to many thousands more!
Exclude even the Levites and their families, and upwards of three
millions will be left.

"In [Num 3:39](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#039) the male Levites, aged
one month and upwards, are reckoned 22,000, perhaps the females did not
much exceed this number, say 23,000, and 500 children, under one month,
will make 45,500." - Anon.

Had not Moses the fullest proof of his Divine mission, he never could
have put himself at the head of such an immense concourse of people,
who, without the most especial and effective providence, must all have
perished for lack of food. This single circumstance, unconnected with
all others, is an ample demonstration of the Divine mission of Moses,
and of the authenticity and Divine inspiration of the Pentateuch. To
suppose that an impostor, or one pretending only to a Divine call, could
have ventured to place himself at the head of such an immense body of
people, to lead them through a trackless wilderness, utterly unprovided
for such a journey, to a land as yet in the possession of several
powerful nations whom they must expel before they could possess the
country, would have implied such an extreme of madness and folly as has
never been witnessed in an individual, and such a blind credulity in the
multitude as is unparalleled in the annals of mankind! The succeeding
stupendous events proved that Moses had the authority of God to do what
he did; and the people had at least such a general conviction that he
had this authority, that they implicitly followed his directions, and
received their law from his mouth.

[Exodus 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">exo 12:40</span></span>

Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, etc. - The statement in
this verse is allowed on all hands to be extremely difficult, and
therefore the passage stands in especial need of illustration. "That the
descendants of Israel did not dwell 430 years in Egypt," says Dr.
Kennicott, "may be easily proved, and has often been demonstrated. Some
therefore imagine that by Egypt here both it and Canaan are to be
understood. But this greater latitude of place will not solve the
difficulty, since the Israelites, including Israel their father, did not
sojourn 430 years in both countries previous to their departure from
Egypt. Others, sensible of the still remaining deficiency, would not
only have Egypt in the text to signify it and Canaan, but by a figure
more comprehensive would have the children of Israel to mean Israel's
children, and Israel their father, and Isaac the father of Israel, and
part of the life of Abraham, the father of Isaac.

"Thus indeed," says Dr. Kennicott, "we arrive at the exact sum, and by
this method of reckoning we might arrive at any thing but truth, which
we may presume was never thus conveyed by an inspired writer." But can
the difficulty be removed without having recourse to such absurd shifts?
Certainly it can. The Samaritan Pentateuch, in all its manuscripts and
printed copies, reads the place thus: -

Umoshab beney Yishrael veabotham asher yashebu baarets Cenaan, ubaarets
mitsraim sheloshim shanah vearba meoth shanah.

"Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, and of their fathers,
which they sojourned in the land of Canaan and in the land of Egypt, was
430 years." This same sum is given by St. Paul, [Gal
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017), who reckons from the promise
made to Abraham, when God commanded him to go to Canaan, to the giving
of the law, which soon followed the departure from Egypt; and this
chronology of the apostle is concordant with the Samaritan Pentateuch,
which, by preserving the two passages, they and their fathers, and in
the land of Canaan, which are lost out of the present copies of the
Hebrew text, has rescued this passage from all obscurity and
contradiction. It may be necessary to observe that the Alexandrian copy
of the Septuagint has the same reading as that in the Samaritan. The
Samaritan Pentateuch is allowed by many learned men to exhibit the most
correct copy of the five books of Moses; and the Alexandrian copy of the
Septuagint must also be allowed to be one of the most authentic as well
as most ancient copies of this version which we possess. As to St. Paul,
no man will dispute the authenticity of his statement; and thus in the
mouth of these three most respectable witnesses the whole account is
indubitably established. That these three witnesses have the truth, the
chronology itself proves: for from Abraham's entry into Canaan to the
birth of Isaac was 25 years, [Gen
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#004); 17:1-21; Isaac was 60 years old
at the birth of Jacob, [Gen 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026); and
Jacob was 130 at his going down into Egypt, [Gen
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009); which three sums make 215 years.
And then Jacob and his children having continued in Egypt 215 years
more, the whole sum of 430 years is regularly completed. See Kennicott's
Dissertation on the Hebrew Text.

[Exodus 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">exo 12:42</span></span>

A night to be much observed - A night to be held in everlasting
remembrance, because of the peculiar display of the power and goodness
of God, the observance of which annually was to be considered a
religious precept while the Jewish nation should continue.

[Exodus 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">exo 12:43</span></span>

This is the ordinance of the passover - From the last verse of this
chapter it appears pretty evident that this, to the 50th verse
inclusive, constituted a part of the directions given to Moses relative
to the proper observance of the first passover, and should be read
conjointly with the preceding account beginning at [Exo
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021). It may be supposed that these
latter parts contain such particular directions as God gave to Moses
after he had given those general ones mentioned in the preceding verses,
but they seem all to belong to this first passover.

There shall no stranger eat thereof - בן נכר ben nechar, the son of a
stranger or foreigner, i.e., one who was not of the genuine Hebrew
stock, or one who had not received circumcision; for any circumcised
person might eat the passover, as the total exclusion extends only to
the uncircumcised, see [Exo 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#048). As
there are two sorts of strangers mentioned in the sacred writings; one
who was admitted to all the Jewish ordinances, and another who, though
he dwelt among the Jews, was not permitted to eat the passover or
partake of any of their solemn feasts; it may be necessary to show what
was the essential point of distinction through which the one was
admitted and the other excluded.

In treatises on the religious customs of the Jews we frequently meet
with the term proselyte, from the Greek προσηλυτος, a stranger or
foreigner; one who is come from his own people and country to sojourn
with another. All who were not descendants of some one of the twelve
sons of Jacob, or of Ephraim and Manasseh, the two sons of Joseph, were
reputed strangers or proselytes among the Jews. But of those strangers
or proselytes there were two kinds, called among them proselytes of the
gate, and proselytes of injustice or of the covenant. The former were
such as wished to dwell among the Jews, but would not submit to be
circumcised; they, however, acknowledged the true God, avoided all
idolatry, and observed the seven precepts of Noah, but were not obliged
to observe any of the Mosaic institutions. The latter submitted to be
circumcised, obliged themselves to observe all the rites and ceremonies
of the law, and were in nothing different from the Jews but merely in
their having once been heathens. The former, or proselytes of the gate,
might not eat the passover or partake of any of the sacred festivals;
but the latter, the proselytes of the covenant, had the same rights,
spiritual and secular, as the Jews themselves. See [Exo
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#048).

[Exodus 12:45](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">exo 12:45</span></span>

A foreigner - תושב toshab, from ישב yashab, to sit down or dwell; one
who is a mere sojourner, for the purpose of traffic, merchandise, etc.,
but who is neither a proselyte of the gate nor of the covenant.

And a hired servant - Who, though he be bought with money, or has
indented himself for a certain term to serve a Jew, yet has not become
either a proselyte of the gate or of the covenant. None of these shall
eat of it, because not circumcised - not brought under the bond of the
covenant; and not being under obligation to observe the Mosaic law, had
no right to its privileges and blessings. Even under the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, he is the author of eternal salvation only to them
who Obey him, [Heb 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009); and those who
become Christians are chosen to salvation through Sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth, [Th2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013); for the grace of God, that
bringeth salvation to all men, hath appeared, teaching us that, Denying
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts we should live Soberly, Righteously, and
Godly, in this present world; [Tit
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011), [Tit
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#012). Such persons only walk worthy of
the vocation wherewith they are called.

[Exodus 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">exo 12:46</span></span>

In one house shall it be eaten - In one family, if that be large enough;
if not, a neighboring family might be invited, [Exo
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#004).

Thou shalt not carry forth aught of the flesh - Every family must abide
within doors because of the destroying angel, none being permitted to go
out of his house till the next day, [Exo
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022).

Neither shall ye break a bone thereof - As it was to be eaten in haste,
([Exo 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)), there was no time either
to separate the bones, or to break them in order to extract the marrow;
and lest they should be tempted to consume time in this way, therefore
this ordinance was given. It is very likely that, when the whole lamb
was brought to table, they cut off the flesh without even separating any
of the large joints, leaving the skeleton, with whatever flesh they
could not eat, to be consumed with fire, [Exo
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#010). This precept was also given to
point out a most remarkable circumstance which 1500 years after was to
take place in the crucifixion of the Savior of mankind, who was the true
Paschal Lamb, that Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world;
who, though he was crucified as a common malefactor, and it was a
universal custom to break the legs of such on the cross, yet so did the
providence of God order it that a bone of Him was not broken. See the
fulfillment of this wondrously expressive type, [Joh
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#033), [Joh
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036).

[Exodus 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">exo 12:48</span></span>

And when a stranger - will keep the passover, etc. - Let all who sojourn
among you, and who desire to partake of this sacred ordinance, not only
be circumcised themselves, but all the males of their families likewise,
that they may all have an equal right to the blessings of the covenant.

[Exodus 12:49](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">exo 12:49</span></span>

One law shall be to him that is home-born, etc. - As this is the first
place that the term תורה torah or Law occurs, a term of the greatest
importance in Divine revelation, and on the proper understanding of
which much depends, I judge it best to give its genuine explanation once
for all.

The word תורה torah comes from the root ירה yarah, which signifies to
aim at, teach, point out, direct, lead, guide, make straight, or even;
and from these significations of the word (and in all these senses it is
used in the Bible) we may see at once the nature, properties, and design
of the law of God. It is a system of Instruction in righteousness; it
teaches the difference between moral good and evil; ascertains what is
right and fit to be done, and what should be left undone, because
improper to be performed. It continually aims at the glory of God, and
the happiness of his creatures; teaches the true knowledge of the true
God, and the destructive nature of sin; points out the absolute
necessity of an atonement as the only means by which God can be
reconciled to transgressors; and in its very significant rites and
ceremonies points out the Son of God, till he should come to put away
iniquity by the sacrifice of himself. It is a revelation of God's wisdom
and goodness, wonderfully well calculated to direct the hearts of men
into the truth, to guide their feet into the path of life, and to make
straight, even, and plain that way which leads to God, and in which the
soul must walk in order to arrive at eternal life. It is the fountain
whence every correct notion relative to God - his perfections,
providence, grace, justice, holiness, omniscience, and omnipotence, has
been derived. And it has been the origin whence all the true principles
of law and justice have been deduced. The pious study of it was the
grand means of producing the greatest kings, the most enlightened
statesmen, the most accomplished poets, and the most holy and useful
men, that ever adorned the world. It is exceeded only by the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, which is at once the accomplishment of its rites and
predictions, and the fulfillment of its grand plan and outline. As a
system of teaching or instruction, it is the most sovereign and most
effectual; as by it is the knowledge of sin, and it alone is the
schoolmaster, παι δαγωγος, that leads men to Christ, that they may be
justified through faith. [Gal 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024).
Who can absolutely ascertain the exact quantum of obliquity in a crooked
line, without the application of a straight one? And could sin, in all
its twistings, windings, and varied involutions, have ever been truly
ascertained, had not God given to man this perfect rule to judge by? The
nations who acknowledge this revelation of God have, as far as they
attained to its dictates, the wisest, purest, most equal, and most
beneficial laws. The nations that do not receive it have laws at once
extravagantly severe and extravagantly indulgent. The proper
distinctions between moral good and evil, in such states, are not known:
hence the penal sanctions are not founded on the principles of justice,
weighing the exact proportion of moral turpitude; but on the most
arbitrary caprices, which in many cases show the utmost indulgence to
first-rate crimes, while they punish minor offenses with rigour and
cruelty. What is the consequence? Just what might be reasonably
expected: the will and caprice of a man being put in the place of the
wisdom of God, the government is oppressive, and the people, frequently
goaded to distraction, rise up in a mass and overturn it; so that the
monarch, however powerful for a time, seldom lives out half his days.
This was the case in Greece, in Rome, in the major part of the Asiatic
governments, and is the case in all nations of the world to the present
day, where the governor is despotic, and the laws not formed according
to the revelation of God.

The word lex, law, among the Romans, has been derived from lego, I read;
because when a law or statute was made, it was hung up in the most
public places, that it might be seen, read, and known by all men, that
those who were to obey the laws might not break them through ignorance,
and thus incur the penalty. This was called promulgatio legis, q.
provulgatio, the promulgation of the law, i.e., the laying it before the
common people. Or from ligo, I bind, because the law binds men to the
strict observance of its precepts. The Greeks call a law νομος nomos,
from νεμω, to divide, distribute, minister to, or serve, because the law
divides to all their just rights, appoints or distributes to each his
proper duty, and thus serves or ministers to the welfare of the
individual and the support of society. Hence where there are either no
laws, or unequal and unjust ones, all is distraction, violence, rapine,
oppression, anarchy, and ruin.

[Exodus 12:51](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">exo 12:51</span></span>

By their armies - צבאתם tsibotham, from צבא tsaba, to assemble, meet
together, in an orderly or regulated manner, and hence to war, to act
together as troops in battle; whence צבאות tsebaoth, troops, armies,
hosts. It is from this that the Divine Being calls himself יהוה צבאות
Yehovah tsebaoth, the Lord Of Hosts or armies, because the Israelites
were brought out of Egypt under his direction, marshalled and ordered by
himself, guided by his wisdom, supported by his providence, and
protected by his might. This is the true and simple reason why God is so
frequently styled in Scripture the Lord of hosts; for the Lord did bring
the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their Armies.

On this chapter the notes have been so full and so explicit, that little
can be added to set the subject before the reader in a clearer light. On
the ordinance of the Passover, the reader is requested to consult the
notes on [Exo 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#007), [Exo
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014), and [Exo
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027). See Clarke's note on [Exo
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#007). See Clarke's note on [Exo
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014). See Clarke's note on [Exo
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027). For the display of God's power
and providence in supporting so great a multitude where, humanly
speaking, there was no provision, and the proof that the exodus of the
Israelites gives of the truth of the Mosaic history, he is referred to
[Exo 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037). And for the meaning of the
term Law, to [Exo 12:49](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#049).

On the ten plagues it may be but just necessary, after what has been
said in the notes, to make a few general reflections. When the nature of
the Egyptian idolatry is considered, and the plagues which were sent
upon them, we may see at once the peculiarity of the judgment, and the
great propriety of its being inflicted in the way related by Moses. The
plagues were either inflicted on the objects of their idolatry, or by
their means.

1\. That the river Nile was an object of their worship and one of their
greatest gods, we have already seen. As the First plague, its waters
were therefore turned into blood; and the fish, many of which were
objects also of their adoration, died. Blood was particularly offensive
to them, and the touch of any dead animal rendered them unclean. When
then their great god, the river, was turned into blood, and its waters
became putrid, so that all the fish, minor objects of their devotion,
died, we see a judgment at once calculated to punish, correct, and
reform them. Could they ever more trust in gods who could neither save
themselves nor their deluded worshippers?

2\. Mr. Bryant has endeavored to prove that frogs, the Second plague,
were sacred animals in Egypt, and dedicated to Osiris: they certainly
appear on many ancient Egyptian monuments, and in such circumstances and
connections as to show that they were held in religious veneration.
These therefore became an awful scourge; first, by their numbers, and
their intrusion into every place; and, secondly, by their death, and the
infection of the atmosphere which took place in consequence.

3\. We have seen also that the Egyptians, especially the priests,
affected great cleanliness, and would not wear woolen garments lest any
kind of vermin should harbour about them. The Third plague, by means of
lice or such like vermin, was wisely calculated both to humble and
confound them. In this they immediately saw a power superior to any that
could be exerted by their gods or their magicians; and the latter were
obliged to confess, This is the finger of God!

4\. That flies were held sacred among the Egyptians and among various
other nations, admits of the strongest proof. It is very probable that
Baal-zebub himself was worshipped under the form of a fly or great
cantharid. These, therefore, or some kind of winged noxious insects,
became the prime agents in the Fourth plague; and if the cynomyia or
dog-fly be intended, we have already seen in the notes with what
propriety and effect this judgment was inflicted.

5\. The murrain or mortality among the cattle was the Fifth plague, and
the most decisive mark of the power and indignation of Jehovah. That
dogs, cats, monkeys, rams, heifers, and bulls, were all objects of their
most religious veneration, all the world knows. These were smitten in a
most singular manner by the hand of God; and the Egyptians saw
themselves deprived at once of all their imaginary helpers. Even Apis,
their ox-god, in whom they particularly trusted, now suffers, groans,
and dies under the hand of Jehovah. Thus does he execute judgment
against all the gods of Egypt. See [Exo
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012).

6\. The Sixth plague, viz., of boils and blains, was as appropriate as
any of the preceding; and the sprinkling of the ashes, the means by
which it was produced, peculiarly significant. Pharmacy, Mr. Bryant has
observed, was in high repute among the Egyptians; and Isis, their most
celebrated goddess, was considered as the preventer or healer of all
diseases. "For this goddess," says Diodorus, Hist., lib. i., "used to
reveal herself to people in their sleep when they labored under any
disorder, and afford them relief. Many who placed their confidence in
her influence, παραδοξως ὑγιαινεσθαι, were miraculously restored. Many
likewise who had been despaired of and given over by the physicians on
account of the obstinacy of the distemper, were saved by this goddess.
Numbers who had been deprived of their eyes, and of other parts of their
bodies, were all restored on their application to Isis." By this
disorder, therefore, which no application to their gods could cure, and
which was upon the magicians also, who were supposed to possess most
power and influence, God confounded their pride, showed the folly of
their worship, and the vanity of their dependence. The means by which
these boils and blains were inflicted, viz., the sprinkling of ashes
from the furnace, was peculiarly appropriate. Plutarch assures us, De
Iside et Osiride, that in several cities of Egypt they were accustomed
to sacrifice human beings to Typhon, which they burned alive upon a high
altar; and at the close of the sacrifice the priests gathered the ashes
of these victims, and scattered them in the air: "I presume, says Mr.
Bryant, "with this view, that where an atom of their dust was wafted, a
blessing might be entailed. The like was done by Moses with the ashes of
the furnace, that wherever any, the smallest portion, alighted, it might
prove a plague and a curse to this cruel, ungrateful, and infatuated
people. Thus there was a designed contrast in these workings of
Providence, an apparent opposition to the superstition of the times."

7\. The grievous hail, the Seventh plague, attended with rain, thunder,
and lightning, in a country where these scarcely ever occur, and
according to an express prediction of Moses, must in the most signal
manner point out the power and justice of God. Fire and water were some
of the principal objects of Egyptian idolatry; and fire, as Porphyry
says, they considered μεγαν ειναι θεον, to be a great god. To find,
therefore, that these very elements, the objects of their adoration,
were, at the command of a servant of Jehovah, brought as a curse and
scourge on the whole land, and upon men also and cattle, must have
shaken their belief in these imaginary deities, while it proved to the
Israelites that there was none like the God of Jeshurun.

8\. In the Eighth plague we see by what insignificant creatures God can
bring about a general destruction. A caterpillar is beyond all animals
the most contemptible, and, taken singly, the least to be dreaded in the
whole empire of nature; but in the hand of Divine justice it becomes one
of the most formidable foes of the human race. From the examples in the
notes we see how little human power, industry, or art, can avail against
this most awful scourge. Not even the most contemptible animal should be
considered with disrespect, as in the hand of God it may become the most
terrible instrument for the punishment of a criminal individual or a
guilty land.

9\. The Ninth plague, the total and horrible darkness that lasted for
three days, afforded both Israelites and Egyptians the most illustrious
proof of the power and universal dominion of God; and was particularly
to the latter a most awful yet instructive lesson against a species of
idolatry which had been long prevalent in that and other countries,
viz., the worship of the celestial luminaries. The sun and moon were
both adored as supreme deities, as the sole dispensers of light and
life; and the sun was invoked as the giver of immortality and eternal
blessedness. Porphyry, De Abstin., l. 4, preserves the very form used by
the Egyptian priests in addressing the sun on behalf of a deceased
person, that he might be admitted into the society of the gods: Ω
δεσποτα Ἡλιε, και Θεοι παντες, οἱ την ζωην τοις ανθρωποις δοντες,
προσδεξασθε με, και παραδοτε τοις αΐδιοις Θεοις συνοικον, "O sovereign
lord the sun, and all ye other deities who bestow life on mankind!
Receive me, and grant that I may be admitted as a companion with the
immortal gods!" These objects of their superstitious worship Jehovah
showed by this plague to be his creatures, dispensing or withholding
their light merely at his will and pleasure; and that the people might
be convinced that all this came by his appointment alone, he predicted
this awful darkness; and that their astronomers might have the fullest
proof that this was no natural occurrence, and could not be the effect
of any kind of eclipse, which even when total could endure only about
four minutes, (and this case could happen only once in a thousand
years), he caused this palpable darkness to continue for three days!

10\. The Tenth and last plague, the slaying of the first-born or chief
person in each family, may be considered in the light of a Divine
retribution: for after that their nation had been preserved by one of
the Israelitish family, "they had," says Mr. Bryant, "contrary to all
right, and in defiance of original stipulation, enslaved the people to
whom they had been so much indebted; and not contented with this, they
had proceeded to murder their offspring, and to render the people's
bondage intolerable by a wanton exertion of power. It had been told them
that the family of the Israelites were esteemed as God's first-born,
[Exo 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022); therefore God said: Let my
son go, that he may serve me; and if thou refuse - behold, I will slay
thy son, even thy First-Born, [Exo
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#023). But they heeded not this
admonition, and hence those judgments came upon them that terminated in
the death of the eldest in each family; a just retaliation for their
disobedience and cruelty." See several curious and important remarks on
this subject in a work entitled, Observations upon the Plagues inflicted
on the Egyptians, by Jacob Bryant, 8vo., 1810.

On the whole we may say, Behold the goodness and severity of God!
Severity mixed with goodness even to the same people. He punished and
corrected them at the same time; for there was not one of these
judgments that had not, from its peculiar nature and circumstances, some
emendatory influence. Nor could a more effectual mode be adopted to
demonstrate to that people the absurdity of their idolatry, and the
inefficacy of their dependence, than that made use of on this occasion
by the wise, just, and merciful God. At the same time the Israelites
themselves must have received a lesson of the most impressive
instruction on the vanity and wickedness of idolatry, to which they were
at all times most deplorably prone, and of which they would no doubt
have given many more examples, had they not had the Egyptian plagues
continually before their eyes. It was probably these signal displays of
God's rower and justice, and these alone, that induced them to leave
Egypt at his command by Moses and Aaron; otherwise, with the dreadful
wilderness before them, totally unprovided for such a journey, in which
humanly speaking it was impossible for them and their households to
subsist, they would have rather preferred the ills they then suffered,
than have run the risk of greater by an attempt to escape from their
present bondage. This is proved by their murmurings, [Exo
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#002), [Exo
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003), from which it is evident that
they preferred Egypt with all its curses to their situation in the
wilderness, and never could have been induced to leave it had they not
had the fullest evidence that it was the will of God; which will they
were obliged, on pain of utter destruction, to obey.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 13](exo013)

</div>
