<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo037)  [Next](exo039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 38:0</span></span>

Bezaleel makes the altar of burnt-offering, [Exo
38:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001). He makes the laver and its
foot out of the mirrors given by the women, [Exo
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#008). The court, its pillars,
hangings, etc., [Exo 38:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#009). The
whole tabernacle and its work finished by Bezaleel, Aholiab, and their
assistants, [Exo 38:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#021). The amount
of the gold contributed, [Exo 38:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#024).
The amount of the silver, and how it was expended, [Exo
38:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#025). The amount of the brass, and
how this was used, [Exo 38:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#029).

[Exodus 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 38:1</span></span>

The altar of burnt-offering - See Clarke's note on [Exo
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001); and for its horns, pots,
shovels, basins, etc., see the meaning of the Hebrew terms explained,
[Exo 27:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#003) (note).

[Exodus 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 38:8</span></span>

He made the laver - See Clarke's note on [Exo
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#018), etc.

The looking-glasses - The word מראת maroth, from ראה raah, he saw,
signifies reflectors or mirrors of any kind. Here metal, highly
polished, must certainly be meant, as glass was not yet in use; and had
it even been in use, we are sure that looking - Glasses could not make a
Brazen laver. The word therefore should be rendered mirrors, not
looking-glasses, which in the above verse is perfectly absurd, because
from those maroth the brazen laver was made. The first mirrors known
among men were the clear, still, fountain, and unruffled lake; and
probably the mineral called mica, which is a very general substance
through all parts of the earth. Plates of it have been found of three
feet square, and it is so extremely divisible into laminae, that it has
been divided into plates so thin as to be only the three hundred
thousandth part of an inch. A plate of this forms an excellent mirror
when any thing black is attached to the opposite side. A plate of this
mineral, nine inches by eight, now lies before me; a piece of black
cloth, or any other black substance, at the back, converts it into a
good mirror; or it would serve as it is for a square of glass, as every
object is clearly perceivable through it. It is used in Russian ships of
war, instead of glass, for windows. The first artificial mirrors were
apparently made of brass, afterwards of polished steel, and when luxury
increased they were made of silver; but they were made at a very early
period of mixed metal, particularly of tin and copper, the best of
which, as Pliny tells us, were formerly manufactured at Brundusium:
Optima apud majores fuerant Brundisina, stanno et aere mixtis - Hist.
Nat. lib. xxxiii., cap. 9. But, according to him, the most esteemed were
those made of tin; and he says that silver mirrors became so common that
even the servant girls used them: Specula (ex stanno) laudatissima
Brundisii temperabantur; donec argenteis uti caepere et ancillae; lib.
xxxiv., cap. 17. When the Egyptian women went to the temples, they
always carried their mirrors with them. The Israelitish women probably
did the same, and Dr. Shaw states that the Arabian women carry them
constantly hung at their breasts. It is worthy of remark, that at first
these women freely gave up their ornaments for this important service,
and now give their very mirrors, probably as being of little farther
service, seeing they had already given up the principal decorations of
their persons. Woman has been invidiously defined by Aristotle, an
animal fond of dress, (though this belongs to the whole human race, and
not exclusively to woman). Had this been true of the Israelitish women,
in the present case we must say they nobly sacrificed their incentives
to pride to the service of their God. Woman, go thou and do likewise.

Of the women - which assembled at the door - What the employment of
these women was at the door of the tabernacle, is not easily known. Some
think they assembled there for purposes of devotion. Others, that they
kept watch there during the night; and this is the most probable
opinion, for they appear to have been in the same employment as those
who assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation in the
days of Samuel, who were abused by the sons of the high priest Eli, [Sa1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#022). Among the ancients women were
generally employed in the office of porters or doorkeepers. Such were
employed about the house of the high priest in our Lord's time; for a
woman is actually represented as keeping the door of the palace of the
high priest, [Joh 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#017) : Then saith
the Damsel that Kept The Door unto Peter; see also [Mat
26:69](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069). In [Sa2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#006), both the Septuagint and Vulgate
make a woman porter or doorkeeper to Ishbosheth. Aristophanes mentions
them in the same office, and calls them Σηκις, Sekis, which seems to
signify a common maid-servant. Aristoph, in Vespis, ver. 768: -

Ὁτι την θυραν ανεῳξεν ἡ Σηκις λαθρα.

Homer, Odyss., ψ, ver. 225-229, mentions Actoris, Penelope's maid, whose
office it was to keep the door of her chamber: -

Ακτορις - - -

Ἡ νωΐν ειρυτο θυρας πυκινου θαλαμοιο.

And Euripides, in Troad., ver. 197, brings in Hecuba, complaining that
she who was wont to sit upon a throne is now reduced to the miserable
necessity of becoming a doorkeeper or a nurse, in order to get a morsel
of bread.

\- - - η ταν

Παρα προθυροις φυλακαν κατεχουσα,

Η παιδων θρεπτειρα.

Sir John Chardin observes, that women are employed to keep the gate of
the palace of the Persian kings. Plautus, Curcul., act 1, scene 1,
mentions an old woman, who was keeper of the gate.

Anus hic solet cubitare, custos janitrix.

Many other examples might be produced. It is therefore very likely that
the persons mentioned here, and in [Sa1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#022), were the women who guarded the
tabernacle; and that they regularly relieved each other, a troop or
company regularly keeping watch: and indeed this seems to be implied in
the original, צבאו tsabeu, they came by troops; and these troops
successively consecrated their mirrors to the service of the tabernacle.
See Calmet on [Joh 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#016).

[Exodus 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 38:9</span></span>

The court - See Clarke on [Exo 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#009).

[Exodus 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 38:17</span></span>

The hooks - and their fillets - The capitals, and the silver bands that
went round them; see Clarke's note on [Exo
26:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#032).

[Exodus 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 38:21</span></span>

This is the sum of the tabernacle - That is, The foregoing account
contains a detail of all the articles which Bezaleel and Aholiab were
commanded to make; and which were reckoned up by the Levites, over whom
Ithamar, the son of Aaron, presided.

[Exodus 38:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 38:24</span></span>

All the gold that was occupied for the work, etc. - To be able to
ascertain the quantum and value of the gold, silver, and brass, which
were employed in the tabernacle, and its different utensils, altars,
etc., it will be necessary to enter into the subject in considerable
detail.

In the course of my notes on this and the preceding book, I have had
frequent occasion to speak of the shekel in use among the ancient
Hebrews, which, following Dean Prideaux, I have always computed at 3s
(shillings), English. As some value it at 2s. 6d., and others at 2s.
4d., I think it necessary to lay before the reader the learned dean's
mode of computation as a proper introduction to the calculations which
immediately follow.

"Among the ancients, the way of reckoning their money was by talents. So
the Hebrews, so the Babylonians, and so the Romans did reckon. And of
these talents they had subdivisions which were usually in minas and
drachms; i.e., of their talents into minas, and their minas into
drachms. The Hebrews had, besides these, their shekels and half-shekels,
or bekas; and the Romans their denarii, which last were very nearly of
the same value with the drachms of the Greeks. What was the value of a
Hebrew talent appears from [Exo 38:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#025),
[Exo 38:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#026), for there 603,550 persons
being taxed at half a shekel a head, they must have paid in the whole
301,775 shekels; and that sum is there said to amount to one hundred
talents, and 1775 shekels over: if therefore we deduct the 1775 shekels
from the number 301,775, and divide the remaining sum, i.e., 300,000, by
a hundred, this will prove each of those talents to contain three
thousand shekels. Each of these shekels weighed about three shillings of
our money; and sixty of them, Ezekiel tells us, [Eze
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#012), made a mina; and therefore
fifty of those minas made a talent. And as to their drachms, it appears
by the Gospel of St. Matthew that it was the fourth part of a shekel,
that is, nine-pence of our money. For there ([Mat
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024)) the tribute money annually paid
to the temple, by every Jew, (Talmud in shekalim), which was half a
shekel, is called Διδραχμον(i.e., the two drachm piece); and therefore,
if half a shekel contained two drachms, a drachm must have been the
quarter part of a shekel, and every shekel must have contained four of
them: and so Josephus tells us it did; for he says, Antiq., lib. iii.,
c. 9, that a shekel contained four Attic drachms, which is not exactly
to be understood according to the weight, but according to the valuation
in the currency of common payments. For according to the weight, the
heaviest Attic drachms did not exceed eight-pence farthing
half-farthing, of our money; and a Hebrew drachm, as I have said, was
nine-pence; but what the Attic drachm fell short of the Hebrew in weight
might be made up in the fineness, and its ready currency in all
countries, (which last the Hebrew drachm could not have), and so might
be made equivalent in common estimation among the Jews. Allowing
therefore a drachm, as well Attic as Jewish, as valued in Judea, to be
equivalent to nine-pence of our money, a Beka or half-shekel will be one
shilling and six-pence; a Shekel, three shillings; a Mina, nine pounds;
and a Talent, four hundred and fifty pounds. So it was in the time of
Moses and Ezekiel; and so was it in the time of Josephus among that
people, for he tells us, Antiq., lib. xiv., c. 12, that a Hebrew mina
contained two Litras and a half, which comes exactly to nine pounds of
our money: for a litra, being the same with a Roman libra, contained
twelve ounces troy weight, that is, ninety-six drachms; and therefore
two litras and a half must contain two hundred and forty drachms, which
being estimated at nine-pence a drachm, according to the Jewish
valuation, comes exactly to sixty shekels, or nine pounds of our money.
And this account agrees exactly with that of Alexandria. For the
Alexandrian talent contained 12,000 Attic drachms; and 12,000 Attic
drachms, according to the Jewish valuation, being 12,000 of our
nine-pences, they amount to 450 pounds of sterling money, which is the
same in value as the Mosaic talent. But here it is to be observed, that
though the Alexandrian talent amounted to 12,000 Attic drachms, yet they
themselves reckoned it but at 6000 drachms, because every Alexandrian
drachm contained two Attic drachms; and therefore the Septuagint version
being made by the Alexandrian Jews, they there render the Hebrew word
shekel, by the Greek διδραχμον, which signifies two drachms, because two
Alexandrian drachms make a shekel, two of them amounting to as much as
four Attic drachms. And therefore computing the Alexandrian money
according to the same method in which we have computed the Jewish, it
will be as follows: One drachm of Alexandria will be of our money
eighteen pence; one didrachm or shekel, consisting of two drachms of
Alexandria, or four of Attica, will be three shillings; one mina,
consisting of sixty didrachms or shekels, will be nine pounds; and one
talent, consisting of fifty minas, will be four hundred and fifty
pounds, which is the talent of Moses, [Exo
38:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#025), [Exo
38:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#026) : and so also is it the talent
of Josephus, Antiq., lib. iii., c. 7; for he tells us that a Hebrew
talent contained one hundred Greek (i.e., Attic) minas. For those fifty
minas, which here make an Alexandrian talent, would be one hundred Attic
minas in the like method of valuation; the Alexandrian talent containing
double as much as the Attic talent, both in the whole, and also in all
its parts, in whatever method both shall be equally distributed. Among
the Greeks the established rule was, Jul. Pollux, Onomast., lib. x., c.
6, that one hundred drachms made a mina, and sixty minas a talent. But
in some different states their drachms being different, accordingly
their minas and talents were within the same proportion different also.
But the money of Attica was the standard by which all the rest were
valued, according as they more or less differed from it. And therefore,
it being of most note, wherever any Greek historian speaks of talents,
minas, or drachms, if they be simply mentioned, it is to be always
understood of talents, minas, or drachms of Attica, and never of the
talents, minas, or drachms of any other place, unless it be expressed.
Mr. Brerewood, going by the goldsmith's weights, reckons an Attic drachm
to be the same with a drachm now in use in their shops, that is, the
eighth part of an ounce; and therefore lays it at the value of
seven-pence halfpenny of our money, or the eighth part of a crown, which
is or ought to be an ounce weight. But Dr. Bernard, going more
accurately to work, lays the middle sort of Attic drachms at eight-pence
farthing of our money, and the minas and talents accordingly, in the
proportions above mentioned. The Babylonish talent, according to Pollux,
Onomast., lib. x., c. 6, contained seven thousand of those drachms. The
Roman talent (see Festus Pompeius) contained seventy-two Italic minas,
which were the same with the Roman libras; and ninety-six Roman
denariuses, each being of the value of seven-pence halfpenny of our
money, made a Roman libra. But all the valuations I have hitherto
mentioned must be understood only of silver money, and not of gold; for
that was much higher. The proportion of gold to silver was among the
ancients commonly as ten to one; sometimes it was raised to be as eleven
to one, sometimes as twelve, and sometimes as thirteen to one. In the
time of King Edward the First it was here, in England, at the value of
ten to one; but it is now gotten at sixteen to one; and so I value it in
all the reductions which I make in this history of ancient sums to the
present value. But to make the whole of this matter the easier to the
reader, I will lay all of it before him for his clear view in this
following table of valuations: -

Currency (British pound) s.(shilling) d.(penny1/12 shilling) Hebrew
Money A Hebrew drachm 9 Two drachms made a beka or half-shekel, which
was the tribute money paid by every Jew to the temple 1 6 Two bekas made
a shekel 3 0 Sixty shekels made a mina. 9 0 0 Fifty minas made a talent
450 0 0 A talent of gold, sixteen to one 7200 0 0 Attic Money, according
to Mr. Brerewood An Attic drachm 7.5 A hundred drachms made a mina 3 2
6.0 Sixty minas made a talent 187 10 0 A talent of gold, sixteen to one
3000 0 0 Attic Money, according to Dr. Bernard An Attic drachm 8.25 A
hundred drachms made a mina 3 8 9.00 Sixty minas made a talent 206 5 0 A
talent of gold, sixteen to one 3300 0 0 Babylonian Money, according to
Mr. Brerewood A Babylonish talent of silver containing seven thousand
Attic drachms 218 15 0. A Babylonish talent in gold, sixteen to one 3500
0 0. Babylonian Money, according to Dr. Bernard A Babylonish talent in
silver 240 12 6 A Babylonish talent in gold, sixteen to one 3850 0 0.
Alexandrian Money A drachm of Alexandria, containing two Attic drachms,
as valued by the Jews 1 6 A didrachm of Alexandria, containing two
Alexandrian drachms, which was a Hebrew shekel 3 0 Sixty didrachms or
Hebrew shekels made a mina 9 0 0 Fifty minas made a talent 450 0 0 A
talent of gold, sixteen to one 7200 0 0. Roman Money Four sesterciuses
made a Roman denarius 7.5 Ninety-six Roman denariuses made an Italic
mina, which was the same with a Roman libra 3 0 0 Seventy-two Roman
libras made a talent 216 0 0

There were twenty-nine talents seven hundred and thirty shekels of Gold;
one hundred talents one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five shekels
of Silver; and seventy talents two thousand four hundred shekels of
Brass.

If with Dean Prideaux we estimate the value of the silver shekel at
three shillings English, we shall obtain the weight of the shekel by
making use of the following proportion. As sixty-two shillings, the
value of a pound weight of silver as settled by the British laws, is to
two hundred and forty, the number of penny-weights in a pound troy, so
is three shillings, the value of a shekel of silver, to 11 dwts. 14
22/31 grains, the weight of the shekel required.

In the next place, to find the value of a shekel of gold we must make
use of the proportion following: As one ounce troy is to 3. 17s. 10d.,
the legal value of an ounce of gold, so is 11 dwts. 14 22/31 grains, the
weight of the shekel as found by the last proportion, to 2. 5s. 2
42/93d., the value of the shekel of gold required. From this datum we
shall soon be able to ascertain the value of all the gold employed in
the work of this holy place, by the following arithmetical process:
Reduce 2. 5s. 2 42/93d. to the lowest term mentioned, which is 201,852
ninety-third parts of a farthing. Multiply this last number by 3000, the
number of shekels in a talent, and the product by 29, the number of
talents; and add in 730 times 201,852, on account of the 730 shekels
which were above the 29 talents employed in the work, and we shall have
for the last product 17,708,475,960, which, divided successively by 93,
4, 12, and 20, will give 198,347. 12s. 6d. for the total value of the
gold employed in the tabernacle, etc.

The value of the silver contributed by 603,550 Israelites, at half a
shekel or eighteen pence per man, may be found by an easy arithmetical
calculation to amount to 45,266. 5s.

The value of the brass at 1s. per pound will amount to 513. 17s.

The Gold of the holy place weighed 4245 pounds.

The Silver of the tabernacle 14,602 pounds.

The Brass 10,277 pounds troy weight.

The total value of all the gold, silver, and brass of the tabernacle
will consequently amount to 244,127. 14s. 6d. And the total weight of
all these three metals amounts to 29,124 pounds troy, which, reduced to
avoirdupois weight, is nearly ten tons and a half. When all this is
considered, besides the quantity of gold which was employed in the
golden calf, and which was all destroyed, it is no wonder that the
sacred text should say the Hebrews spoiled the Egyptians, particularly
as in those early times the precious metals were probably not very
plentiful in Egypt.

[Exodus 38:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 38:26</span></span>

A bekah for every man - The Hebrew word בקי beka, from בקי baka, to
divide, separate into two, seems to signify, not a particular coin, but
a shekel broken or cut in two; so, anciently, our farthing was a penny
divided in the midst and then subdivided, so that each division
contained the fourth part of the penny; hence its name fourthing or
fourthling, since corrupted into farthing.

There appear to be three particular reasons why much riches should be
employed in the construction of the tabernacle, etc.

1\. To impress the people's minds with the glory and dignity of the
Divine Majesty, and the importance of his service.

2\. To take out of their hands the occasion of covetousness; for as they
brought much spoils out of Egypt, and could have little if any use for
gold and silver in the wilderness, where it does not appear that they
had much intercourse with any other people, and were miraculously
supported, so that they did not need their riches, it was right to
employ that in the worship of God which otherwise might have engendered
that love which is the root of all evil.

3\. To prevent pride and vainglory, by leading them to give up to the
Divine service even the ornaments of their persons, which would have had
too direct a tendency to divert their minds from better things. Thus
God's worship was rendered august and respectable, incitements to sin
and low desires removed, and the people instructed to consider nothing
valuable, but as far as it might be employed to the glory and in the
service of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 39](exo039)

</div>
