<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo012)  [Next](exo014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 13:0</span></span>

God establishes the law concerning the first-born, and commands that all
such, both of man and beast, should be sanctified unto him, [Exo
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#001), [Exo
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002). Orders them to remember the day
in which they were brought out of Egypt, when they should be brought to
the land of Canaan; and to keep this service in the month Abib, [Exo
13:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#003). Repeats the command concerning
the leavened bread, [Exo 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#006), [Exo
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#007), and orders them to teach their
children the cause of it, [Exo 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#008),
and to keep strictly in remembrance that it was by the might of God
alone they had been delivered from Egypt, [Exo
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#009). Shows that the consecration of
the first-born, both of man and beast, should take place when they
should be settled in Canaan, [Exo
13:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#010). The first-born of man and
beast to be redeemed, [Exo 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#013). The
reason of this also to be shown to their children, [Exo
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#014), [Exo
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#015). Frontlets or phylacteries for
the hands and forehead commanded, [Exo
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#016). And the people are not led
directly to the promised land, but about through the wilderness; and the
reason assigned, [Exo 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017), [Exo
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018). Moses takes the bones of Joseph
with him, [Exo 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#019). They journey
from Succoth and come to Etham, [Exo
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#020). And the Lord goes before them
by day in a pillar of cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire, [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021), which miracle is regularly
continued both by day and night, [Exo
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#022).

[Exodus 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 13:1</span></span>

The Lord spake unto Moses - The commands in this chapter appear to have
been given at Succoth, on the same day in which they left Egypt.

[Exodus 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 13:2</span></span>

Sanctify unto me all the first-born - To sanctify, קדש kadash, signifies
to consecrate, separate, and set apart a thing or person from all
secular purposes to some religious use; and exactly answers to the
import of the Greek ἁγιαζω, from a, privative, and γη, the earth,
because every thing offered or consecrated to God was separated from all
earthly uses. Hence a holy person or saint is termed ἁγιος, i.e., a
person separated from the earth; one who lives a holy life, entirely
devoted to the service of God. Thus the persons and animals sanctified
to God were employed in the service of the tabernacle and temple; and
the animals, such as were proper, were offered in sacrifice.

The Hindoos frequently make a vow, and devote to an idol the first-born
of a goat and of a man. The goat is permitted to run wild, as a
consecrated animal. A child thus devoted has a lock of hair separated,
which at the time appointed is cut off and placed near the idol. Hindoo
women sometimes pray to Gunga (the Ganges) for children, and promise to
devote the first-born to her. Children thus devoted are cast into the
Ganges, but are generally saved by the friendly hand of some stranger -
Ward's Customs.

Whatsoever openeth the womb - That is, the first-born, if a male; for
females were not offered, nor the first male, if a female had been born
previously. Again, if a man had several wives, the first-born of each,
if a male, was to be offered to God. And all this was done to
commemorate the preservation of the first-born of the Israelites, when
those of the Egyptians were destroyed.

[Exodus 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 13:5</span></span>

When the Lord shall bring thee into the land - Hence it is pretty
evident that the Israelites were not obliged to celebrate the Passover,
or keep the feast of unleavened bread, till they were brought into the
promised land.

[Exodus 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 13:6</span></span>

Unleavened bread - See Clarke on [Exo
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015) (note), and [Exo
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#016) (note).

[Exodus 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 13:9</span></span>

And it shall be for a sign - upon thine hand - This direction, repeated
and enlarged [Exo 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#016), gave rise to
phylacteries or tephillin, and this is one of the passages which the
Jews write upon them to the present day. The manner in which the Jews
understood and kept these commands may appear in their practice. They
wrote the following four portions of the law upon slips of parchment or
vellum: Sanctify unto me the first-born, Exodus 13, from [Exo
13:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002) inclusive. And it shall be,
when the Lord shall bring thee into the land, Exodus 13, from [Exo
13:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011) inclusive. Hear, O Israel,
the Lord our God is one Lord, Deuteronomy 6, from [Deu
6:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004) inclusive. And it shall come to
pass, if ye shall hearken diligently, Deuteronomy 11, from [Deu
11:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#013) inclusive. These four
portions, making in all 30 verses, written as mentioned above, and
covered with leather, they tied to the forehead and to the hand or arm.

Those which were for the Head (the frontlets) they wrote on four slips
of parchment, and rolled up each by itself, and placed them in four
compartments, joined together in one piece of skin or leather. Those
which were designed for the hand were formed of one piece of parchment,
the four portions being written upon it in four columns, and rolled up
from one end to the other. These were all correct transcripts from the
Mosaic text, without one redundant or deficient letter, otherwise they
were not lawful to be worn. Those for the head were tied on so as to
rest on the forehead. Those for the hand or arm were usually tied on the
left arm, a little above the elbow, on the inside, that they might be
near the heart, according to the command, [Deu
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#006) : And these words which I command
thee this day shall be in thine heart. These phylacteries formed no
inconsiderable part of a Jew's religion; they wore them as a sign of
their obligation to God, and as representing some future blessedness.
Hence they did not wear them on feast days nor on the Sabbath, because
these things were in themselves signs; but they wore them always when
they read the law, or when they prayed, and hence they called them תפלין
tephillin, prayer, ornaments, oratories, or incitements to prayer. In
process of time the spirit of this law was lost in the letter, and when
the word was not in their mouth, nor the law in their heart, they had
their phylacteries on their heads and on their hands. And the Pharisees,
who in our Lord's time affected extraordinary piety, made their
phylacteries very broad, that they might have many sentences written
upon them, or the ordinary portions in very large and observable
letters.

It appears that the Jews wore these for three different purposes: -

1\. As signs or remembrancers. This was the original design, as the
institution itself sufficiently proves.

2\. To procure reverence and respect in the sight of the heathen. This
reason is given in the Gemara, Berachoth, chapter i: "Whence is it
proved that the phylacteries or tephillin are the strength of Israel?
Ans. From what is written, [Deu 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#010)
: All the people of the earth shall see that thou art called by the name
of the Lord (יהוה Yehovah) and they shall be afraid of thee."

3\. They used them as amulets or charms, to drive away evil spirits.
This appears from the Targum on [Sol
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#003) : His left hand is under my head,
etc. "The congregation of Israel hath said, I am elect above all people,
because I bind my phylacteries on my left hand and on my head, and the
scroll is fixed to the right side of my gate, the third part of which
looks to my bed-chamber, that demons may not be permitted to injure me.

One of the original phylacteries or תפלין tephillin now lies before me;
it is a piece of fine vellum, about eighteen inches long, and an inch
and quarter broad. It is divided into four unequal compartments; the
letters are very well formed, but written with many apices, after the
manner of the German Jews. In the first compartment is written the
portion taken from [Exo 13:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002); in
the second, [Exo 13:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011); in the
third, [Deu 6:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004); in the fourth, [Deu
11:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#013), as before related. This had
originally served for the hand or arm.

These passages seem to be chosen in vindication of the use of the
phylactery itself, as the reader may see on consulting them at large.
Bind them for a Sign upon thy Hand; and for Frontlets between thy Eyes;
write them upon the Posts of thy House and upon thy Gates; all which
commands the Jews take in the most literal sense. To acquire the
reputation of extraordinary sanctity they wore the fringes of their
garments of an uncommon length. Moses had commanded them, [Num
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038), [Num
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#039), to put fringes to the borders
of their garments, that when they looked upon even these distinct
threads they might remember, not only the law in general but also the
very minutiae or smaller parts of all the precepts, rites, and
ceremonies belonging to it. As those hypocrites (for such our Lord
proves them to be) were destitute of all the life and power of religion
within, they endeavored to supply its place with phylacteries and
fringes without. The same principles distinguish hypocrites every where,
and multitudes of them may be found among those termed Christians as
well as among the Jews. It is probably to this institution relative to
the phylactery that the words, [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001), allude: And I looked, and, lo, a
hundred and forty-four thousand having his Father's name written on
their foreheads. "That is," says Mr. Ainsworth, "as a sign of the
profession of God's law; for That which in the Gospel is called his
Name, ([Mat 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#021)), in the prophets is
called his Law, ([Isa 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004))." So again
antichrist exacts the obedience to his precepts by a mark on men's right
hands or on their foreheads, [Rev
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#016).

[Exodus 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 13:13</span></span>

Every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a lamb - Or a kid, as
in the margin. In [Num 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#015), it is
said: "The first-born of man shalt thou surely redeem; and the firstling
of an unclean beast shalt thou redeem." Hence we may infer that ass is
put here for any unclean beast, or for unclean beasts in general. The
lamb was to be given to the Lord, that is, to his priest, [Num
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#008), [Num
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#015). And then the owner of the ass
might use it for his own service, which without this redemption he could
not do; see [Deu 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#019).

The first-born of man - shalt thou redeem - This was done by giving to
the priests five standard shekels, or shekels of the sanctuary, every
shekel weighing twenty gerahs. What the gerah was, see Clarke on [Gen
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016) (note). And for the shekel, see
Clarke on [Gen 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016) (note).

It may be necessary to observe here that the Hebrew doctors teach, that
if a father had neglected or refused thus to redeem his first-born, the
son himself was obliged to do it when he came of age. As this redeeming
of the first-born was instituted in consequence of sparing the
first-born of the Israelites, when the first-born both of man and beast
among the Egyptians was destroyed, on this ground all the first-born
were the Lord's, and should have been employed in his service; but he
permitted the first-born of a useful unclean animal to be redeemed by a
clean animal of much less value. And he chose the tribe of Levi in place
of all the first-born of the tribes in general; and the five shekels
were ordered to be paid in lieu of such first-born sons as were liable
to serve in the sanctuary, and the money was applied to the support of
the priests and Levites. See this subject at large in [Num
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#012), [Num
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#013), [Num
3:41](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#041), [Num
3:43](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#043), [Num
3:45](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#045), [Num
3:47-51](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#047).

[Exodus 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 13:16</span></span>

It shall be for a token, etc. - See Clarke's note on [Exo
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#009).

[Exodus 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 13:17</span></span>

God led them not through the way of the land of the Philistines, etc. -
Had the Israelites been obliged to commence their journey to the
promised land by a military campaign, there is little room to doubt that
they would have been discouraged, have rebelled against Moses and Aaron,
and have returned back to Egypt. Their long slavery had so degraded
their minds that they were incapable of any great or noble exertions;
and it is only on the ground of this mental degradation, the infallible
consequence of slavery, that we can account for their many dastardly
acts, murmurings, and repinings after their escape from Egypt. The
reader is requested to bear this in mind, as it will serve to elucidate
several circumstances in the ensuing history. Besides, the Israelites
were in all probability unarmed, and totally unequipped for battle,
encumbered with their flocks, and certain culinary utensils. which they
were obliged to carry with them in the wilderness to provide them with
bread, etc.

[Exodus 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 13:18</span></span>

But God led the people about - Dr. Shaw has shown that there were two
roads from Egypt to Canaan, one through the valleys of Jendilly,
Rumeleah, and Baideah, bounded on each side by the mountains of the
lower Thebais; the other lies higher, having the northern range of the
mountains of Mocatee running parallel with it on the right hand, and the
desert of the Egyptian Arabia, which lies all the way open to the land
of the Philistines, to the left. See his account of these encampments at
the end of Exodus. See Clarke's note on [Exo
40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038).

Went up harnessed - חמשים chamushim. It is truly astonishing what a
great variety of opinions are entertained relative to the meaning of
this word. After having maturely considered all that I have met with on
the subject, I think it probable that the word refers simply to that
orderly or well arranged manner in which the Israelites commenced their
journey from Egypt. For to arrange, array, or set in order, seems to be
the ideal meaning of the word חמש chamash. As it was natural to expect
that in such circumstances there must have been much hurry and
confusion, the inspired writer particularly marks the contrary, to show
that God had so disposed matters that the utmost regularity and order
prevailed; and had it been otherwise, thousands of men, women, and
children must have been trodden to death. Our margin has it by five in a
rank; but had they marched only five abreast, supposing only one yard
for each rank to move in, it would have required not less than
sixty-eight miles for even the 600,000 to proceed on regularly in this
way; for 600,000 divided by five gives 120,000 ranks of five each; and
there being only 1,760 yards in a mile, the dividing 120,000 by 1,760
will give the number of miles such a column of people would take up,
which by such an operation will be found to be something more than
sixty-eight miles. But this the circumstances of the history will by no
means admit - Harmer. The simple meaning therefore appears to be that
given above; and if the note on the concluding verse of the preceding
chapter be considered, it may serve to place this explanation in a still
clearer point of view.

[Exodus 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 13:19</span></span>

Moses took the bones of Joseph - See Clarke's note on [Gen
50:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#025). It is supposed that the
Israelites carried with them the bones or remains of all the twelve sons
of Jacob, each tribe taking care of the bones of its own patriarch,
while Moses took care of the bones of Joseph. St. Stephen expressly
says, [Act 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#015), [Act
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#016), that not only Jacob, but the
fathers were carried from Egypt into Sychem; and this, as Calmet
remarks, was the only opportunity that seems to have presented itself
for doing this: and certainly the reason that rendered it proper to
remove the bones of Joseph to the promised land, had equal weight in
reference to those of the other patriarchs. See Clarke's note on [Gen
49:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029).

[Exodus 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 13:20</span></span>

Encamped in Etham - As for the reasons assigned on [Exo
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017), God would not lead the
Israelites by the way of the Philistines' country, he directed them
towards the wilderness of Shur, [Exo
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022), upon the edge or extremity of
which, next to Egypt, at the bottom of the Arabian Gulf, lay Etham,
which is the second place of encampment mentioned. See the extracts from
Dr. Shaw at the end of Exodus. See Clarke's note on [Exo
40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038).

[Exodus 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 13:21</span></span>

The Lord went before them - That by the Lord here is meant the Lord
Jesus, we have the authority of St. Paul to believe, [Co1
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#009) : it was he whose Spirit they
tempted in the wilderness, for it was he who led them through the desert
to the promised rest.

Pillar of a cloud - This pillar or column, which appeared as a cloud by
day, and a fire by night, was the symbol of the Divine presence. This
was the Shechinah or Divine dwelling place, and was the continual proof
of the presence and protection of God. It was necessary that they should
have a guide to direct them through the wilderness, even had they taken
the most direct road; and how much more so when they took a circuitous
route not usually traveled, and of which they knew nothing but just as
the luminous pillar pointed out the way! Besides, it is very likely that
even Moses himself did not know the route which God had determined on,
nor the places of encampment, till the pillar that went before them
became stationary, and thus pointed out, not only the road, but the
different places of rest. Whether there was more than one pillar is not
clearly determined by the text. If there was but one it certainly
assumed three different appearances, for the performance of Three very
important offices. 1. In the day-time, for the purpose of pointing out
the way, a column or pillar of a cloud was all that was requisite. 2. At
night, to prevent that confusion which must otherwise have taken place,
the pillar of cloud became a pillar of fire, not to direct their
journeyings, for they seldom traveled by night, but to give light to
every part of the Israelitish camp. 3. In such a scorching, barren,
thirsty desert, something farther was necessary than a light and a
guide. Women, children, and comparatively infirm persons, exposed to the
rays of such a burning sun, must have been destroyed if without a
covering; hence we find that a cloud overshadowed them: and from what
St. Paul observes, [Co1 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001), [Co1
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002), we are led to conclude that this
covering cloud was composed of aqueous particles for the cooling of the
atmosphere and refreshment of themselves and their cattle; for he
represents the whole camp as being sprinkled or immersed in the humidity
of its vapours, and expressly calls it a being under the cloud and being
baptized in the cloud. To the circumstance of the cloud covering them,
there are several references in Scripture. Thus: He spread a Cloud for
their Covering; [Psa 105:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#039). And the
Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her
assemblies, A Cloud and Smoke By Day, and the shining of a Flaming Fire
by night; for upon all the glory shall be a Defence, (or Covering), [Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005); which words contain the most
manifest allusion to the threefold office of the cloud in the
wilderness. See [Num 9:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#016), etc.

[Exodus 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 13:22</span></span>

He took not away the pillar of the cloud - Neither Jews nor Gentiles are
agreed how long the cloud continued with the Israelites. It is very
probable that it first visited them at Succoth, if it did not accompany
them from Rameses; and that it continued with them till they came to the
river Jordan, to pass over opposite to Jericho, for after that it
appears that the ark alone was their guide, as it always marched at
their head. See [Jos 3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#010), etc. But
others think that it went no farther with them than Mount Hor, and never
appeared after the death of Aaron. We may safely assert that while it
was indispensably necessary it continued with them, when it was not so
it was removed. But it is worthy of remark that the ark of the covenant
became its substitute. While a miracle was necessary, a miracle was
granted; when that was no longer necessary, then the testimony of the
Lord deposited in the ark was deemed sufficient by Him who cannot err.
So, under the Gospel dispensation, miracles were necessary at its first
promulgation; but after that the canon of Scripture was completed, the
new covenant having been made, ratified by the blood of the Lamb, and
published by the Holy Spirit, then God withdrew generally those outward
signs, leaving his word for a continual testimony, and sealing it on the
souls of believers by the Spirit of truth.

It is also worthy of remark that the ancient heathen writers represent
their gods, in their pretended manifestations to men, as always
encompassed with a cloud; Homer and Virgil abound with examples of this
kind: and is it not very probable that they borrowed this, as they did
many other things in their mythologic theology, from the tradition of
Jehovah guiding his people through the desert by means of the cloud, in
and by which he repeatedly manifested himself?

1\. Extraordinary manifestations and interpositions of providence and
grace should be held in continual remembrance. We are liable to forget
the hole of the pit whence we were dug, and the rock whence we were
hewn. Prudence and piety will institute their anniversaries, that the
merciful dealings of the Lord may never be forgotten. The passover and
the feast of unleavened bread, by an annual commemoration, became
standing proofs to the children of Israel of the Divine origin of their
religion; and are supporting pillars of it to the present day. For when
a fact is reported to have taken place, and certain rites or ceremonies
have been instituted in order to commemorate it, which rites or
ceremonies continue to be observed through succeeding ages, then the
fact itself, no matter how remote the period of its occurrence may have
been, has the utmost proofs of authenticity that it is possible for any
fact to have; and such as every person pretending to reason and judgment
is obliged to receive. On this ground the Mosaic religion, and the facts
recorded in it, are indubitably proved; and the Christian religion and
its facts, being commemorated in the same way, particularly by baptism
and the Lord's Supper, stand on such a foundation of moral certainty as
no other records in the universe can possibly boast. Reader, praise God
for his ordinances; they are not only means of grace to thy soul, but
standing irrefragable proofs of the truth of that religion which thou
hast received as from Him.

2\. A serious public profession of the religion of Christ has in all
ages of the Church been considered not only highly becoming, but
indispensably necessary to salvation. He who consistently confesses
Christ before men shall be confessed by him before God and his angels. A
Jew wore his phylacteries on his forehead, on his hands, and round his
garments, that he might have reverence in the sight of the heathen; he
gloried in his law, and he exulted that Abraham was his father.
Christian! with a zeal not less becoming, and more consistently
supported, let the words of thy mouth, the acts of thy hands, and all
thy goings, show that thou belongest unto God; that thou hast taken his
Spirit for the guide of thy heart, his word for the rule of thy life,
his people for thy companions, his heaven for thy inheritance, and
himself for the portion of thy soul. And see that thou hold fast the
truth, and that thou hold it in righteousness.

3\. How merciful is God in the dispensations of his providence! He
permits none to be tried above what he is able to bear, and he
proportions the burden to the back that is to bear it. He led not the
Israelites by the way of the Philistines, lest, seeing war, they should
repent and be discouraged. Young converts are generally saved from
severe spiritual conflicts and heavy temptations till they have acquired
a habit of believing, are disciplined in the school of Christ, and
instructed in the nature of the path in which they go, and the
difficulties they may expect to find in it. They are informed that such
things may take place, they are thus armed for the battle, and when
trials do come they are not taken by surprise. God, the most merciful
and kind God, "tempers even the blast to the shorn lamb." Trust in him
therefore with all thy heart, and never lean to thy own understanding.

4\. The providence and goodness of God are equally observable in the
pillar of cloud and the pillar of fire. The former was the proof of his
providential kindness by day; the latter, by night. Thus he adjusts the
assistance of his grace and Spirit to the exigencies of his creatures,
giving at some times, when peculiar trials require it, more particular
manifestations of his mercy and goodness; but at all times, such
evidences of his approbation as are sufficient to satisfy a pious
faithful heart. It is true the pillar of fire was more observable in the
night, because of the general darkness, than the pillar of cloud was by
day; yet the latter was as convincing and as evident a proof of his
presence, approbation, and protection as the former. It is the duty and
interest of every sound believer in Christ to have the witness of God's
Spirit in his soul at all times, that his spirit and ways please his
Maker; but in seasons of peculiar difficulty he may expect the more
sensible manifestations of God's goodness. A good man is a temple of the
Holy Spirit; but he who has an unholy heart, and who lives an
unrighteous life, though he may have an orthodox creed, is a hold of
unclean spirits, and an abomination in the sight of the Lord. Reader,
let not these observations be fruitless to thee. God gives thee his word
and his Spirit, obey this word that thou grieve not this Spirit. The
following figurative saying of a Jewish rabbin is worthy of regard: "God
addresses Israel and says, My son, I give thee my lamp, give me thy
lamp. If thou keep my lamp, I will keep thy lamp; but if thou quench my
lamp, I will extinguish thy lamp:" i.e., I give thee my word and Spirit,
give me thy heart and soul. If thou carefully attend to my word, and
grieve not my Spirit. I will preserve thy soul alive; but if thou rebel
against my word, and quench my Spirit, then thy light shall be put out,
and thy soul's blessedness extinguished in everlasting darkness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 14](exo014)

</div>
