<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo013)  [Next](exo015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 14:0</span></span>

The Israelites are commanded to encamp before Pi-hahiroth, [Exo
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#001), [Exo
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002). God predicts the pursuit of
Pharaoh, [Exo 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#003), [Exo
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#004). Pharaoh is informed that the
Israelites are fled, and regrets that he suffered them to depart, [Exo
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#005). He musters his troops and
pursues them, [Exo 14:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#006). Overtakes
them in their encampment by the Red Sea, [Exo
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#009). The Israelites are terrified at
his approach, [Exo 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010). They murmur
against Moses for leading them out, [Exo
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#011), [Exo
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#012). Moses encourages them, and
assures them of deliverance, [Exo
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013), [Exo
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#014). God commands the Israelites to
advance, and Moses to stretch out his rod over the sea that it might be
divided, [Exo 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#015), [Exo
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#016); and promises utterly to
discomfit the Egyptians, [Exo 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#017),
[Exo 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#018). The angel of God places
himself between the Israelites and the Egyptians, [Exo
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019). The pillar of the cloud becomes
darkness to the Egyptians, while it gives light to the Israelites, [Exo
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#020). Moses stretches out his rod,
and a strong east wind blows, and the waters are divided, [Exo
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021). The Israelites enter and walk
on dry ground, [Exo 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022). The
Egyptians enter also in pursuit of the Israelites, [Exo
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#023). The Lord looks out of the
pillar of cloud on the Egyptians, terrifies them, and disjoints their
chariots, [Exo 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024), [Exo
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#025). Moses is commanded to stretch
forth his rod over the waters, that they may return to their former bed,
[Exo 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#026). He does so, and the whole
Egyptian army is overwhelmed, [Exo
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#027), [Exo
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028), while every Israelite escapes,
[Exo 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#029). Being thus saved from the
hand of their adversaries, they acknowledge the power of God, and credit
the mission of Moses, [Exo 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#030), [Exo
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031).

[Exodus 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 14:2</span></span>

Encamp before Pi-hahiroth - פי ההירת pi hachiroth, the mouth, strait, or
bay of Chiroth. Between Migdol, מגדל migdol, the tower, probably a
fortress that served to defend the bay. Over against Baal-zephon, בעל
צפן baal tsephon, the lord or master of the watch, probably an idol
temple, where a continual guard, watch, or light was kept up for the
defense of one part of the haven, or as a guide to ships. Dr. Shaw
thinks that chiroth may denote the valley which extended itself from the
wilderness of Etham to the Red Sea, and that the part in which the
Israelites encamped was called Pi-hachiroth, i.e., the mouth or bay of
Chiroth. See his Travels, p. 310, and his account at the end of Exodus.

[Exodus 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 14:3</span></span>

They are entangled in the land - God himself brought them into straits
from which no human power or art could extricate them. Consider their
situation when once brought out of the open country, where alone they
had room either to fight or fly. Now they had the Red Sea before them,
Pharaoh and his host behind them, and on their right and left hand
fortresses of the Egyptians to prevent their escape; nor had they one
boat or transport prepared for their passage! If they be now saved, the
arm of the Lord must be seen, and the vanity and nullity of the Egyptian
idols be demonstrated. By bringing them into such a situation he took
from them all hope of human help, and gave their adversaries every
advantage against them, so that they themselves said, They are entangled
in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in.

[Exodus 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 14:4</span></span>

I will harden Pharaoh's heart - After relenting and giving them
permission to depart, he now changes his mind and determines to prevent
them; and without any farther restraining grace, God permits him to rush
on to his final ruin, for the cup of his iniquity was now full.

[Exodus 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 14:5</span></span>

And it was told the king - that the people fled - Of their departure he
could not be ignorant, because himself had given them liberty to depart:
but the word fled here may be understood as implying that they had
utterly left Egypt without any intention to return, which is probably
what he did not expect, for he had only given them permission to go
three days' journey into the wilderness, in order to sacrifice to
Jehovah; but from the circumstances of their departure, and the property
they had got from the Egyptians, it was taken for granted that they had
no design to return; and this was in all likelihood the consideration
that weighed most with this avaricious king, and determined him to
pursue, and either recover the spoil or bring them back, or both. Thus
the heart of Pharaoh and his servants was turned against the people, and
they said, Why have we let Israel go from serving us? Here was the grand
incentive to pursuit; their service was profitable to the state, and
they were determined not to give it up.

[Exodus 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 14:7</span></span>

Six hundred chosen chariots, etc. - According to the most authentic
accounts we have of war-chariots, they were frequently drawn by two or
by four horses, and carried three persons: one was charioteer, whose
business it was to guide the horses, but he seldom fought; the second
chiefly defended the charioteer; and the third alone was properly the
combatant. It appears that in this case Pharaoh had collected all the
cavalry of Egypt; (see [Exo 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#017));
and though these might not have been very numerous, yet, humanly
speaking, they might easily overcome the unarmed and encumbered
Israelites, who could not be supposed to be able to make any resistance
against cavalry and war-chariots.

[Exodus 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 14:10</span></span>

The children of Israel cried out unto the Lord - Had their prayer been
accompanied with faith, we should not have found them in the next verses
murmuring against Moses, or rather against the Lord, through whose
goodness they were now brought from under that bondage from which they
had often cried for deliverance. Calmet thinks that the most pious and
judicious cried unto God, while the unthinking and irreligious murmured
against Moses.

[Exodus 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 14:13</span></span>

Moses said - Fear ye not - This exhortation was not given to excite them
to resist, for of that there was no hope; they were unarmed, they had no
courage, and their minds were deplorably degraded.

Stand still - Ye shall not be even workers together with God; only be
quiet, and do not render yourselves wretched by your fears and your
confusion.

See the salvation of the Lord - Behold the deliverance which God will
work, independently of all human help and means.

Ye shall see them again no more - Here was strong faith, but this was
accompanied by the spirit of prophecy. God showed Moses what he would
do, he believed, and therefore he spoke in the encouraging manner
related above.

[Exodus 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 14:14</span></span>

The Lord shall fight for you - Ye shall have no part in the honor of the
day; God alone shall bring you off, and defeat your foes.

Ye shall hold your peace - Your unbelieving fears and clamours shall be
confounded, and ye shall see that by might none shall be able to prevail
against the Lord, and that the feeblest shall take the prey when the
power of Jehovah is exerted.

[Exodus 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 14:15</span></span>

Wherefore criest thou unto me? - We hear not one word of Moses' praying,
and yet here the Lord asks him why he cries unto him? From which we may
learn that the heart of Moses was deeply engaged with God, though it is
probable he did not articulate one word; but the language of sighs,
tears, and desires is equally intelligible to God with that of words.
This consideration should be a strong encouragement to every feeble,
discouraged mind: Thou canst not pray, but thou canst weep; if even
tears are denied thee, (for there may be deep and genuine repentance,
where the distress is so great as to stop up those channels of relief),
then thou canst sigh; and God, whose Spirit has thus convinced thee of
sin, righteousness, and judgment, knows thy unutterable groanings, and
reads the inexpressible wish of thy burdened soul, a wish of which
himself is the author, and which he has breathed into thy heart with the
purpose to satisfy it.

[Exodus 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 14:16</span></span>

Lift thou up thy rod - Neither Moses nor his rod could be any effective
instrument in a work which could be accomplished only by the omnipotence
of God; but it was necessary that he should appear in it, in order that
he might have credit in the sight of the Israelites, and that they might
see that God had chosen him to be the instrument of their deliverance.

[Exodus 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 14:18</span></span>

Shall know that I am the Lord - Pharaoh had just recovered from the
consternation and confusion with which the late plagues had overwhelmed
him, and now he is emboldened to pursue after Israel; and God is
determined to make his overthrow so signal by such an exertion of
omnipotence, that he shall get himself honor by this miraculous act, and
that the Egyptians shall know, i.e., acknowledge, that he is Jehovah,
the omnipotent, self-existing, eternal God.

[Exodus 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 14:19</span></span>

The angel of God - It has been thought by some that the angel, i.e.,
messenger, of the Lord, and the pillar of cloud, mean here the same
thing. An angel might assume the appearance of a cloud; and even a
material cloud thus particularly appointed might be called an angel or
messenger of the Lord, for such is the literal import of the word מלאך
malach, an angel. It is however most probable that the Angel of the
covenant, the Lord Jesus, appeared on this occasion in behalf of the
people; for as this deliverance was to be an illustrious type of the
deliverance of man from the power and guilt of sin by his incarnation
and death, it might have been deemed necessary, in the judgment of
Divine wisdom, that he should appear chief agent in this most important
and momentous crisis. On the word angel, and Angel of the covenant, See
Clarke's note on [Gen 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007); See
Clarke's note on [Gen 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#013); and See
Clarke's note on [Exo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002).

[Exodus 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 14:20</span></span>

It was a cloud and darkness to them, etc. - That the Israelites might
not be dismayed at the appearance of their enemies, and that these might
not be able to discern the object of their pursuit, the pillar of cloud
moved from the front to the rear of the Israelitish camp, so as
perfectly to separate between them and the Egyptians. It appears also
that this cloud had two sides, one dark and the other luminous: the
luminous side gave light to the whole camp of Israel during the night of
passage; and the dark side, turned towards the pursuing Egyptians,
prevented them from receiving any benefit from that light. How easily
can God make the same thing an instrument of destruction or salvation,
as seems best to his godly wisdom! He alone can work by all agents, and
produce any kind of effect even by the same instrument; for all things
serve the purposes of his will.

[Exodus 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 14:21</span></span>

The Lord caused the sea to go back - That part of the sea over which the
Israelites passed was, according to Mr. Bruce and other travelers, about
four leagues across, and therefore might easily be crossed in one night.
In the dividing of the sea two agents appear to be employed, though the
effect produced can be attributed to neither. By stretching out the rod
the waters were divided; by the blowing of the vehement, ardent, east
wind, the bed of the sea was dried. It has been observed, that in the
place where the Israelites are supposed to have passed, the water is
about fourteen fathoms or twenty-eight yards deep: had the wind
mentioned here been strong enough, naturally speaking, to have divided
the waters, it must have blown in one narrow track, and continued
blowing in the direction in which the Israelites passed; and a wind
sufficient to have raised a mass of water twenty-eight yards deep and
twelve miles in length, out of its bed, would necessarily have blown the
whole six hundred thousand men away, and utterly destroyed them and
their cattle. I therefore conclude that the east wind, which was ever
remarked as a parching, burning wind, was used after the division of the
waters, merely to dry the bottom, and render it passable. For an account
of the hot drying winds in the east, See Clarke's note on [Gen
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001). God ever puts the highest honor
on his instrument, Nature; and where it can act, he ever employs it. No
natural agent could divide these waters, and cause them to stand as a
wall upon the right hand and upon the left; therefore God did it by his
own sovereign power. When the waters were thus divided, there was no
need of a miracle to dry the bed of the sea and make it passable;
therefore the strong desiccating east wind was brought, which soon
accomplished this object. In this light I suppose the text should be
understood.

[Exodus 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 14:22</span></span>

And the waters were a wall unto them on their right and on their left -
This verse demonstrates that the passage was miraculous. Some have
supposed that the Israelites had passed through, favored by an
extraordinary ebb, which happened at that time to be produced by a
strong wind, which happened just then to blow! Had this been the case,
there could not have been waters standing on the right hand and on the
left; much less could those waters, contrary to every law of fluids,
have stood as a wall on either side while the Israelites passed through,
and then happen to become obedient to the laws of gravitation when the
Egyptians entered in! An infidel may deny the revelation in toto, and
from such we expect nothing better; but to hear those who profess to
believe this to be a Divine revelation endeavoring to prove that the
passage of the Red Sea had nothing miraculous in it, is really
intolerable. Such a mode of interpretation requires a miracle to make
itself credible. Poor infidelity! how miserable and despicable are thy
shifts!

[Exodus 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 14:24</span></span>

The morning watch - A watch was the fourth part of the time from
sun-setting to sun-rising; so called from soldiers keeping guard by
night, who being changed four times during the night, the periods came
to be called watches. - Dodd.

As here and in [Sa1 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#011) is mentioned
the morning watch; so in [Lam 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#019),
the beginning of the watches; and in [Jdg
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#019), the middle watch is spoken of;
in [Luk 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#038), the second and third
watch; and in [Mat 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025), the fourth
watch of the night; which in [Mar
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#035) are named evening, midnight,
cock-crowing, and day-dawning - Ainsworth.

As the Israelites went out of Egypt at the vernal equinox, the morning
watch, or, according to the Hebrew, באשמרת הבקר beashmoreth habboker,
the watch of day-break, would answer to our four o'clock in the morning
- Calmet.

The Lord looked unto - This probably means that the cloud suddenly
assumed a fiery appearance where it had been dark before; or they were
appalled by violent thunders and lightning, which we are assured by the
psalmist did actually take place, together with great inundations of
rain, etc.: The clouds Poured Out Water; the skies sent out a Sound:
thine Arrows also went abroad. The Voice of thy Thunder was in the
heaven; the Lightnings Lightened the world; the earth Trembled and
Shook. Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters. Thou
leddest thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron; [Psa
77:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#017). Such tempests as these would
necessarily terrify the Egyptian horses, and produce general confusion.
By their dashing hither and thither the wheels must be destroyed, and
the chariots broken; and foot and horse must be mingled together in one
universal ruin; see [Exo 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#025). During
the time that this state of horror and confusion was at its summit the
Israelites had safely passed over; and then Moses, at the command of
God, ([Exo 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#026)), having stretched
out his rod over the waters, the sea returned to its strength; ([Exo
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#027)); i.e., the waters by their
natural gravity resumed their level, and the whole Egyptian host were
completely overwhelmed, [Exo 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028).
But as to the Israelites, the waters had been a wall unto them on the
right hand and on the left, [Exo
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#029). This the waters could not have
been, unless they had been supernaturally supported; as their own
gravity would necessarily have occasioned them to have kept their level,
or, if raised beyond it, to have regained it if left to their natural
law, to which they are ever subject, unless in cases of miraculous
interference. Thus the enemies of the Lord perished; and that people who
decreed that the male children of the Hebrews should be drowned, were
themselves destroyed in the pit which they had destined for others.
God's ways are all equal; and he renders to every man according to his
works.

[Exodus 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 14:28</span></span>

There remained not so much as one of them - Josephus says that the army
of Pharaoh consisted of fifty thousand horse, and two hundred thousand
foot, of whom not one remained to carry tidings of this most
extraordinary catastrophe.

[Exodus 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 14:30</span></span>

Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the seashore - By the extraordinary
agitation of the waters, no doubt multitudes of the dead Egyptians were
cast on the shore, and by their spoils the Israelites were probably
furnished with considerable riches, and especially clothing and arms;
which latter were essentially necessary to them in their wars with the
Amalekites, Basanites, and Amorites, etc., on their way to the promised
land. If they did not get their arms in this way, we know not how they
got them, as there is not the slightest reason to believe that they
brought any with them out of Egypt.

[Exodus 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 14:31</span></span>

The people feared the Lord - They were convinced by the interference of
Jehovah that his power was unlimited, and that he could do whatsoever he
pleased, both in the way of judgment and in the way of mercy.

And believed the Lord, and his servant Moses - They now clearly
discerned that God had fulfilled all his promises; and that not one
thing had failed of all the good which he had spoken concerning Israel.
And they believed his servant Moses - they had now the fullest proof
that he was Divinely appointed to work all these miracles, and to bring
them out of Egypt into the promised land.

Thus God got himself honor upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians, and credit in
the sight of Israel. After this overthrow of their king and his host,
the Egyptians interrupted them no more in the journeyings, convinced of
the omnipotence of their Protector: and how strange, that after such
displays of the justice and mercy of Jehovah, the Israelites should ever
have been deficient in faith, or have given place to murmuring!

1\. The events recorded in this chapter are truly astonishing; and they
strongly mark what God can do, and what he will do, both against his
enemies and in behalf of his followers. In vain are all the forces of
Egypt united to destroy the Israelites: at the breath of God's mouth
they perish; and his feeble, discouraged, unarmed followers take the
prey! With such a history before their eyes, is it not strange that
sinners should run on frowardly in the path of transgression; and that
those who are redeemed from the world, should ever doubt of the
all-sufficiency and goodness of their God! Had we not already known the
sequel of the Israelitish history, we should have been led to conclude
that this people would have gone on their way rejoicing, trusting in God
with their whole heart, and never leaning to their own understanding;
but alas! we find that as soon as any new difficulty occurred, they
murmured against God and their leaders, despised the pleasant land, and
gave no credence to his word.

2\. Their case is not a solitary one: most of those who are called
Christians are not more remarkable for faith and patience. Every reverse
will necessarily pain and discompose the people who are seeking their
portion in this life. And it is a sure mark of a worldly mind, when we
trust the God of Providence and grace no farther than we see the
operations of his hand in our immediate supply; and murmur and repine
when the hand of his bounty seems closed, and the influences of his
Spirit restrained, though our unthankful and unholy carriage has been
the cause of this change. Those alone who humble themselves under the
mighty hand of God, shall be lifted up in due season. Reader, thou canst
never be deceived in trusting thy all, the concerns of thy body and
soul, to Him who divided the sea, saved the Hebrews, and destroyed the
Egyptians.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 15](exo015)

</div>
