<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo023)  [Next](exo025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 24:0</span></span>

Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and the seventy elders, are commanded
to go to the mount to meet the Lord, [Exo
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001). Moses alone to come near to the
Divine presence, [Exo 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#002). He informs
the people, and they promise obedience, [Exo
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003). He writes the words of the Lord,
erects an altar at the foot of the hill, and sets up twelve pillars for
the twelve tribes, [Exo 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#004). The
young priests offer burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, [Exo
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#005). Moses reads the book of the
covenant, sprinkles the people with the blood, and they promise
obedience, [Exo 24:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#006). Moses, Aaron,
Nadab, Abihu, and the seventy elders of Israel, go up to the mount, and
get a striking display of the majesty of God, [Exo
24:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#009). Moses alone is called up into
the mount, in order to receive the tables of stone, written by the hand
of God, [Exo 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012). Moses and his
servant Joshua go up, and Aaron and Hur are left regents of the people
during his absence, [Exo 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#013), [Exo
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#014). The glory of the Lord rests on
the mount, and the cloud covers it for six days, and on the seventh God
speaks to Moses out of the cloud, [Exo
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#015), [Exo
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016). The terrible appearance of
God's glory on the mount, [Exo 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#017).
Moses continues with God on the mount forty days, [Exo
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018).

[Exodus 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 24:1</span></span>

Come up unto the Lord - Moses and Aaron were already on the mount, or at
least some way up, ([Exo 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#024)), where
they had heard the voice of the Lord distinctly speaking to them: and
the people also saw and heard, but in a less distinct manner, probably
like the hoarse grumbling sound of distant thunder; see [Exo
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018). Calmet, who complains of the
apparent want of order in the facts laid down here, thinks the whole
should be understood thus: - "After God had laid before Moses and Aaron
all the laws mentioned from the beginning of the 20th chapter to the end
of the 23d, before they went down from the mount to lay them before the
people, he told them that, when they had proposed the conditions of the
covenant to the Israelites, and they had ratified them, they were to
come up again unto the mountain accompanied with Nadab and Abihu the
sons of Aaron, and seventy of the principal elders of Israel. Moses
accordingly went down, spoke to the people, ratified the covenant, and
then, according to the command of God mentioned here, he and the others
reascended the mountain. Tout cela est racont ici avec assez peu
d'ordre."

[Exodus 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 24:2</span></span>

Moses alone shall come near - The people stood at the foot of the
mountain. Aaron and his two sons and the seventy elders went up,
probably about half way, and Moses alone went to the summit.

[Exodus 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 24:3</span></span>

Moses - told the people all the words of the Lord - That is, the ten
commandments, and the various laws and ordinances mentioned from the
beginning of the 20th to the end of the 23d chapter.

[Exodus 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 24:4</span></span>

Moses wrote all the words of the Lord - After the people had promised
obedience, ([Exo 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003)), and so entered
into the bonds of the covenant, "it was necessary," says Calmet, "to
draw up an act by which the memory of these transactions might be
preserved, and confirm the covenant by authentic and solemn ceremonies."
And this Moses does.

1\. As legislator, he reduces to writing all the articles and conditions
of the agreement, with the people's act of consent.

2\. As their mediator and the deputy of the Lord, he accepts on his part
the resolution of the people; and Jehovah on his part engages himself to
Israel, to be their God, their King, and Protector, and to fulfill to
them all the promises he had made to their fathers.

3\. To make this the more solemn and affecting, and to ratify the
covenant, which could not be done without sacrifice, shedding and
sprinkling of blood, Moses builds an altar, probably of turf, as was
commanded, [Exo 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024), and erects
twelve pillars, no doubt of unhewn stone, and probably set round about
the altar. The altar itself represented the throne of God; the twelve
stones, the twelve tribes of Israel. These were the two parties, who
were to contract, or enter into covenant, on this occasion.

[Exodus 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 24:5</span></span>

He sent young men - Stout, able, reputable young men, chosen out of the
different tribes, for the purpose of killing, flaying, and offering the
oxen mentioned here.

Burnt-offerings - They generally consisted of sheep and goats, [Lev
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010). These were wholly consumed by
fire.

Peace-offerings - Bullocks or goats; see [Heb
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019). The blood of these was poured
out before the Lord, and then the priests and people might feast on the
flesh.

[Exodus 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 24:7</span></span>

The book of the covenant - The writing containing the laws mentioned in
the three preceding chapters. As this writing contained the agreement
made between God and them, it was called the book of the covenant; but
as no covenant was considered to be ratified and binding till a
sacrifice had been offered on the occasion, hence the necessity of the
sacrifices mentioned here.

Half of the blood being sprinkled on the Altar, and half of it sprinkled
on the People, showed that both God and They were mutually bound by this
covenant. God was bound to the People to support, defend, and save them;
the People were bound to God to fear, love, and serve him. On the
ancient method of making covenants, see Clarke on [Gen
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#018) (note); and see Clarke on [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018) (note). Thus the blood of the
new covenant was necessary to propitiate the throne of justice on the
one hand, and to reconcile men to God on the other. On the nature and
various kinds of the Jewish offerings, see Clarke's note on [Lev
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#001), etc.

[Exodus 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 24:10</span></span>

They saw the God of Israel - The seventy elders, who were
representatives of the whole congregation, were chosen to witness the
manifestation of God, that they might be satisfied of the truth of the
revelation which he had made of himself and of his will; and on this
occasion it was necessary that the people also should be favored with a
sight of the glory of God; see [Exo
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018). Thus the certainty of the
revelation was established by many witnesses, and by those especially of
the most competent kind.

A paved work of a sapphire stone - Or sapphire brick-work. I suppose
that something of the Musive or Mosaic pavement is here intended; floors
most curiously inlaid with variously coloured stones or small square
tiles, disposed in a great variety of ornamental forms. Many of these
remain in different countries to the present day. The Romans were
particularly fond of them, and left monuments of their taste and
ingenuity in pavements of this kind, in most countries where they
established their dominion. Some very fine specimens are found in
different parts of Britain.

Sapphire is a precious stone of a fine blue color, next in hardness to
the diamond. The ruby is considered by most mineralogists of the same
genus; so is also the topaz: hence we cannot say that the sapphire is
only of a blue color; it is blue, red, or yellow, as it may be called
sapphire, ruby, or topaz; and some of them are blue or green, according
to the light in which they are held; and some white. A very large
specimen of such a one is now before me. The ancient oriental sapphire
is supposed to have been the same with the lapis lazuli. Supposing that
these different kinds of sapphires are here intended, how glorious must
a pavement be, constituted of polished stones of this sort, perfectly
transparent, with an effulgence of heavenly splendor poured out upon
them! The red, the blue, the green, and the yellow, arranged by the
wisdom of God, into the most beautiful emblematic representations, and
the whole body of heaven in its clearness shining upon them, must have
made a most glorious appearance. As the Divine glory appeared above the
mount, it is reasonable to suppose that the Israelites saw the sapphire
pavement over their heads, as it might have occupied a space in the
atmosphere equal in extent to the base of the mountain; and being
transparent, the intense brightness shining upon it must have greatly
heightened the effect.

It is necessary farther to observe that all this must have been only an
appearance, unconnected with any personal similitude; for this Moses
expressly asserts, [Deu 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015). And
though the feet are here mentioned, this can only be understood of the
sapphirine basis or pavement, on which this celestial and indescribable
glory of the Lord appeared. There is a similar description of the glory
of the Lord in the Book of Revelation, [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003) : "And he who sat \[upon the
throne\] was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine stone; and there
was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald." In
neither of these appearances was there any similitude or likeness of any
thing in heaven, earth, or sea. Thus God took care to preserve them from
all incentives to idolatry, while he gave them the fullest proofs of his
being. In Scheuchzer's Physica Sacra, among his numerous fine
engravings, there is one of this glorious manifestation, which cannot be
too severely reprehended. The Supreme Being is represented as an old
man, sitting on a throne, encompassed with glory, having a crown on his
head, and a scepter in his hand, the people prostrate in adoration at
the foot of the piece. A print of this kind should be considered as
utterly improper, if not blasphemous.

[Exodus 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 24:11</span></span>

Upon the nobles of - Israel he laid not his hand - This laying on of the
hand has been variously explained.

1\. He did not conceal himself from the nobles of Israel by covering
them with his hand, as he did Moses, [Exo
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#022).

2\. He did not endue any of the nobles, i.e., the seventy elders, with
the gift of prophecy; for so laying on of the hand has been understood.

3\. He did not slay any of them; none of them received any injury; which
is certainly one meaning of the phrase: see [Neh
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#021); [Psa
55:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#020). Also they saw God, i.e.,
although they had this discovery of his majesty, yet they did eat and
drink, i.e., were preserved alive and unhurt.

Perhaps the eating and drinking here may refer to the peace-offerings on
which they feasted, and the libations that were then offered on the
ratification of the covenant. But they rejoiced the more because they
had been so highly favored, and were still permitted to live; for it was
generally apprehended that God never showed his glory in this signal
manner but for the purpose of manifesting his justice; and therefore it
appeared a strange thing that these should have seen God as it were face
to face, and yet live. See [Gen 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#013);
[Gen 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#010); and [Jdg
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#022), [Jdg
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#023).

[Exodus 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 24:12</span></span>

Come up to me into the mount, and be there - We may suppose Moses to
have been, with Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and the seventy elders, about
midway up the mount; for it plainly appears that there were several
stations on it.

[Exodus 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 24:13</span></span>

Moses rose up - In [Exo 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016) it is
said that the glory of the Lord abode on the mount, and the cloud
covered it. The glory was probably above the cloud, and it was to the
cloud that Moses and his servant Joshua ascended at this time, leaving
Aaron and the elders below. After they had been in this region, viz.,
where the cloud encompassed the mountain, for six days, God appears to
have called Moses up higher: compare verses [Exo
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016) and [Exo
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018). Moses then ascended to the
glory, leaving Joshua in the cloud, with whom he had, no doubt, frequent
conferences during the forty days he continued with God on the mount.

[Exodus 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 24:14</span></span>

Tarry ye here for us - Probably Moses did not know that he was to
continue so long on the mount, nor is it likely that the elders tarried
the whole forty days where they were: they doubtless, after waiting some
considerable time, returned to the camp; and their return is supposed to
have been the grand cause why the Israelites made the golden calf, as
they probably reported that Moses was lost.

Aaron and Hur are with you - Not knowing how long he might be detained
on the mount, and knowing that many cases might occur which would
require the interference of the chief magistrate, Moses constituted them
regents of the people during the time he should be absent.

[Exodus 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 24:16</span></span>

And the seventh day he called - It is very likely that Moses went up
into the mount on the first day of the week; and having with Joshua
remained in the region of the cloud during six days, on the seventh,
which was the Sabbath, God spake to him, and delivered successively to
him, during forty days and forty nights, the different statutes and
ordinances which are afterwards mentioned.

[Exodus 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 24:17</span></span>

The glory of the Lord was like devouring fire - This appearance was well
calculated to inspire the people with the deepest reverence and godly
rear; and this is the use the apostle makes or it, [Heb
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#028), [Heb
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#029), where he evidently refers to
this place, saying, Let us have grace whereby we may serve God
acceptably with reverence and godly fear; for our God is a Consuming
Fire. Seeing the glory of the Lord upon the mount like a devouring fire,
Moses having tarried long, the Israelites probably supposed that he had
been devoured or consumed by it, and therefore the more easily fell into
idolatry. But how could they do this, with this tremendous sight of
God's glory before their eyes?

[Exodus 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 24:18</span></span>

Forty days and forty nights - During the whole of this time he neither
ate bread nor drank water; see [Exo
34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028); [Deu
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009). Both his body and soul were so
sustained by the invigorating presence of God, that he needed no earthly
support, and this may be the simple reason why he took none. Elijah
fasted forty days and forty nights, sustained by the same influence,
[Kg1 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008); as did likewise our blessed
Lord, when he was about to commence the public ministry of his own
Gospel, [Mat 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002).

1\. Moses, who was the mediator of the Old Covenant, is alone permitted
to draw nigh to God; none of the people are suffered to come up to the
Divine glory, not even Aaron, nor his sons, nor the nobles of Israel.
Moses was a type of Christ, who is the mediator of the New Covenant; and
he alone has access to God in behalf of the human race, as Moses had in
behalf of Israel.

2\. The law can inspire nothing but terror, when viewed unconnected with
its sacrifices, and those sacrifices are nothing but as they refer to
Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, who alone by the sacrifice of himself,
bears away the sin of the world.

3\. The blood of the victims was sprinkled both on the altar and on the
people, to show that the death of Christ gave to Divine justice what it
demanded, and to men what they needed. The people were sanctified by it
unto God, and God was propitiated by it unto the people. By this
sacrifice the law was magnified and made honorable, so Divine justice
received its due; and those who believe are justified from all guilt,
and sanctified from all sin, so they receive all that they need. Thus
God is well pleased, and believers eternally saved. This is a glorious
economy, highly worthy of God its author.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 25](exo025)

</div>
