<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze028)  [Next](eze030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 29:0</span></span>

This and the three following chapters foretell the conquest of Egypt by
Nebuchadnezzar, which he accomplished in the twenty-seventh year of
Jehoiachin's captivity. The same event is foretold by Jeremiah, [Jer
46:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#013), etc. The prophecy opens with
God's charging the king of Egypt (Pharaoh-hophra) with the same
extravagant pride and profanity which were in the preceding chapter laid
to the charge of the prince of Tyre. He appears, like him, to have
affected Divine honors; and boasted so much of the strength of his
kingdom, that, as an ancient historian (Herodotus) tells us, he
impiously declared that God himself could not dispossess him. Wherefore
the prophet, with great majesty, addresses him under the image of one of
those crocodiles or monsters which inhabited that river, of whose riches
and revenue he vaunted; and assures him that, with as much ease as a
fisherman drags the fish he has hooked, God would drag him and his
people into captivity, and that their carcasses should fall a prey to
the beasts of the field and to the fowls of heaven, [Eze
29:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#001). The figure is then dropped;
and God is introduced denouncing, in plain terns, the most awful
judgments against him and his nation, and declaring that the Egyptians
should be subjected to the Babylonians till the fall of the Chaldean
empire, [Eze 29:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#008). The prophet then
foretells that Egypt, which was about to be devastated by the
Babylonians, and many of the people carried into captivity, should again
become a kingdom; but that it should never regain its ancient political
importance; for, in the lapse of time, it should be even the Basest of
the kingdoms, a circumstance in the prophecy most literally fulfilled,
especially under the Christian dispensation, in its government by the
Mameluke slaves, [Eze 29:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#013). The
prophecy, beginning at the seventeenth verse, is connected with the
foregoing, as it relates to the same subject, though delivered about
seventeen years later. Nebuchadnezzar and his army, after the long siege
of Tyre, which made every head bald by constantly wearing their helmets,
and wore the skin of off every shoulder by carrying burdens to raise the
fortifications, were disappointed of the spoil which they expected, by
the retiring of the inhabitants to Carthage. God, therefore, promises
him Egypt for his reward, [Eze
29:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#017). The chapter concludes with a
prediction of the return of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity, [Eze
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#021).

[Ezekiel 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 29:1</span></span>

In the tenth year - Of Zedekiah; and tenth of the captivity of Jeconiah.

The ten month, in the twelfth day of the month - Answering to Monday,
the first of February, A.M. 3415.

[Ezekiel 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 29:2</span></span>

Set thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt - This was Pharaoh-hophra or
Pharaoh-apries, whom we have so frequently met with in the prophecies of
Jeremiah, and much of whose history has been given in the notes.

[Ezekiel 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 29:3</span></span>

The great dragon - התנים hattannim should here be translated crocodile,
as that is a real animal, and numerous in the Nile; whereas the dragon
is wholly fabulous. The original signifies any large animal.

The midst of his rivers - This refers to the several branches of the
Nile, by which this river empties itself into the Mediterranean. The
ancients termed them septem ostia Nili, "the seven mouths of the Nile."
The crocodile was the emblem of Egypt.

[Ezekiel 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 29:4</span></span>

I will put hooks in thy jaws - Amasis, one of this king's generals,
being proclaimed king by an insurrection of the people, dethroned
Apries, and seized upon the kingdom; and Apries was obliged to flee to
Upper Egypt for safety.

I will cause the fish - to stick unto thy scales - Most fish are sorely
troubled with a species of insect which bury their heads in their flesh,
under their scales, and suck out the vital juices. The allusion seems to
be to this. Pharaoh was the crocodile; the fish, the common people; and
the sticking to his scales, the insurrection by which he was wasted and
despoiled of his kingdom.

[Ezekiel 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 29:5</span></span>

I will leave thee thrown into the wilderness - Referring to his being
obliged to take refuge in Upper Egypt. But he was afterwards taken
prisoner, and strangled by Amasis. Herod. lib. 2 s. 169.

[Ezekiel 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 29:6</span></span>

They have been a staff of reed - An inefficient and faithless ally. The
Israelites expected assistance from them when Nebuchadnezzar came
against Jerusalem; and they made a feint to help them, but retired when
Nebuchadnezzar went against them. Thus were the Jews deceived and
ultimately ruined, see [Eze 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#007).

[Ezekiel 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 29:10</span></span>

From the tower of Syene - ממגדל מונה mimmigdol seveneh, "from Migdol to
Syene." Syene, now called Essuan, was the last city in Egypt, going
towards Ethiopia. It was famous for a well into which the rays of the
sun fell perpendicularly at midday.

[Ezekiel 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 29:12</span></span>

Shall be desolate forty years - The country from Migdol or Magdolan,
which was on the isthmus between the Mediterranean and the Red Sea, was
so completely ruined, that it might well be called desert; and it is
probable that this desolation continued during the whole of the reign of
Amasis, which was just forty years. See Herod. lib. 3 c. 10; and see
Calmet.

[Ezekiel 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 29:13</span></span>

Will I gather the Egyptians - It is probable that Cyrus gave permission
to the Egyptians brought to Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar, to return to
their own country. And if we reckon from the commencement of the war
against Pharaoh-hophra by Nebuchadnezzar, to the third or fourth year of
Cyrus, the term will be about forty years.

[Ezekiel 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 29:14</span></span>

Into the land of Pathros - Supposed to mean the Delta, a country
included between the branches of the Nile, called Δ delta, from its
being in the form of the Greek letter of that name. It may mean the
Pathrusim, in Upper Egypt, near to the Thebaid. This is most likely.

Shall be there a base kingdom - That is, it shall continue to be
tributary. It is upwards of two thousand years since this prophecy was
delivered, and it has been uninterruptedly fulfilling to the present
hour.

1\. Egypt became tributary to the Babylonians under Amasis.

2\. After the ruin of the Babylonish empire, it became subject to the
Persians.

3\. After the Persians, it came into the hands of the Macedonians.

4\. After the Macedonians it fell into the hands of the Romans.

5\. After the division of the Roman empire it was subdued by the
Saracens.

6\. About a.d. 1250, it came into the hands of the Mameluke slaves.

7\. Selim, the ninth emperor of the Turks, conquered the Mamelukes, a.d.
1517, and annexed Egypt to the Ottoman empire, of which it still
continues to be a province, governed by a pacha and twenty-four beys,
who are always advanced from servitude to the administration of public
affairs. So true is it that Egypt, once so glorious, is the basest of
kingdoms. See Newton on the prophecies.

[Ezekiel 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 29:17</span></span>

The seven and twentieth year - That is, of the captivity of Jeconiah,
fifteen years after the taking of Jerusalem; about April 20, 3432. The
preceding prophecy was delivered one year before the taking of
Jerusalem; this, sixteen years after; and it is supposed to be the last
which this prophet wrote.

[Ezekiel 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 29:18</span></span>

Caused his army to serve a great service against Tyrus - He was thirteen
years employed in the siege. See Joseph. Antiq. lib. 10 c. 11. In this
siege his soldiers endured great hardships. Being continually on duty,
their heads became bald by wearing their helmets; and their shoulders
bruised and peeled by carrying baskets of earth to the fortifications,
and wood, etc., to build towers, etc.

Yet had he no wages, nor his army - The Tyrians, finding it at last
impossible to defend their city, put all their wealth aboard their
vessels, sailed out of the port, and escaped for Carthage; and thus
Nebuchadnezzar lost all the spoil of one of the richest cities in the
world.

[Ezekiel 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 29:20</span></span>

I have given him the land of Egypt for his labor - Because he fulfilled
the designs of God against Tyre, God promises to reward him with the
spoil of Egypt.

[Ezekiel 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 29:21</span></span>

Will I cause the horn of the house of Israel to bud - This may refer
generally to the restoration; but particularly to Zerubbabel, who became
one of the leaders of the people from Babylon. Or it may respect Daniel,
or Mordecai, or Jeconiah, who, about this time, was brought out of
prison by Evil-merodach, and afterwards kindly treated.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 30](eze030)

</div>
