<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze023)  [Next](eze025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 24:0</span></span>

The prophet now informs those of the captivity of the very day on which
Nebuchadnezzar was to lay siege to Jerusalem, (compare [Jer
52:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#004)), and describes the fate of that
city and its inhabitants by a very apt similitude, [Eze
24:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#001). As another sign of the
greatness of those calamities the prophet is forbidden to mourn for his
wife, of whom he is to be deprived; intimating thereby that the
sufferings of the Jews should be so astonishing as to surpass all
expressions of grief; and that private sorrow however affectionate and
tender the object, ought to be absorbed in the public calamities, [Eze
24:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#015). The prophet, having farther
expressed his prediction in plain terms, intimates that he was to speak
to them no more till they should have the news of these prophecies
having been fulfilled, [Eze 24:19-27](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#019).

[Ezekiel 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 24:1</span></span>

The ninth year - This prophecy was given in the ninth year of Zedekiah,
about Thursday, the thirtieth of January, A.M. 3414; the very day in
which the king of Babylon commenced the siege of Jerusalem.

[Ezekiel 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 24:3</span></span>

Set on a pot - The pot was Jerusalem; the flesh, the inhabitants in
general; every good piece, the thigh and the shoulder, King Zedekiah and
his family; the bones, the soldiers; and the setting on the pot, the
commencement of the siege. The prophet was then in Mesopotamia; and he
was told particularly to mark the day, etc., that it might be seen how
precisely the spirit of prophecy had shown the very day in which the
siege took place. Under the same image of a boiling pot, Jeremiah had
represented the siege of Jerusalem, [Jer
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013). Ezekiel was a priest; the action
of boiling pots was familiar to him, as these things were much in use in
the temple service.

[Ezekiel 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 24:5</span></span>

Make it boil well - Let it boil over, that its own scum may augment the
fire, that the bones - the soldiers, may be seethed therein. Let its
contentions, divided counsels, and disunion be the means of increasing
its miseries, רתח רתחיה rattach rethacheyha, let it bubble its bubbling;
something like that of the poet: -

"Bubble, bubble, toil and trouble:

Fire burn, and cauldron bubble."

Very like the noise made by ebullition, when a pot of thick broth,
"sleek and slab," is set over a fierce fire. Such was that here
represented in which all the flesh, the fat and the bones were to be
boiled, and generally dissolved together.

[Ezekiel 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 24:6</span></span>

Let no lot fall upon it - Pull out the flesh indiscriminately; let no
piece be chosen for king or priest; thus showing that all should be
involved in one indiscriminate ruin.

[Ezekiel 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 24:7</span></span>

For her blood is in the midst of her - She gloried in her idol
sacrifices; she offered them upon a rock, where the blood should remain
evident; and she poured none upon the ground to cover it with dust, in
horror of that moral evil that required the blood of an innocent
creature to be shed, in order to the atonement of the offender's guilt.
To "cover the blood of the victim," was a command of the law, [Lev
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#013); [Deu
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#024).

[Ezekiel 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 24:8</span></span>

That it might cause fury - This very blood shall be against them, as the
blood of Abel was against Cain.

[Ezekiel 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 24:10</span></span>

Heap or wood - Let the siege be severe, the carnage great, and the ruin
and catastrophe complete.

[Ezekiel 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 24:13</span></span>

In thy filthiness is lewdness - זמה zimmah, a word that denominates the
worst kinds of impurity; adultery, incest, etc., and the purpose, wish,
design, and ardent desire to do these things. Hers were not accidental
sins, they were abominations by design, and they were the worse in her,
because God had cleansed her, had separated the Israelites from idolatry
and idolatrous nations, and by his institutions removed from them all
idolatrous incentives. But they formed alliances with the heathen, and
adopted all their abominations; therefore God would not spare them. See
[Eze 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#014).

[Ezekiel 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 24:16</span></span>

Behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes - Here is an
intimation that the stroke he was to suffer was to be above all grief;
that it would be so great as to prevent the relief of tears.

Curae leves loquuntur, graviores silent,

is a well-accredited maxim in such cases. Superficial griefs affect the
more easily moved passions; great ones affect the soul itself, in its
powers of reasoning, reflecting, comparing, recollecting, etc., when the
sufferer feels all the weight of wo.

Neither shall thy tears run down - Τουτο γαρ ιδιον των οφθαλμων εν τοις
μεγαλοις κακοις· εν μεν γαρ ταις μετριαις συμφοραις αφθονως τα δακρυα
καταρῥει, - εν δε τοις ὑπερβαλλουσι δεινοις φευγει και τα δακρυα και
προδιδωσι και τους αφθαλμους· Achill. Tat. lib. 3. c. 11. For this is
the case with the eyes in great calamities: in light misfortunes tears
flow freely, but in heavy afflictions tears fly away, and betray the
eyes.

[Ezekiel 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 24:17</span></span>

Make no mourning - As a priest, he could make no public mourning, [Lev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001), etc.

Bind the tire of thine head - This seems to refer to the high priest's
bonnet; or perhaps, one worn by the ordinary priests: it might have been
a black veil to cover the head.

Put on thy shoes upon thy feet - Walking barefoot was a sign of grief.

Cover not thy lips - Mourners covered the under part of the face, from
the nose to the bottom of the chin.

Eat not the bread of men - לחם אנשים lechem anashim, "the bread of
miserable men," i.e., mourners; probably, the funeral banquet.

[Ezekiel 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 24:18</span></span>

At even my wife died - The prophet's wife was a type of the city, which
was to him exceedingly dear. The death of his wife represented the
destruction of the city by the Chaldeans; see [Eze
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#021), where the temple is represented
to be the desire of his eyes, as his wife was, [Eze
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#016).

[Ezekiel 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 24:19</span></span>

Wilt thou not tell us - In the following verses he explains and applies
the whole of what he had done and said.

[Ezekiel 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 24:27</span></span>

In that day shall thy mouth be opened - What is, When some one who shall
have escaped from Jerusalem, having arrived among the captives, shall
inform them of the destruction of the city, the temple, the royal
family, and the people at large; till then he might suppress his tears
and lamentations. And we find from [Eze
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021), that one did actually escape
from the city, and informed the prophet and his brethren in captivity
that the city was smitten.

Thus he was not only a prophet to foretell such things, but he was also
a sign or portent, shadowing them out by circumstances in his own person
and family; and thus the prediction, agreeing so perfectly with the
event, proved that the previous information was from the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 25](eze025)

</div>
