<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze039)  [Next](eze041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 40:0</span></span>

The prophecy or vision, which begins here, continues to the end of the
Book. The Temple of Jerusalem lying in ruins when Ezekiel had this
vision, (for its date as the fourteenth year after the destruction of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar), the Jews needed consolation. If they were
not promised a restoration of the temple, they would not feel so great
an interest in returning home. It is thought by some that no model of
Solomon's Temple had remained. To direct them, therefore, in the
dimensions, parts, order, and rules of their new temple might be one
reason why Ezekiel is so particular in the description of the old; to
which the new was conformable in figure and parts, though inferior in
magnificence, on account of the poverty of the nation at the time.
Whatever was august or illustrious in the prophetic figures, and not
literally fulfilled in or near their own times, the ancient Jews
properly considered as belonging to the time of the Messiah.
Accordingly, upon finding that the latter temple fell short of the model
of the temple here described by Ezekiel, they supposed the prophecy to
refer, at least in part, to the period now mentioned. And we, who live
under the Gospel dispensation, have apostolical authority for the
assertion that the temple and temple worship were emblematic of Christ's
Church, frequently represented in the New Testament under the metaphor
of a temple, in allusion to the symmetry, beauty, and firmness of that
of Solomon; to its orderly worship; and to the manifestations it held of
the Divine Presence. This chapter commences with the time, manner, and
end of the vision, [Eze 40:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#001). We
have next a description of the east gate, [Eze
40:6-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#006), the north gate, [Eze
40:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#020), and the south gate, [Eze
40:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#024). A farther description of the
east gate, [Eze 40:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#032), and of the
north gate, [Eze 40:35-38](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#035). Account of
the eight tables, [Eze 40:39-43](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#039); of
the chambers, [Eze 40:44-47](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#044); and of
the porch of the temple, [Eze 40:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#048),
[Eze 40:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#049).

A New Plan of the Temple at Jerusalem

For an explanation of this plan, and of the accompanying map of the
division of the Land of Canaan, see the notes at end of Ezekiel 48.

[Ezekiel 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 40:1</span></span>

In the five and twentieth year of our captivity - According to the date
here given, this prophecy was delivered on Tuesday, April 20, A.M. 3430,
in the twenty-fifth year of the captivity of Jeconiah, and fourteen
years after the taking of Jerusalem.

The temple here described by Ezekiel is, in all probability, the same
which he saw before his captivity, and which had been burned by the
Chaldeans fourteen years before this vision. On comparing the Books of
Kings and Chronicles with this prophet, we shall find the same
dimensions in the parts described by both; for instance, the temple, or
place which comprehended the sanctuary, the holy place, and the
vestibule or porch before the temple, is found to measure equally the
same both in Ezekiel and the Kings. Compare [Kg1
6:3-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#003), with [Eze
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#002), etc. The inside ornaments of the
temple are entirely the same; in both we see two courts; an inner one
for the priests, and an outer one for the people. Compare [Kg1
6:29-36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#029); [Ch2
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#009); and [Eze
41:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#016), [Eze
41:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#017), and [Eze
48:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#007). So that there is room to
suppose that, in all the rest, the temple of Ezekiel resembled the old
one; and that God's design in retracing these ideas in the prophet's
memory was to preserve the remembrance of the plan, the dimensions, the
ornaments, and whole structure of this Divine edifice; and that at the
return from captivity the people might more easily repair it, agreeably
to this model. The prophet's applying himself to describe this edifice
was a motive of hope to the Jews of seeing themselves one day delivered
from captivity, the temple rebuilt, and their nation restored to its
ancient inheritance. Ezekiel touches very slightly upon the description
of the temple or house of the Lord, which comprehended the holy place or
sanctuary, and which are so exactly described in the Books of Kings. He
dwells more largely upon the gates, the galleries, and apartments, of
the temple, concerning which the history of the kings had not spoken, or
only just taken notice of by the way.

This is the judgment of Calmet; and although every Biblical critic is of
the same opinion, yet more labor is spent on rebuilding this temple of
Ezekiel than was spent on that built by Solomon! The Jesuits, Prada and
Villalpand, have given three folio volumes on this temple, with
abundance of cuts, where the different parts are exhibited after the
finest models of Grecian and Roman architecture! But still the building
is incomplete. Now, of what consequence is all this to the Christian, or
to any other reader? I confess I see not. While, then, we have the exact
dimensions and accurate description in 1 Kings and 2 Chronicles, of that
built by Solomon, in imitation of which this plan by Ezekiel was drawn,
we need not be very solicitous about the manner of measuring and
describing used by the prophet; as, when we have labored through the
whole, we have only the measurements and description of that built by
Solomon, and delineated by a hand not less faithful in the First Book of
Kings, [Eze 6:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#001), and 2 Chronicles
2, 3, 4, [Ch2 5:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#001) and 6.

As the prophet knew that the Chaldeans had utterly destroyed the temple,
he thought it necessary to preserve an exact description of it, that on
their restoration the people might build one on the same model. As to
allegorical meanings relative to this temple, I can say nothing: God has
given no data by which any thing of this kind can be known or applied;
and as to those who have labored in this way, perhaps "Solomon's Temple
Spiritualized, by John Bunyan," is equally good with their well-intended
inventions. Those who wish to enter much into the particulars of this
temple must have recourse to the more voluminous expositors, who on this
subject seem to have thought that they could never say enough. See also
the accompanying map.

[Ezekiel 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 40:2</span></span>

Set me upon a very high mountain - Mount Moriah, the mount on which
Solomon's temple was built, [Ch2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001).

[Ezekiel 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 40:3</span></span>

A man, whose appearance was like - brass - Like bright polished brass,
which strongly reflected the rays of light. Probably he had what we
would term a nimbus or glory round his head. This was either an angel;
or, as some think, a personal appearance of our blessed Lord.

[Ezekiel 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 40:4</span></span>

Declare all that thou seest to the house of Israel - That they may know
how to build the second temple, when they shall be restored from their
captivity.

[Ezekiel 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 40:5</span></span>

A measuring reed of six cubits long - The Hebrew cubit is supposed to be
about twenty and a half inches; and a palm, about three inches more; the
length of the rod about ten feet six inches.

The breadth - one reed; and the height, one reed - As this wall was as
broad as it was high, it must have been a kind of parapet, which was
carried, of the same dimensions, all round the temple. See AAAA in the
plan.

[Ezekiel 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 40:6</span></span>

Went up the stairs thereof - As the temple was built upon an eminence,
there must have been steps on the outside, opposite to each door, to
ascend by. And it appears there were steps to go up from one court to
another, see [Eze 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#022), [Eze
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#026), [Eze
40:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#034), [Eze
40:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#037); and also from the court of the
priests to the sanctuary, [Eze 40:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#049).
See MMMMM in the plan.

[Ezekiel 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 40:7</span></span>

And every little chamber was one reed - These were the chambers of the
buildings which were within the inclosure of the temple round the court,
and these chambers appear to have been numerous. See the map, which has
been carefully copied from that of Calmet.

[Ezekiel 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 40:9</span></span>

The porch of the gate - See account of the gates in the plan.

[Ezekiel 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 40:15</span></span>

Fifty cubits - The length of the building. See MMMMM in the plan.

[Ezekiel 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 40:17</span></span>

The outward court - This was the court of the people.

[Ezekiel 40:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 40:21</span></span>

And the little chambers thereof were three, etc. - See the plan.

Arches - Porch. The arch was not known at this period.

[Ezekiel 40:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 40:24</span></span>

According to these measures - The same measures that had been used at
the eastern court.

[Ezekiel 40:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eze 40:30</span></span>

And the arches round about were five and twenty cubits long - That the
five cubits broad should be read twenty-five is evident from [Eze
40:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#021), [Eze
40:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#025), [Eze
40:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#029), [Eze
40:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#033), and [Eze
40:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#036), The word ועשרים veesrim,
twenty, has probably been lost out of the text. Indeed the whole verse
is wanting in two of Kennicott's MSS., one of De Rossi's, and one of
mine, (Cod. B.) It has been added in the margin of mine by a later hand.
It is reported to have been anciently wanting in many MSS.

[Ezekiel 40:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">eze 40:39</span></span>

The porch of the gate - The north gate of the court of the priests. See
Q in the plan.

Two tables - Some say of marble. See dddd in the plan.

[Ezekiel 40:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">eze 40:41</span></span>

Four tables - These were in the porch of the north gate, in the court of
the priests: on them they slew, flayed, and cut up the victims. See dddd
in the plan.

[Ezekiel 40:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">eze 40:47</span></span>

He measured the court - This was the court of the priests. See FFF in
the plan.

[Ezekiel 40:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">eze 40:48</span></span>

Breadth of the gate - It is evident that the gate was a bivalve, or had
folding doors. The length of the porch was twenty cubits. Josephus says
the vestibule was twenty cubits long and ten broad. Antiq. lib. 8:3, 2.

[Ezekiel 40:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">eze 40:49</span></span>

By the steps - This was a flight of steps that led to the temple; there
were eight steps in each flight. See YY in the plan.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 41](eze041)

</div>
