<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze018)  [Next](eze020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 19:0</span></span>

This chapter contains two beautiful examples of the parabolic kind of
writing; the one lamenting the sad catastrophe of Jehoahaz and
Jehoiakim, [Eze 19:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#001), and the other
describing the desolation and captivity of the whole people, [Eze
19:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#010). In the first parable, the
lioness is Jerusalem. The first of the young lions is Jehoahaz, deposed
by the king of Egypt; and the second lion is Jehoiakim, whose rebellion
drew on himself the vengeance of the king of Babylon. In the second
parable the vine is the Jewish nation, which long prospered, its land
being fertile, its princes powerful, and its people flourishing; but the
judgments of God, in consequence of their guilt, had now destroyed a
great part of the people, and doomed the rest to captivity.

[Ezekiel 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 19:1</span></span>

Moreover take thou up a lamentation - Declare what is the great subject
of sorrow in Israel. Compose a funeral dirge. Show Be melancholy fate of
the kings who proceeded from Josiah. The prophet deplores the misfortune
of Jehoahaz and Jehoiakim, under the figure of two lion whelps, which
were taken by hunters, and confined in cages. Next he shows the
desolation of Jerusalem under Zedekiah, which he compares to a beautiful
vine pulled up by the roots, withered, and at last burned. Calmet justly
observes, that the style of this song is beautiful, and the allegory
well supported throughout.

[Ezekiel 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 19:2</span></span>

What is thy mother? A lioness - Judea may here be the mother; the
lioness, Jerusalem. Her lying down among lions, her having confederacy
with the neighboring kings; for lion here means king.

[Ezekiel 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 19:3</span></span>

She brought up one of her whelps - Jehoahaz, son of Josiah, whose father
was conquered and slain by Pharaoh-necho, king of Egypt.

It learned to catch the prey - His reign was a reign of oppression and
cruelty. He made his subjects his prey, and devoured their substance.

[Ezekiel 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 19:4</span></span>

The nations also heard of him - The king of Egypt, whose subjects were
of divers nations, marched against Jerusalem, took Jehoahaz prisoner,
and brought him to Egypt. Thus: -

He was taken in their pit - Here is an allusion to those trap-pits
digged in forests, into which the wild beasts fall, when the huntsmen,
surrounding a given portion of the forest, drive the beasts in; by
degrees narrowing the inclosure, till the animals come to the place
where the pits are, which, being lightly covered over with branches and
turf, are not perceived, and the beasts tread on them and fall in.
Jehoahaz reigned only three months before he was dethroned by the king
of Egypt, against whom it is apparent some craft was used, here
signified by the pit, into which he fell.

[Ezekiel 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 19:5</span></span>

When she saw that she had waited - Being very weak, the Jews found that
they could not resist with any hope of success; so the king of Egypt was
permitted to do as he pleased.

She took another of her whelps - Jehoiakim.

And made him a young lion - King of Judea.

[Ezekiel 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 19:6</span></span>

And he went up and down among the lions - He became a perfect heathen,
and made Judea as idolatrous as any of the surrounding nations. He
reigned eleven years, a monster of iniquity, [Kg2
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#030), etc.

[Ezekiel 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 19:8</span></span>

The nations set against him - The Chaldeans, Syrians, Moabites, and
Ammonites, and the king of Babylon - king of many nations.

He was taken - The city was taken by Nebuchadnezzar; and Jehoiakim was
taken prisoner, and sent in chains to Babylon.

[Ezekiel 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 19:9</span></span>

That his voice should no more be heard - He continued in prison many
years, till the reign of Evil-merodach, who set him at liberty, but
never suffered him to return to the mountains of Israel. "The unhappy
fate of these princes, mentioned [Eze
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#004), [Eze
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#008), [Eze
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#009), is a just subject of
lamentation." - Newcome.

[Ezekiel 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 19:10</span></span>

Thy mother (Jerusalem) is like a vine in thy blood - Of this expression
I know not what to make. Some think the meaning is "A vine planted by
the waters to produce the blood of the grape." See [Deu
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014). Others, for בדמך bedamecha, in
thy blood, would read ברמון berimmon, in or at a pomegranate; like a
vine planted by or beside a pomegranate-tree, by which it was to be
supported. And so the Septuagint and Arabic appear to have read. Calmet
reads כרמך carmecha, thy vineyard, instead of בדמך bedamecha, in thy
blood. Here is no change but a ר resh for a ד daleth. This reading is
supported by one of Kennicott's and one of De Rossi's MSS.: "Thy mother
is like a vine in thy vineyard, planted by the waters." Though this is
rather an unusual construction yet it seems the best emendation. Of the
textual reading no sense can be made. There is a corruption somewhere.

Full on branches - Many princes. See next verse.

[Ezekiel 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 19:11</span></span>

She had strong rods - Zedekiah, and his many sons.

Her stature was exalted - Zedekiah grew proud of his numerous offspring
and prosperity; and although he copied the example of Jehoiakim, yet he
thought he might safely rebel against the king of Babylon.

[Ezekiel 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 19:12</span></span>

But she was plucked up in fury - Jerusalem; taken after a violent and
most destructive siege; Nebuchadnezzar being violently enraged against
Zedekiah for breaking his oath to him.

She was cast down to the ground - Jerusalem was totally ruined, by being
burned to the ground.

Her strong rods were broken - The children of Zedekiah were slain before
his eyes, and after that his own eyes pulled out; and he was laden with
chains, and carried into Babylon.

[Ezekiel 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 19:13</span></span>

And now she is planted in the wilderness - In the land of Chaldea,
whither the people have been carried captives; and which, compared with
their own land, was to them a dreary wilderness.

[Ezekiel 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 19:14</span></span>

Fire is gone out - A vindictive and murderous disposition has taken
hold: -

Of a rod of her branches - Ishmael, son of Nethaniah, who was of the
blood-royal of Judah: -

Hath devoured her fruit - Hath assassinated Gedaliah, slain many people,
and carried off others into the country of the Ammonites. But he was
pursued by Jonathan, the son of Kareah, who slew many of his adherents,
and delivered much of the people.

She hath no strong rod - None of the blood-royal of Judah left. And from
that time not one of her own royal race ever sat upon the throne of
Israel.

This is a lamentation - This is a most lamentable business.

And shall be for a lamentation - These predictions shall be so
punctually fulfilled, and the catastrophe shall be so complete, that it
shall ever remain as a lamentation; as this state of Jerusalem shall
never be restored. Even to the present day this, to a Jew, is a subject
of mourning.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 20](eze020)

</div>
