<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze037)  [Next](eze039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 38:0</span></span>

The sublime prophecy contained in this and the following chapter relates
to Israel's victory over Gog, and is very obscure. It begins with
representing a prodigious armament of many nations combined together
under the conduct of Gog, with the intention of overwhelming the Jews,
after having been for some time resettled in their land subsequent to
their return from the Babylonish captivity, [Eze
38:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#001). These enemies are farther
represented as making themselves sure of the spoil, [Eze
38:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#010). But in this critical
conjuncture when Israel, to all human appearance, was about to be
swallowed up by her enemies, God most graciously appears, to execute by
terrible judgments the vengeance threatened against these formidable
adversaries of his people, [Eze
38:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#014). The prophet, in terms
borrowed from human passions, describes, with awful emphasis, the fury
of Jehovah as coming up to his face; and the effects of it so dreadful,
as to make all the animate and inanimate creation tremble, and even to
convulse with terror the whole frame of nature, [Eze
38:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#017).

[Ezekiel 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 38:2</span></span>

Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog - This is
allowed to be the most difficult prophecy in the Old Testament. It is
difficult to us, because we know not the king nor people intended by it:
but I am satisfied they were well known by these names in the time that
the prophet wrote.

I have already remarked in the introduction to this book that there are
but two opinions on this subject that appear to be at all probable:

1\. That which makes Gog Cambyses, king of Persia; and,

2\. That which makes him Antiochus Epiphanes, king of Syria.

And between these two (for one or other is supposed to be the person
intended) men are much divided.

Calmet, one of the most judicious commentators that ever wrote on the
Bible, declares for Cambyses; and supports his opinion, in opposition to
all others, by many arguments.

Mr. Mede supposes the Americans are meant who were originally colonies
of the Scythians who were descendants of Magog, son of Japheth.
Houbigant declares for the Scythians, whose neighbors were the people of
Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, that is the Russians, Muscovites, and Tybareni
or Cappadocians. Several eminent critics espouse this opinion. Rabbi
David Kimchi says the Christians and Turks are meant: and of later
opinions there are several, founded in the ocean of conjecture. Calmet
says expressly, that Gog is Cambyses, king of Persia, who on his return
from the land of Egypt, died in Judea. The Revelation David Martin,
pastor of the Waloon church at Utrecht, concludes, after examining all
previous opinions, that Antiochus Epiphanes, the great enemy on the
Israelites, is alone intended here; and that Gog, which signifies
covered, is an allusion to the well-known character of Antiochus, whom
historians describe as an artful, cunning, and dissembling man. See [Dan
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#023), [Dan
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025); [Dan
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#023), [Dan
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#027), [Dan
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#032). Magog he supposes to mean the
country of Syria. Of this opinion the following quotation from Pliny,
Hist. Nat., lib. v., c. 23, seems a proof; who, speaking of Coele-Syria,
says Coele habet Apamiam Marsyia amne divisam a Nazarinorum Tetrarchia.
Bambycem quam alio nomine Hierapolis vocatur, Syris vero Magog.
"Coele-Syria has Apamia separated from the tetrarchy of the Nazarenes by
the river Marsyia; and Bambyce, otherwise called Hierapolis; but by the
Syrians, Magog."

I shall at present examine the text by this latter opinion.

Chief prince of Meshech and Tubal - These probably mean the auxiliary
forces, over whom Antiochus was supreme; they were the Muscovites and
Cappadocians.

[Ezekiel 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 38:4</span></span>

I will turn thee back - Thy enterprise shall fail.

[Ezekiel 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 38:5</span></span>

Persia - That a part of this country was tributary to Antiochus, see 1
Maccabees 3:31.

Ethiopia, and Libya - That these were auxiliaries of Antiochus is
evident from [Dan 11:43](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#043) : "The Libyans
and Ethiopians shall be at his steps."

[Ezekiel 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 38:6</span></span>

Gomer, and all his bands; the house of Togarmah - The Cimmerians and
Turcomanians, and other northern nations. - Calmet.

[Ezekiel 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 38:8</span></span>

In the latter years thou shalt come - This was fulfilled about four
hundred years after. - Martin. The expedition of Cambyses against Egypt
was about twelve years after the return of the Jews from Babylon. -
Calmet.

[Ezekiel 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 38:9</span></span>

Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm - It is observable that
Antiochus is thus spoken of by Daniel, [Dan
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#040) : The king of the north -
Antiochus, shall come against him (the king of the south is the king of
Egypt) like a whirlwind.

[Ezekiel 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 38:10</span></span>

Shall things come into thy mind, and thou shalt think an evil thought -
Antiochus purposed to invade and destroy Egypt, as well as Judea; see
[Dan 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#031), [Dan
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#032), [Dan
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036). This Calmet interprets of
Cambyses, his cruelties in Egypt, and his evil design to destroy the
Israelites.

[Ezekiel 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 38:12</span></span>

To take a spoil - and a prey - When Antiochus took Jerusalem he gave the
pillage of it to his soldiers, and spoiled the temple of its riches,
which were immense. See Josephus War, B. 1. C. 1.

[Ezekiel 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 38:13</span></span>

Sheba, and Dedan - The Arabians, anciently great plunderers; and
Tarshish, the inhabitants of the famous isle of Tartessus, the most
noted merchants of the time. They are here represented as coming to
Antiochus before he undertook the expedition, and bargaining for the
spoils of the Jews. Art thou come to take a spoil, to carry away silver
and gold, cattle and goods?

[Ezekiel 38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 38:16</span></span>

When I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog - By the defeat of his troops
under Lysias, his general. 1 Maccabees 3:32, 33, etc., and 6:6.

[Ezekiel 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 38:17</span></span>

Art thou he of whom I have spoken in old time - This prophecy concerning
Antiochus and the Jews was delivered about four hundred years before the
events took place. - Martin. Calmet maintains that Cambyses is spoken
of, and refers to ancient prophecies, especially Isaiah 14, [Isa
15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001), [Isa
16:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001), [Isa
20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001), 21.

[Ezekiel 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 38:21</span></span>

I will call for a sword against him - Meaning Judas Maccabeus, who
defeated his army under Lysias, making a horrible carnage. - Martin.
Cambyses had no wars in the mountains of Israel.

[Ezekiel 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 38:22</span></span>

Great hailstones, fire, and brimstone - These are probably figurative
expressions, to signify that the whole tide of the war should be against
him, and that his defeat and slaughter should be great. Abp. Newcome
supposes all the above prophecy remains yet to be fulfilled. Where such
eminent scribes are divided, who shall decide!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 39](eze039)

</div>
