<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze006)  [Next](eze008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 7:0</span></span>

This chapter, which also forms a distinct prophecy, foretells the
dreadful destruction of the land of Israel, or Judah, (for after the
captivity of the ten tribes these terms are often used indiscriminately
for the Jews in general), on account of the heinous sins of its
inhabitants, [Eze 7:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#001); and the
great distress of the small remnant that should escape, [Eze
7:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#016). The temple itself, which they
had polluted with idolatry, is devoted to destruction, [Eze
7:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#020); and the prophet is directed
to make a chain, as a type of that captivity, in which both king and
people should be led in bonds to Babylon, [Eze
7:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#023). The whole chapter abounds in
bold and beautiful figures, flowing in an easy and forcible language.

[Ezekiel 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 7:2</span></span>

An end, the end is come - Instead of קץ בא הקץ kets ba hakkets, one MS.
of Kennicott's, one of De Rossi's, and one of my own, read קץ בא בא הקץ
kets ba, ba hakkets,"The end cometh, come is the end." This reading is
supported by all the ancient Versions, and is undoubtedly genuine. The
end Cometh: the termination of the Jewish state is coming, and while I
am speaking, it is come. The destruction is at the door. The later hand,
who put the vowel points to the ancient MS. that has the above reading,
did not put the points to the first בא ba, but struck his pen gently
across it, and by a mark in the margin intimated that it should be
blotted out. All my ancient MSS. were without the points originally; but
they have been added by modern hands, with a different ink; and they
have in multitudes of instances corrected, or rather changed, important
readings, to make them quadrate with the masora. But the original
reading, in almost every case, is discernible.

The end is come upon the four corners of the land - This is not a
partial calamity; it shall cover and sweep the whole land. The cup of
your iniquity is full, and my forbearing is at an end. This whole
chapter is poetical.

[Ezekiel 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 7:4</span></span>

Thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee - They shall ever stare
thee in the face, upbraid thee with thy ingratitude and disobedience,
and be witnesses against thee.

[Ezekiel 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 7:5</span></span>

An evil, an only evil - The great, the sovereign, the last exterminating
evil, is come: the sword, the pestilence, the famine, and the captivity.
Many MSS. read אחר achar, after. So evil cometh after evil; one
instantly succeeds another.

[Ezekiel 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 7:6</span></span>

An end is come, the end is come: it watcheth for thee - This is similar
to the second verse; but there is a paronomasia, or play upon letters
and words, which is worthy of note. קץ בא בא הקץ הקץ אליך kets ba, ba
hakkets, hekits elayich. קצה katsah signifies to make an end or
extremity, by cutting off something, and יקץ yakats signifies to awake
from sleep: hence קיץ kits, the summer, as the earth and its productions
seem then to awake from the sleep of winter. The end or final
destruction is here personified; and represented as an executioner who
has arisen early from his sleep, and is waiting for his orders to
execute judgment upon these offenders. Hence it is said: -

[Ezekiel 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 7:7</span></span>

The morning is come unto thee - Every note of time is used in order to
show the certainty of the thing. The morning that the executioner has
watched for is come; the time of that morning, in which it should take
place, and the day to which that time, precise hour of that morning,
belongs in which judgment shall be executed. All, all is come.

And not the sounding again of the mountains - The hostile troops are
advancing! Ye hear a sound, a tumultuous noise; do not suppose that this
proceeds from festivals upon the mountains; from the joy of harvestmen,
or the treaders of the wine-press. It is the noise of those by whom ye
and your country are to fall. ולא הד הרים veto hed harim, and not the
reverberation of sound, or reflected sound, or reechoing from the
mountains. "Now will I shortly pour out," [Eze
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#008). Here they come!

[Ezekiel 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 7:10</span></span>

Behold the day - The same words are repeated, sometimes varied, and
pressed on the attention with new figures and new circumstances, in
order to alarm this infatuated people. Look at the day! It is come!

The morning is gone forth - It will wait no longer. The rod that is to
chastise you hath blossomed; it is quite ready.

Pride hath budded - Your insolence, obstinacy, and daring opposition to
God have brought forth their proper fruits.

[Ezekiel 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 7:11</span></span>

Violence is risen, up into a rod of wickedness - The prophet continues
his metaphor: "Pride has budded." - And what has it brought forth?
Violence and iniquity. To meet these, the rod of God cometh. There is
such a vast rapidity of succession in the ideas of the prophet that he
cannot wait to find language to clothe each. Hence we have broken
sentences; and, consequently, obscurity. Something must be supplied to
get the sense, and most critics alter words in the text. Houbigant, who
rarely acknowledges himself to be puzzled, appears here completely
nonplussed. He has given a meaning; it is this: "Violence hath burst
forth from the rod; salvation shall not proceed from them, nor from
their riches, nor from their turbulence: there shall be no respite for
them." Calmet has given no less than five interpretations to this verse.
The simple meaning seems to be, that such and so great is their
wickedness that it must be punished; and from this punishment, neither
their multitude nor struggles shall set them free. They may strive to
evade the threatened stroke; but they shall not succeed, nor shall they
have any respite. Our Version is to be understood as saying, - None of
the people shall be left; all shall be slain, or carried into captivity:
nor shall any of theirs, their princes, priests, wives, or children,
escape. And so deserved shall their desolation appear, that none shall
lament them. This may be as good a sense as any, and it is nearest to
the letter.

[Ezekiel 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 7:12</span></span>

Let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn - Such is now the state
of public affairs, that he who through want has been obliged to sell his
inheritance, need not mourn on the account; as of this the enemy would
soon have deprived him. And he who has bought it need not rejoice in his
bargain, as he shall soon be stripped of his purchase, and either fall
by the sword, or be glad to flee for his life.

[Ezekiel 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 7:13</span></span>

For the seller shall not return - In the sale of all heritages among the
Jews, it was always understood that the heritage must return to the
family on the year of jubilee, which was every fiftieth year; but in
this case the seller should not return to possess it, as it was not
likely that he should be alive when the next jubilee should come, and if
he were even to live till that time, he could not possess it, as he
would then be in captivity. And the reason is particularly given; for
the vision - the prophetic declaration of a seventy years' captivity,
regards the whole multitude of the people; and it shall not return,
i.e., it will be found to be strictly true, without any abatement.

[Ezekiel 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 7:14</span></span>

They have blown the trumpet - Vain are all the efforts you make to
collect and arm the peoples and stand on your own defense; for all shall
be dispirited, and none go to the battle.

[Ezekiel 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 7:15</span></span>

The sword is without - War through all the country, and pestilence and
famine within the city, shall destroy the whole, except a small remnant.
He who endeavors to flee from the one shall fall by the other.

[Ezekiel 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 7:16</span></span>

They - shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys - Rather,
like mourning doves הגאיות haggeayoth, chased from their dove-cotes, and
separated from their mates.

[Ezekiel 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 7:17</span></span>

All knees shall be weak as water - Calmet understands this curiously: La
frayeur dont on sera saisi, fera qu'on ne pourra retenir son urine.
D'autres l'expliquent d'une autre souillure plus honteuse. I believe him
to be nearly about right. St. Jerome is exactly the same: Pavoris
magnitudine, urina polluet genua, nec valebit profluentes aquas vesica
prohibere. This and other malretentions are often the natural effect of
extreme fear or terror.

[Ezekiel 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 7:19</span></span>

They shall cast their silver in the streets - Their riches can be of no
use; as in a time of famine there is no necessary of life to be
purchased, and gold and silver cannot fill their bowels.

It is the stumbling-block of their iniquity - They loved riches, and
placed in the possession of them their supreme happiness. Now they find
a pound of gold not worth an ounce of bread.

[Ezekiel 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 7:20</span></span>

As for the beauty of his ornament - Their beautiful temple was their
highest ornament, and God made it majestic by his presence. But they
have even taken its riches to make their idols, which they have brought
into the very courts of the Lord's house; and therefore God hath set it
- the temple, from him - given it up to pillage. Some say it means,
"They took their ornaments, which were their pride, and made them into
images to worship."

[Ezekiel 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 7:22</span></span>

The robbers shall enter into it - The Chaldeans shall not only destroy
the city; but they shall enter the temple, deface it, plunder it, and
burn it to the ground.

[Ezekiel 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 7:23</span></span>

Make a chain - Point out the captivity; show them that it shall come,
and show them the reason: "Because the land is full of bloody crimes,"
etc.

[Ezekiel 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 7:24</span></span>

The worst of the heathen - The Chaldeans; the most cruel and idolatrous
of all nations.

[Ezekiel 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 7:25</span></span>

They shall seek peace - They see now that their ceasing to pay the
tribute to the king of Babylon has brought the Chaldeans against them;
and now they sue for peace in vain. He will not hear: he is resolved on
their destruction.

[Ezekiel 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 7:26</span></span>

Then shall they seek a vision - Vision shall perish from the prophet,
the law from the priest, and counsel from the ancients. Previously to
great national judgments, God restrains the influences of his Spirit.
His word is not accompanied with the usual unction; and the wise men of
the land, the senators and celebrated statesmen, devise foolish schemes;
and thus, in endeavoring to avert it, they hasten on the national ruin.
How true is the saying, Quem Deus vult perdere, prius dementat. "Those
whom God designs to destroy, he first infatuates."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 8](eze008)

</div>
