<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze015)  [Next](eze017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 16:0</span></span>

In this chapter the mercy of God to Jerusalem, (or the Jewish Church and
nation), is set forth by the emblem of a person that should take up an
exposed infant, bring her up with great tenderness, and afterwards marry
her, [Eze 16:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#001). She is then
upbraided with her monstrous ingratitude in departing from the worship
of God, and polluting herself with the idolatries of the nations around
her, under the figure of a woman that proves false to a tender and
indulgent husband, vv. 15-52. But, notwithstanding these her heinous
provocations, God promises, after she should suffer due correction, to
restore her again to his favor, [Eze
16:53-63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#053). The mode of describing
apostasy from the true religion to the worship of idols under the emblem
of adultery, (a figure very frequent in the sacred canon), is pursued
with great force, and at considerable length, both in this and the
twenty-third chapter; and is excellently calculated to excite in the
Church of God the highest detestation of all false worship.

[Ezekiel 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 16:2</span></span>

Cause Jerusalem to know her abominations - And such a revelation of
impurity never was seen before or since. Surely the state of the Jews,
before the Babylonish captivity, was the most profligate and corrupt of
all the nations of the earth. This chapter contains God's manifesto
against this most abominable people; and although there are many
metaphors here, yet all is not metaphorical. Where there was so much
idolatry, there must have been adulteries, fornications, prostitutions,
and lewdness of every description. The description of the prophet is
sufficiently clear, except where there is a reference to ancient and
obsolete customs. What a description of crimes! The sixth satire of
Juvenal is its counterpart. General remarks are all that a commentator
is justified in bestowing on this very long, very circumstantial, and
caustic invective. For its key, see on [Eze
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#013) (note) and [Eze
16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063) (note).

[Ezekiel 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 16:3</span></span>

Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan - It would dishonor
Abraham to say that you sprung from him: ye are rather Canaanites than
Israelites. The Canaanites were accursed; so are ye.

Thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite - These tribes were
the most famous, and probably the most corrupt, of all the Canaanites.
So Isaiah calls the princes of Judah rulers of Sodom, [Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010); and John the Baptist calls the
Pharisees a generation or brood of vipers, [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007). There is a fine specimen of this
kind of catachresis in Dido's invective against Aeneas: -

Nec tibi Diva parens, generis nec

Dardanus auctor, Perflde;

sed duris genuit te cautibus horrens

Caucasus, Hyrcanaeque admorunt ubera tigres.

Aen. lib. 4:365.

"False as thou art, and more than false, forsworn;

Not sprung from noble blood, nor goddess born:

But hewn from hardened entrails of a rock, -

And rough Hyrcanian tigers gave thee suck."

Dryden.

This is strong: but the invective of the prophet exceeds it far. It is
the essence of degradation to its subject; and shows the Jews to be as
base and contemptible as they were abominable and disgusting.

[Ezekiel 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 16:4</span></span>

As for thy nativity, etc. - This verse refers to what is ordinarily done
for every infant on its birth. The umbilical cord, by which it received
all its nourishment while in the womb, being no longer necessary, is cut
at a certain distance from the abdomen: on this part a knot is tied,
which firmly uniting the sides of the tubes, they coalesce, and
incarnate together. The extra part of the cord on the outside of the
ligature, being cut off from the circulation by which it was originally
fed, soon drops off, and the part where the ligature was is called the
navel. In many places, when this was done, the infant was plunged into
cold water; in all cases washed, and sometimes with a mixture of salt
and water, in order to give a greater firmness to the skin, and
constringe the pores. The last process was swathing the body, to support
mechanically the tender muscles till they should acquire sufficient
strength to support the body. But among savages this latter process is
either wholly neglected, or done very slightly: and the less it is done,
the better for the infant; as this kind of unnatural compression greatly
impedes the circulation of the blood, the pulsation of the heart, and
the due inflation of the lungs; respiration, in many cases, being
rendered oppressive by the tightness of these bandages.

[Ezekiel 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 16:5</span></span>

Thou wast cast out in the open field - This is an allusion to the custom
of some heathen and barbarous nations, who exposed those children in the
open fields to be devoured by wild beasts who had any kind of deformity,
or whom they could not support.

[Ezekiel 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 16:6</span></span>

I said - Live - I received the exposed child from the death that awaited
it, while in such a state as rendered it at once an object of horror,
and also of compassion.

\- Modo primos Edere vagitus,

et adhuc a matre rubentem.

[Ezekiel 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 16:8</span></span>

Was the time of love - Thou wast marriageable.

I spread my skirt over thee - I espoused thee. This was one of their
initiatory marriage ceremonies. See [Rut
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#009).

I - entered into a covenant with thee - Married thee. Espousing preceded
marriage.

[Ezekiel 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 16:10</span></span>

I clothed thee also with broidered work - Cloth on which various
figures, in various colors, were wrought by the needle.

With badgers'skin - See [Exo 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#006). The
same kind of skin with which the tabernacle was covered.

Fine linen - בשש beshesh, with cotton. I have seen cloth of this kind
enveloping the finest mummies.

I covered thee with silk - משי meshi. Very probably the produce of the
silk-worm.

[Ezekiel 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 16:12</span></span>

I put a jewel on thy forehead - על אפך al appech, upon thy nose. This is
one of the most common ornaments among ladies in the east. European
translators, not knowing what to make of a ring in the nose, have
rendered it, a jewel on thy forehead or mouth, (though they have
sometimes a piece of gold or jewel fastened to the center of their
forehead.) I have already spoken of this Asiatic custom, so often
referred to in the sacred writings: see [Gen
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#022), [Gen
24:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#042); [Exo
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#002); [Job
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#011); [Pro
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#022); [Isa
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#021); [Hos
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#013).

[Ezekiel 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 16:13</span></span>

Thus wast thou decked, etc. - The Targum understands all this of the
tabernacle service, the book of the law, the sacerdotal vestments, etc.

Thou didst prosper into a kingdom - Here the figure explains itself: by
this wretched infant, the low estate of the Jewish nation in its origin
is pointed out; by the growing up of this child into woman's estate, the
increase and multiplication of the people; by her being decked out and
ornamented, her tabernacle service, and religious ordinances; by her
betrothing and consequent marriage, the covenant which God made with the
Jews; by her fornication and adulteries, their apostasy from God, and
the establishment of idolatrous worship, with all its abominable rites;
by her fornication and whoredoms with the Egyptians and Assyrians, the
sinful alliances which the Jews made with those nations, and the
incorporation of their idolatrous worship with that of Jehovah; by her
lovers being brought against her, and stripping her naked, the delivery
of the Jews into the hands of the Egyptians, Assyrians, and Chaldeans,
who stripped them of all their excellencies, and at last carried them
into captivity.

This is the key to the whole of this long chapter of metaphors; and the
reader will do well to forget the figures, and look at the facts. The
language and figures may in many places appear to us exceptionable: but
these are quite in conformity to those times and places, and to every
reader and hearer would appear perfectly appropriate, nor would engender
either a thought or passion of an irregular or improper kind. Custom
sanctions the mode, and prevents the abuse. Among naked savages
irregular passions and propensities are not known to predominate above
those in civilized life. And why? Because such sights are customary, and
therefore in themselves innocent. And the same may be said of the
language by which such states and circumstances of life are described.
Had Ezekiel spoken in such language as would have been called chaste and
unexceptionable among us, it would have appeared to his auditors as a
strange dialect, and would have lost at least one half of its power and
effect. Let this be the prophet's apology for the apparent indelicacy of
his metaphors; and mine, for not entering into any particular discussion
concerning them. See also the note on [Eze
16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063) (note).

[Ezekiel 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 16:15</span></span>

Thou didst trust in thine own beauty - Riches, strength, alliances,
etc.; never considering that all they possessed came from God; therefore
it was his comeliness which he had put upon them. Witness their original
abject state, and the degree of eminence to which they had arrived
afterwards through the protecting power of God.

[Ezekiel 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 16:17</span></span>

And madest to thyself images of men - צלמי זכר tsalmey zachar, male
images. Priapi are here meant, which were carried about in the
ceremonies of Osiris, Bacchus, and Adonis; and were something like the
lingam among the Hindoos. Herodotus, lib. ii, c. 48, 49, gives us an
account of these male images: Πηχυαια αγαλματα νευροσπαστα, τα
περιφορεουσι κατα κωμας ται γυναικες, νευον το αιδοιον, ου πολλῳ τεῳ
ελασσον εον του αλλου σωματος. This was done at the worship of Bacchus
in Egypt: and they who wish to see more may consult Herodotus as above.
In this phallic worship the women were principally concerned.

[Ezekiel 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 16:18</span></span>

Hast set mine oil and mine incense before them - It appears that they
had made use of the holy vestments, and the different kinds of offerings
which belonged to the Lord, to honor their idols.

[Ezekiel 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 16:21</span></span>

To cause them to pass through the fire - Bp. Newcome quotes a very
apposite passage from Dionysius Halicarnass. Ant. Romans lib. i., s. 88,
p. 72, and marg. p. 75, Edit. Hudson: Μετα δε τουτο, πυρκαΐας προ των
σκηνων γενεσθαι κελευσας, εξαγει τον λεων τας φλογας ὑπερθρωσκοντα,της
ὁσιωσεως των μιασματων ἑνεκα. "And after this, having ordered that fires
should be made before the tents, he brings out the people to leap over
the flames, for the purifying of their pollutions." This example shows
that we are not always to take passing through the fire for being
entirely consumed by it. Among the Israelites this appears to have been
used as a rite of consecration.

[Ezekiel 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 16:24</span></span>

Thou hast also built unto thee an eminent place - גב gab, a stew or
brothel; Vulg. lupanar; Septuag. οικημα πορνικον. So my old MS. Bible, a
bordel house. "Thou hast builded thy stewes and bordell houses in every
place." - Coverdale's Bible, 1636. Bordel is an Italian word: how it got
so early into our language I know not. Our modern word brothel is a
corruption of it. Diodati translates, Tu hai edificato un bordello,
"Thou hast built a brothel." Houses of this kind were of a very ancient
date.

[Ezekiel 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 16:26</span></span>

Great of flesh - The most extensive idolaters. Bene vasatis-longa
mensura incognita nervy - Juv. Sat. 9:34. This is the allusion.

[Ezekiel 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 16:27</span></span>

Have diminished thine ordinary - חקך chukkech means here the household
provision made for a wife - food, clothing, and money.

[Ezekiel 16:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">eze 16:36</span></span>

Thy filthiness was poured out - נחשתך nechushtech. As this word
signifies a sort of metal, (brass), it is generally supposed to mean
money. They had given money literally to these heathen nations to
procure their friendship and assistance; but the word also means
verdigris, the poisonous rust of copper or brass. It is properly
translated in our version filthiness, poisonous filth. Does it not refer
to that venereal virus which is engendered by promiscuous connexions?

[Ezekiel 16:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">eze 16:39</span></span>

They shall strip thee also of thy clothes - thy fair jewels - Alluding
to a lot common enough to prostitutes, their maintainers in the end
stripping them of all they had given them.

[Ezekiel 16:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">eze 16:42</span></span>

I will be quiet and will be no more angry - I will completely abandon
thee; have nothing more to do with thee; think no more of thee. When God
in judgment ceases to reprehend, this is the severest judgment.

[Ezekiel 16:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">eze 16:43</span></span>

Thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth - Thy former low
beginning, when God made thee a people, who wast no people. He who
maintains not a proper recollection of past mercies is not likely to
abide steadfast in the faith. Ingratitude to God is the commencement, if
not the parent, of many crimes.

[Ezekiel 16:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">eze 16:44</span></span>

As is the mother, so is her daughter - כאמה בתה keimmah bittah, "As the
mother, her daughter." As is the cause, so is the effect. As is the
breeding, so is the practice. A silken purse cannot be made out of a
swine's ear. What is bred in the bone seldom comes out of the flesh. All
such proverbs show the necessity of early holy precepts, supported by
suitable example.

[Ezekiel 16:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">eze 16:46</span></span>

Thine elder sister is Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell at thy
left - It is supposed that the prophet by Sodom in this place means the
Israelites that dwelt beyond Jordan, in the land or the Moabites and
Ammonites; or rather of the Moabites and Ammonites themselves.
Literally, Sodom could not be called the younger sister of Jerusalem, as
it existed before Jerusalem had a name. In looking east from Jerusalem,
Samaria was on the left, and Sodom on the right hand; that is, the first
was on the north, the second on the south of Jerusalem.

[Ezekiel 16:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">eze 16:49</span></span>

This was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom - If we are to take this place
literally, Sodom was guilty of other crimes besides that for which she
appears to have been especially punished; in addition to her unnatural
crime, She is charged with pride, luxury, idleness, and
uncharitableness; and these were sufficient to sink any city to the
bottomless pit.

[Ezekiel 16:52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">eze 16:52</span></span>

They are more righteous than thou - תצדקנה ממך tetsuddaknah mimmech,
"They shall be justified more than thou." They are less guilty in the
sight of God, for their crimes were not accompanied with so many
aggravations. This phrase casts light on [Luk
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014) : "This man went down to his
house justified rather than the other." Less blame in the sight of God
was attached to him. He always had fewer advantages, and now he was a
true penitent; while the other was boasting of what he had done, and
what he had not done.

[Ezekiel 16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">eze 16:60</span></span>

I will remember my covenant - That is, the covenant I made with Abraham
in the day or thy youth, when in him thou didst begin to be a nation.

[Ezekiel 16:61](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">eze 16:61</span></span>

Thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger - The Gentiles, who were before
the Jews were called, and after the Jews were cast off, are here termed
the elder and younger sister. These were to be given to Jerusalem for
daughters; the latter should be converted to God by the ministry of men
who should spring out of the Jewish Church. The former, who were
patriarchs, etc., profited by the Lamb who was slain from the foundation
of the world. Among the latter the Gospel was preached, first by Christ
and his apostles, and since by persons raised up from among themselves.

But not by thy covenant - This was the ancient covenant, the conditions
of which they broke, and the blessings of which they forfeited; but by
that new covenant, or the renewal to the Gentiles of that covenant that
was made originally with Abraham while he was a Gentile, promising that
in his seed all the nations of the earth should be blessed; that
covenant which respected the incarnation of Christ, and was ratified by
the blood of his cross.

[Ezekiel 16:63](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">eze 16:63</span></span>

When I am pacified toward thee - This intimates that the Jews shall
certainly share in the blessings of the Gospel covenant, and that they
shall be restored to the favor and image of God. And when shall this be?
Whenever they please. They might have enjoyed them eighteen hundred
years ago; but they would not come, though all things there then ready.
They may enjoy them now; but they still choose to shut their eyes
against the light, and contradict and blaspheme. As they do not turn to
the Lord, the veil still continues on their hearts. Let their elder
brethren pray for them.

For a key to the principal metaphors in this chapter, the reader is
referred to the note on the thirteenth verse, which, if he regard not,
he will neither do justice to himself nor to the prophet. The whole
chapter is a tissue of invective; sharp, cutting, and confounding; every
where well sustained, in every respect richly merited; and in no case
leaving any room to the delinquent for justification or response.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 17](eze017)

</div>
