<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze025)  [Next](eze027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 26:0</span></span>

This prophecy, beginning here and ending in the twentieth verse of the
twenty-eighth chapter, is a declaration of the judgments of God against
Tyre, a very famous commercial city of antiquity, which was taken by
Nebuchadnezzar after an arduous siege of thirteen years. The prophet
begins with introducing Tyre insulting Jerusalem, and congratulating
herself on the prospect of accession to her commerce now that this city
was no more, [Eze 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#001), [Eze
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#002). Upon which God denounces utter
destruction to Tyre, and the cities depending on her, [Eze
26:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#003). We have then a particular
account of the person raised up in the course of the Divine providence
to accomplish this work. We see, as it were, his mighty hosts, (which
are likened to the waves of the sea for their multitude), raising the
mounds, setting the engines, and shaking the walls; we hear the noise of
the horsemen, and the sound of their cars; we see the clouds of smoke
and dust; we see the sword bathed in blood, and hear the groans of the
dying. Tyre, (whose buildings were very splendid and magnificent, and
whose walls were one hundred and fifty feet in height, with a
proportionable breadth), immediately disappears; her strong (and as she
thought impregnable) towers are thrown down; and her very dust is buried
in the sea. Nothing remains but the bare rock, [Eze
26:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#007). The scene is then varied. The
isles and adjacent regions, by a very strong and beautiful figure, are
represented to be shaken, as with a mighty earthquake by violent
concussion occasioned by the fall of Tyre. The groans of the dying reach
the ears of the people inhabiting these regions. Their princes, alarmed
for themselves and grieved for Tyre, descend from their thrones, lay
aside their robes, and clothe themselves with - sackcloth? - no, but
with trembling! Arrayed in this astonishing attire, the prophet
introduces them as a chorus of mourners, lamenting Tyre in a funeral
song or dirge, as customary on the death of renowned personages. And
pursuing the same image still farther, in the person of God, he performs
the last sad office for her. She is brought forth from her place in
solemn pomp; the pit is dug for her; and she is buried, to rise no more,
[Eze 26:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#015). Such is the prophecy
concerning Tyre, comprehending both the city on the continent and that
on the island, and most punctually fulfilled in regard to both. That on
the continent was razed to the ground by Nebuchadnezzar, b.c. 572, and
that on the island by Alexander the Great, b.c. 332. And at present, and
for ages past, this ancient and renowned city, once the emporium of the
world, and by her great naval superiority the center of a powerful
monarchy, is literally what the prophet has repeatedly foretold it
should be, and what in his time was, humanly speaking, so highly
improbable - a Bare rock, a place to spread nets on!

[Ezekiel 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 26:1</span></span>

The eleventh year - This was the year in which Jerusalem was taken; the
eleventh of the captivity of Jeconiah, and the eleventh of the reign of
Zedekiah. What month we are not told, though the day is mentioned. There
have been many conjectures about this, which are not of sufficient
consequence to be detailed.

[Ezekiel 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 26:2</span></span>

Tyrus hath said - From this it would appear that Jerusalem had been
taken, which was on the fourth month of this year; but it is possible
that the prophet speaks of the event beforehand.

She is broken that was the gates of the people - Jerusalem, a general
emporium.

I shall be replenished - The merchandise that went to Jerusalem will
come to me, (to Tyre.).

[Ezekiel 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 26:3</span></span>

Will cause many nations to come up against thee - We have already seen
that the empire of the Chaldeans was composed of many different
provinces, and that Nebuchadnezzar's army was composed of soldiers from
different nations: these may be the people meant; but I doubt whether
this may not refer to the different nations which in successive ages
fought against Tyre. It was at last finally destroyed in the sixteenth
century of the Christian era.

[Ezekiel 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 26:4</span></span>

I will also scrape her dust from her - I will totally destroy her
fortifications, and leave her nothing but a barren rock, as she was
before. This cannot refer to the capture of Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar. It
flourished long after his time.

[Ezekiel 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 26:5</span></span>

A place for the spreading of nets - A place for the habitation of some
poor fishermen, who spent the fishing season there, and were accustomed
to dry their nets upon the rocks. See on [Eze
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#011) (note).

[Ezekiel 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 26:6</span></span>

And her daughters - The places dependent on Tyre. As there were two
places called Tyre, one on the main land, and the other on a rock in the
sea, opposite to that on the main land, sometimes the one seems to be
spoken of, and sometimes the other. That on the land, Palaetyre, was
soon taken; but that in the sea cost Nebuchadnezzar thirteen years of
siege and blockade. The two formed only one city, and one state.

[Ezekiel 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 26:7</span></span>

Nebuchadrezzar - king of kings - An ancient title among those proud
Asiatic despots shahinshah and padshah, titles still in use.

[Ezekiel 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 26:8</span></span>

Thy daughters in the field - This seems to be spoken of Palaetyre, or
Tyre on the main land; for forts, mounts, engines of war, horses, and
chariots could not be brought to act against the other.

[Ezekiel 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 26:12</span></span>

And they shall lay thy stones and thy timber and thy dust in the midst
of the water - This answers to the taking of Tyre by Alexander; he
actually took the timbers, stones, rubbish, etc. of old Tyre, and filled
up the space between it and new Tyre, and thus connected the latter with
the main land; and this he was obliged to do before he could take it.

[Ezekiel 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 26:14</span></span>

Thou shalt be built no more - If this refer to Nebuchadnezzar's capture
of the city, old Tyre must be intended: that was destroyed by him, and
never rebuilt. But I doubt whether the whole of this prophecy do not
refer to the taking of Tyre by Alexander, three hundred years after its
capture by Nebuchadnezzar. Indeed it may include more recent conquests
of this important city. It went through a variety of vicissitudes till
1289, when it and the neighboring towns were sacked and ravaged by the
Mamelukes. Mr. Maundrell, who visited this place, says, "it is a Babel
of broken walls, pillars, vaults, etc., there being not so much as one
entire house left! Its present inhabitants are only a few poor wretches,
harbouring themselves in the vaults, and subsisting chiefly on fishing;
who seem to be preserved in this place by Divine Providence as a visible
argument how God has fulfilled his word concerning Tyre, that it should
be the top of a rock, a place for fishers to dry their nets on."

[Ezekiel 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 26:15</span></span>

The isles shake at the sound of thy fall - All those which had traded
with this city, which was the grand mart, and on which they all
depended. Her ruin involved them all, and caused general wailing.

[Ezekiel 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 26:16</span></span>

The princes of the sea - The chief maritime states, such as Leptis,
Utica, Carthage, Gades, etc. See Calmet.

[Ezekiel 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 26:17</span></span>

Wast strong in the sea - The strength of Tyre was so great, that
Alexander despaired of being able to reduce it unless he could fill up
that arm of the sea that ran between it and the main land. And this work
cost his army seven months of labor.

[Ezekiel 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 26:20</span></span>

And I shall set glory in the land of the living - Judea so called, the
land of the living God.

[Ezekiel 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 26:21</span></span>

Yet shalt thou never be found again - This is literally true; there is
not the smallest vestige of the ancient Tyre, that which was erected on
the main land. Even the ground seems to have been washed away; and the
new Tyre is in nearly a similar state. I think this prophecy must be
extended to the whole duration of Tyre. If it now be found to be in the
state here described, it is sufficient to show the truth of the
prophecy. And now it is found precisely in the state which the above
prophetic declarations, taken according to the letter, point out! No
word of God can ever fall to the ground.

Notwithstanding the former destructions, Tyre was a place of some
consequence in the time of St. Paul. There was a Church there, (see [Act
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#003), [Act
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#004), etc.), which afterwards became
famous. Calmet observes, it afforded a great number of martyrs for the
Christian Church.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 27](eze027)

</div>
