<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr008)  [Next](ezr010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 9:0</span></span>

The princes inform Ezra that many of the people now settled in the had
married heathen wives; and several of the rulers were principal
offenders in this thing, [Ezr 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001),
[Ezr 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#002). He is greatly afflicted,
[Ezr 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#003), [Ezr
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#004). His prayer to God on thus
account, [Ezr 9:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#005).

[Ezra 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 9:1</span></span>

The people of Israel - These were they who had returned at first with
Zerubbabel, and were settled in the land of Judea and whom Ezra found on
his arrival to be little better than the Canaanitish nations from whom
God had commanded them ever to keep separate.

[Ezra 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 9:2</span></span>

Hath been chief in this trespass - They who are the first men have been
the most capital offenders; so Virgil, Aen. ix. 783: -

Unus homo, vestris, o cives, undique septus

Aggeribus, tantas strages impune per urbem Ediderit?

Juvenum primos tot miserit orco?

"Shall one, and he enclosed within your walls,

One rash imprisoned warrior, vanquish all?

Calm you look on, and see the furious foe

Plunge crowds of heroes to the shades below!"

Pitt.

The first of the Trojan youth were the chief, the most illustrious; so
we say the first men of the kingdom for the nobles, etc.

[Ezra 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 9:3</span></span>

I rent my garment and my mantle - The outer and inner garment, in sign
of great grief. This significant act is frequently mentioned in the
sacred writings, and was common among all ancient nations.

Plucked off the hair - Shaving the head and beard were signs of
excessive grief; much more so the plucking off the hair, which must
produce exquisite pain. All this testified his abhorrence, not merely of
the act of having taken strange wives, but their having also joined them
in their idolatrous abominations.

[Ezra 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ezr 9:4</span></span>

Those that had been carried away - Those that had returned long before
with Zerubbabel; see [Ezr 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001).

Until the evening sacrifice - The morning sacrifice was the first of all
the offerings of the day, the evening sacrifice the last. As the latter
was offered between the two evenings, i.e., between sunset and the end
of twilight, so the former was offered between break of day and sunrise.
Ezra sat astonied - confounded in his mind, distressed in his soul, and
scarcely knowing what to do. He probably had withdrawn himself into some
sequestered place, or into some secret part of the temple, spending the
time in meditation and reflection.

[Ezra 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 9:5</span></span>

Fell upon my knees - In token of the deepest humility. Spread out my
hands, as if to lay hold on the mercy of God. We have already had
occasion to explain these significant acts.

[Ezra 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 9:6</span></span>

I am ashamed and blush - God had been so often provoked, and had so
often pardoned them, and they had continued to transgress, that he was
ashamed to go back again to the throne of grace to ask for mercy in
their behalf. This is the genuine feeling of every reawakened
backslider.

[Ezra 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 9:8</span></span>

And now for a little space - This interval in which they were returning
from servitude to their own land.

Grace hath been showed - God has disposed the hearts of the Persian
kings to publish edicts in our favor.

To leave us a remnant to escape - The ten tribes are gone irrecoverably
into captivity; a great part even of Judah and Benjamin had continued
beyond the Euphrates: so that Ezra might well say, there was but a
remnant which had escaped.

A nail in his holy place - Even so much ground as to fix our tent-poles
in.

May lighten our eyes - To give us a thorough knowledge of ourselves and
of our highest interest, and to enable us to re-establish his worship,
is the reason why God has brought us back to this place.

A little reviving - We were perishing, and our hopes were almost dead;
and, because of our sins, we were sentenced to death: but God in his
great mercy has given us a new trial; and he begins with little, to see
if we will make a wise and faithful use of it.

[Ezra 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ezr 9:10</span></span>

What shall we say after this? - Even in the midst of these beginnings of
respite and mercy we have begun to provoke thee anew!

[Ezra 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ezr 9:11</span></span>

Have filled it from one end to another - The abominations have been like
a sweeping mighty torrent, that has increased till it filled the whole
land, and carried every thing before it.

[Ezra 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ezr 9:13</span></span>

Hast punished us less than our iniquities - Great, numerous, and
oppressive as our calamities have been, yet merely as temporal
punishments, they have been much less than our provocations have
deserved.

[Ezra 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ezr 9:15</span></span>

Thou art righteous - Thou art merciful; this is one of the many meanings
of the word צדק tsedek; and to this meaning St. Paul refers, when he
says, God declares his righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past, [Rom 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025) (note). See the note
there.

We remain yet escaped - Because of this righteousness or mercy.

In our trespasses - We have no righteousness; we are clothed and covered
with our trespasses.

We cannot stand before thee because of this - The parallel place, as
noted in the margin, is [Psa 130:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#003) :
If thou, Lord, shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? Every
man must stand before the judgment-seat of Christ: but who shall stand
there with joy? No man against whom the Lord marks iniquities. There is
a reference here to the temple service: the priests and Levites stood
and ministered before the Lord, but they were not permitted to do so
unless pure from all legal pollution; so no man shall stand before the
judgment-seat of Christ who is not washed and made white in the blood of
the Lamb. Reader, how dost thou expect to stand there?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 10](ezr010)

</div>
