<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr000)  [Next](ezr002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

The proclamation of Cyrus for the rebuilding of the temple, [Ezr
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001). The people provide for their
return, [Ezr 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#005), [Ezr
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#006). Cyrus restores to Sheshbazzar the
vessels taken by Nebuchadnezzar out of the temple of Solomon, [Ezr
1:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007).

In the introduction to this book the reader will find the history of
Ezra detailed at considerable length. It is only necessary to say here
that he is generally allowed among the Jews to have been of the
sacerdotal family, and therefore he is called ὁ ἱερευς, the priest by
the Septuagint. Among the rabbins he passes for a most extraordinary
critic, Divinely authorized to collect and arrange the different
portions of the sacred writings, and digest them into a system. How far
all they say on this subject is true, we cannot tell; he was, beyond all
controversy, a very eminent man; and in all that he did, acted under the
immediate direction and inspiration of the Almighty.

This history contains the transactions of about eighty-two years; from
the first year of Cyrus in Babylon, according to Archbishop Usher, A.M.
3468, to the nineteenth year of Ardsheer Diraz Dest, or Artaxerxes
Longimanus, who sent Nehemiah to Jerusalem, about A.M. 3550. For all
other particulars, see the introduction.

[Ezra 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 1:1</span></span>

Now in the first year - This is word for word with the two last verses
of the preceding book; which stand here in their proper place and
connection, but there are entirely destitute of chronological connection
and reference.

Cyrus - This prince, so eminent in antiquity, is said to have been the
son of Cambyses king of Persia, and Mandane, daughter of Astyages king
of the Medes; and was born about six hundred years before Christ.
Josephus accounts for his partiality to the Jews from this circumstance;
that he was shown the places in Isaiah the prophet where he is mentioned
by name, and his exploits and conquests foretold: see [Isa
44:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#028); [Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001), etc. Finding himself thus
distinguished by the God of the Jews, he was anxious to give him proofs
of his gratitude in return; and so made the decree in favor of the Jews,
restored their sacred vessels, gave them liberty to return to their own
land, and encouraged them to rebuild the temple of Jehovah, etc.

It is very probable that when Cyrus took Babylon he found Daniel there,
who had been long famed as one of the wisest ministers of state in all
the East; and it is most likely that it was this person who pointed out
to him the prophecy of Isaiah, and gave him those farther intimations
relative to the Divine will which were revealed to himself. Of his death
there are contradictory accounts. Herodotus says, that having turned his
arms against the Massagetes, and killed the son of Tomyris their queen,
the mother, impatient to avenge the death of her son, sent him a
defiance; promised to glut him with blood; and, having attacked him,
pretended to be worsted and to fly; and thus she drew him and his army
into an ambuscade, where he was routed and slain, and a considerable
part of his army destroyed. The enraged queen having found his body, cut
off his head, and threw it into a vessel full of human blood, with this
most bitter sarcasm: -

Ευ μεν, εμευ ζωσης τε και νικωσης ες μαχην,

απωλεσας παιδα τον εμον, ἑλων δολῳ· σε δ' εγω,

καταπερ ηπειλησα, αἱματος κορεσω.

\- Herod. Clio, c. 214.

"Although living and victorious, thou hast destroyed me in slaying my
son, whom thou hast overcome by deceit; but, as I have threatened, I
will now slake thy thirst with blood."

Cyrus, thy thirst was blood, now drink thy fill.

By - Jeremiah - This prophet, [Jer
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012); [Jer
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#011), had foretold that the
Babylonish captivity should last only seventy years: these were now
ended; Cyrus had given the Jews permission and encouragement to return
to Judea, and rebuild the temple of the Lord; and thus the prediction of
Jeremiah was fulfilled.

[Ezra 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 1:2</span></span>

The Lord God of heaven - It is not unworthy of remark, that in all the
books written prior to the captivity, Jehovah is called The Lord of
Hosts; but in all the books written after the captivity, as 2
Chronicles, Ezra Nehemiah, and Daniel, he is styled The God of Heaven.
The words however have the same meaning.

All the kingdoms of the earth. At this time the empire of the
Medo-Persians was very extensive: according to ancient writers, Cyrus,
at this time, reigned over the Medes, Persians, Hyrcanians, Armenians,
Syrians, Assyrians, Arabians, Cappadocians, Phrygians, Lydians
Phoenicians, Babylonians, Bactrians, Indians, Saci, Cilicians,
Paphlagonians, Moriandrians, and many others. His empire extended on the
East, to the Red Sea; on the North, to the Euxine Sea; on the West, to
the island of Cyprus and Egypt; and on the South, to Ethiopia.

[Ezra 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ezr 1:4</span></span>

Whosoever remaineth in any place - Every one was at liberty to go, but
none was obliged to go. Thus their attachment to God was tried; he whose
heart was right with God went; he who was comfortably settled in
Babylon, might go if he chose. Those who did not go, were commanded to
assist their brethren who went.

[Ezra 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 1:6</span></span>

Vessels of silver - Articles of silver, gold, etc.

[Ezra 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ezr 1:7</span></span>

The king brought forth the vessels - See on [Ezr
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#009) (note).

[Ezra 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 1:8</span></span>

Sheshbazzar, the prince of Judah - This was probably the Chaldean name
of him who was originally called Zerubbabel: the former signifies joy in
affliction; the latter, a stranger in Babylon. The latter may be
designed to refer to his captive state; the former, to the prospect of
release. Some think this was quite a different person, a Persian or
Chaldean, sent by Cyrus to superintend whatever officers or men Cyrus
might have sent to assist the Jews on their return; and to procure them
help in the Chaldean provinces, through which they might be obliged to
travel.

[Ezra 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ezr 1:11</span></span>

All the vessels - were five thousand and four hundred - This place is
without doubt corrupted; here it is said the sum of all the vessels, of
every quality and kind, was five thousand four hundred; but the
enumeration of the articles, as given in [Ezr
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#009), [Ezr
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#010), gives the sum of two thousand
four hundred and ninety-nine only. But we can correct this account from
1 Esdras 2:13, 14.

I shall set both accounts down, that they may be compared together.

[Ezr 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#009), [Ezr
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#011) 1 Esdras 2:13, 14 Golden chargers
30 Golden cups 1000 Silver chargers 1000 Silver cups 1000 Knives 29
Silver censers 29 Golden basons 30 Golden vials 30 Silver basons, second
sort 410 Silver vials 2410 Other vessels 1000 Other vessels 1000 Said to
be 5400 - only 2499 Total 5469 Difference of the first account from
itself: 2901 Difference of the second account from the first: 69

According, therefore, to the sum total in Ezra, the sum total in Esdras
is only 69 different. See the next chapter, Ezra 2 (note).

It may be said that the vessels did actually amount to 5400, and that
the chief of them only were intended to be specified; and these happen
to amount to 2499; but that it was not the design of Ezra to insert the
whole; and that the ninth verse should be considered as stating, And of
the chief of them, that is, the gold and silver articles, this is the
number. But the expression in [Ezr
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#010), other vessels, sets this
conjecture aside: the place is most manifestly corrupted.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 2](ezr002)

</div>
