<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal001)  [Next](gal003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 2:0</span></span>

The apostle mentions his journey to Jerusalem with Barnabas and Titus,
[Gal 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001). Shows that he went thither
by revelation; and what he did while there, and the persons with whom he
had intercourse, [Gal 2:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002). How the
apostles gave him the right hand of fellowship, [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009), [Gal
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010). Here he opposes Peter at
Antioch, and the reason why, [Gal
2:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011). Shows that the Jews as well
as the Gentiles must be justified by faith, [Gal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015), [Gal
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016). They who seek this justification
should act with consistency, [Gal
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017), [Gal
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018). Gives his own religious
experience, and shows, that through the law he was dead to the law, and
crucified with Christ, [Gal 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019), [Gal
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020). Justification is not of the law,
but by the faith of Christ, [Gal 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021).

[Galatians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 2:1</span></span>

Then fourteen years after - There is a considerable difference among
critics concerning the time specified in this verse; the apostle is
however generally supposed to refer to the journey he took to Jerusalem,
about the question of circumcision, mentioned in [Act
15:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004), etc. These years, says Dr.
Whitby, must be reckoned from the time of his conversion, mentioned here
[Gal 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018), which took place a.d. 35
(33); his journey to Peter was a.d. 38 (36), and then between that and
the council of Jerusalem, assembled a.d. 49 (52), will be fourteen
intervening years. The dates in brackets are according to the chronology
which I follow in the Acts of the Apostles. Dr. Whitby has some
objections against this chronology, which may be seen in his notes.

Others contend that the journey of which the apostle speaks is that
mentioned [Act 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027), etc., when
Barnabas and Saul were sent by the Church of Antioch with relief to the
poor Christians in Judea; there being at that time a great dearth in
that land. St. Luke's not mentioning Titus in that journey is no valid
objection against it: for he does not mention him in any part of his
history, this being the first place in which his name occurs. And it
does seem as if St. Paul did intend purposely to supply that defect, by
his saying, I went up with Barnabas, and took Titus with me also. The
former St. Luke relates, [Act 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#030);
the latter St. Paul supplies.

[Galatians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 2:2</span></span>

I went up by revelation - This either means, that he went up at that
time by an express revelation from God that it was his duty to do so,
made either to the Church of Antioch to send these persons to Jerusalem,
or to these persons to go according to the directions of that Church; or
the apostle here wishes to say, that, having received the Gospel by
revelation from God, to preach Christ among the Gentiles, he went up
according to that revelation, and told what God had done by him among
the Gentiles: or it may refer to the revelation made to certain prophets
who came to Antioch, and particularly Agabus, who signified by the
Spirit that there would be a dearth; in consequence of which the
disciples purposed to send relief to their poor brethren at Jerusalem.
See [Act 11:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027).

But privately to them which were of reputation - Τοις δοκουσι· To the
chief men; those who were highest in reputation among the apostles.
Δοκουντες, according to Hesychius, is οἱ ενδοξοι, the honorable. With
these the apostle intimates that he had some private conferences.

Lest by any means - And he held these private conferences with those
more eminent men, to give them information how, in consequence of his
Divine call, he had preached the Gospel to the Gentiles, and the great
good which God had wrought by his ministry; but they, not knowing the
nature and end of his call, might be led to suppose he had acted wrong,
and thus labored in vain; and that, if he still continued to act thus,
he should labor in vain. It was necessary, therefore, that he should
give the apostolic council the fullest information that he had acted
according to the Divine mind in every respect, and had been blessed in
his deed.

[Galatians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 2:3</span></span>

But neither Titus, who was with me - The apostle proceeds to state that
his account was so satisfactory to the apostles, that they not only did
not require him to insist on the necessity of circumcision among the
Gentiles, but did not even require him to have Titus, who was a Greek,
circumcised; though that might have appeared expedient, especially at
Jerusalem, to have prevented false brethren from making a handle of his
uncircumcision, and turning it to the prejudice of the Gospel in Judea.

To spy out our liberty - The Judaizing brethren got introduced into the
assembly of the apostles, in order to find out what was implied in the
liberty of the Gospel, that they might know the better how to oppose St.
Paul and his fellows in their preaching Christ to the Gentiles, and
admitting them into the Church without obliging them to observe
circumcision and keep the law. The apostle saw that while such men were
in the assembly it was better not to mention his mission among the
Gentiles, lest, by means of those false brethren, occasion should be
given to altercations and disputes; therefore he took the opportunity,
by private conferences, to set the whole matter, relative to his work
among the Gentiles, before the chief of the apostles.

[Galatians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 2:5</span></span>

To whom we gave place by subjection - So fully satisfied was he with his
Divine call, and that he had in preaching among the Gentiles acted in
strict conformity to it, that he did not submit in the least to the
opinion of those Judaizing teachers; and therefore he continued to
insist on the exemption of the Gentiles from the necessity of submitting
to Jewish rites; that the truth of the Gospel - this grand doctrine,
that the Gentiles are admitted by the Gospel of Christ to be
fellow-heirs with the Jews, might continue; and thus the same doctrine
is continued with you Gentiles.

[Galatians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 2:6</span></span>

Those who seemed to be somewhat - Των δοκουντων ειναι τι· Those who were
of acknowledged reputation; so the words should be understood, see [Gal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002). The verb δοκειν, to seem, is
repeatedly used by the best Greek writers, not to call the sense in
question, or to lessen it, but to deepen and extend it. See the note on
[Luk 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#018). Perhaps this verse had best
be translated thus, connecting διαφερει with απο των δοκουντων· But
there is no difference between those who were of acknowledged reputation
and myself; God accepts no man's person; but, in the conferences which I
held with then, they added nothing to me - gave me no new light; did not
attempt to impose on me any obligation, because they saw that God had
appointed me my work, and that his counsel was with me.

[Galatians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 2:7</span></span>

But contrariwise - They were so far from wishing me to alter my plan, or
to introduce any thing new in my doctrine to the Gentiles, that they saw
plainly that my doctrine was the same as their own, coming immediately
from the same source; and therefore gave to me and to Barnabas the right
hand of fellowship.

The Gospel of the uncircumcision - They saw, to their utmost
satisfaction, that I was as expressly sent by God to preach the Gospel
to the Gentiles, as Peter was to preach it to the Jews.

[Galatians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 2:8</span></span>

For he that wrought effectually - Ὁ ενεργησας Πετρῳ, ενηργησε και εμοι·
He who wrought powerfully with Peter, wrought powerfully also with me.
He gave us both those talents which were suited to our work, and equal
success in our different departments.

[Galatians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 2:9</span></span>

James, Cephas, and John, who seemed to be pillars - Οἱ δοκουντες στυλοι
ειναι· Who were known to be very eminent, and acknowledged as chief men
among the apostles. See the note on [Luk
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#018), for the meaning of the verb
δοκειν, and see before on [Gal 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)
(note).

Among the Jews, persons of great eminence and importance are represented
as pillars and foundations of the world. So Abraham is said to be עמוד
העולם ammud heolam, "the pillar of the universe; for by him to this day
are the earth and heavens supported." Yalcut Rubeni, fol. 29.

"Rabbi Simeon said, Behold, we are the pillars of the world." Idra
Rabba, s. 23.

"When Rabbi Jochanan ben Zachai was near death, he wept with a loud
voice. His disciples said unto him, O Rabbi, thou high pillar, thou
light of the world, thou strong hammer, why dost thou weep?" Aboth. R.
Nathan, chap. 24.

So, in Sohar Genes, fol. 5, it is said: "And he saw that Rab. Eleazar
went up, and stood there, and with him שאר עמודין shear ammudin, the
rest of the pillars (eminent men) who sat there."

Ibid., fol. 13: "These are the seven righteous men who cleave to the
holy blessed God with a pure heart, and they are the seven pillars of
the world."

Ibid., fol. 21, on the words bearing fruit, [Gen
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011), it is said: "By this we are to
understand the just one, who is the pillar of the world." See
Schoettgen, who adds: "These pillars must be distinguished from the
foundation. The foundation of the Church is Jesus Christ alone; the
pillars are the more eminent teachers, which, without the foundation,
are of no value."

The right hands of fellowship - Giving the right hand to another was the
mark of confidence, friendship, and fellowship. See [Lev
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#002) : If a soul - lie unto his
neighbor in that which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship,
בתשומת יד bithsumeth yad, "in giving the hand."

[Galatians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 2:10</span></span>

Only they would that we should remember the poor - They saw plainly that
God had as expressly called Barnabas and me to go to the Gentiles as he
had called them to preach to the Jews; and they did not attempt to give
us any new injunctions, only wished us to remember the poor in Judea;
but this was a thing to which we were previously disposed.

[Galatians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 2:11</span></span>

When Peter was come to Antioch - There has been a controversy whether
Πετρος, Peter, here should not be read Κηφας, Kephas; and whether this
Kephas was not a different person from Peter the apostle. This
controversy has lasted more than 1500 years, and is not yet settled.
Instead of Πετρος, Peter, ABCH, several others of good note, with the
Syriac, Erpenian, Coptic, Sahidic, Ethiopic, Armenian, later Syriac in
the margin, Vulgate, and several of the Greek fathers, read Κηφας. But
whichsoever of these readings we adopt, the controversy is the same; for
the great question is, whether this Peter or Kephas, no matter which
name we adopt, be the same with Peter the apostle?

I shall not introduce the arguments pro and con, which may be all seen
in Calmet's dissertation on the subject, but just mention the side where
the strength of the evidence appears to lie.

That Peter the apostle is meant, the most sober and correct writers of
antiquity maintain; and though some of the Catholic writers have fixed
the whole that is here reprehensible on one Kephas, one of the seventy
disciples, yet the most learned of their writers and of their popes,
believe that St. Peter is meant. Some apparently plausible arguments
support the contrary opinion, but they are of no weight when compared
with those on the opposite side.

[Galatians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 2:12</span></span>

Before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles - Here
was Peter's fault. He was convinced that God had pulled down the middle
wall of partition that had so long separated the Jews and Gentiles, and
he acted on this conviction, associating with the latter and eating with
them; but when certain Jews came from James, who it appears considered
the law still to be in force, lest he should place a stumbling-block
before them he withdrew from all commerce with the converted Gentiles,
and acted as if he himself believed the law to be still in force, and
that the distinction between the Jews and the Gentiles should still be
kept up.

[Galatians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 2:13</span></span>

And the other Jews dissembled likewise - That is: Those who were
converted to Christianity from among the Jews, and who had also been
convinced that the obligation of the Jewish ritual had ceased, seeing
Peter act this part, and also fearing them that were of the
circumcision, they separated themselves from the converted Gentiles, and
acted so as to convince the Jews that they still believed the law to be
of moral obligation; and so powerful was the torrent of such an example,
that the gentle, loving-hearted Barnabas was carried away by their
dissimulation, αυτων τῃ ὑποκρισει, with their hypocrisy - feigning to be
what they really were not.

[Galatians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 2:14</span></span>

That they walked not uprightly - Ουκ ορθοποδουσι· They did not walk with
a straight step - they did not maintain a firm footing.

According to the truth of the Gospel - According to that true doctrine,
which states that Christ is the end of the law for justification to
every one that believes; and that such are under no obligation to
observe circumcision and the other peculiar rites and ceremonies of the
law.

If thou, being a Jew, livest - This was a cutting reproof. He was a Jew,
and had been circumstantially scrupulous in every thing relative to the
law, and it required a miracle to convince him that the Gentiles were
admitted, on their believing in Christ, to become members of the same
Church, and fellow heirs of the hope of eternal life; and in consequence
of this, he went in with the Gentiles and ate with them; i.e. associated
with them as he would with Jews. But now, fearing them of the
circumcision, he withdrew from this fellowship.

Why compellest thou the Gentiles - Thou didst once consider that they
were not under such an obligation, and now thou actest as if thou didst
consider the law in full force; but thou art convinced that the contrary
is the case, yet actest differently! This is hypocrisy.

[Galatians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 2:15</span></span>

We who are Jews by nature - We who belong to the Jewish nation - who
have been born, bred, and educated Jews.

And not sinners of the Gentiles - Ἁμαρτωλοι· Not without the knowledge
of God, as they have been. Ἁμαρτωλος often signifies a heathen, merely
one who had no knowledge of the true God. But among the nations or
Gentiles many Jews sojourned; who in Scripture are known by the name of
Hellenists, and these were distinguished from those who were termed εξ
εθνων ἁμαρτωλοι, sinners of the Gentiles - heathens, in our common sense
of the word; while the others, though living among them, were
worshippers of the true God, and addicted to no species of idolatry.
Some have translated this passage thus: We Jews, and not Gentiles, by
nature sinners; for it is supposed that φυσει here refers to that
natural corruption which every man brings into the world. Now, though
the doctrine be true, (and the state of man, and universal experience
confirm it), yet it can neither be supported from this place, nor even
from [Eph 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003). See the note on [Rom
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016). It appears, from the use of this
word by some of the best Greek authors, that φυσει did not signify by
nature, as we use the word, but expressed the natural birth, family, or
nation of a man; to distinguish him from any other family or nation. I
can give a few instances of this, which are brought to my hand in a
small elegant pamphlet, written by Dr. Mnter, the present bishop of
Zealand, entitled Observationum ex marmoribus Graecis Sacrarum Specimen,
and which has been lent to me by the right honorable Lord Teignmouth, to
whose condescension, kindness, and learning, many of my studies have
been laid under particular obligation.

The word in question is the xxviiith example in the above pamphlet, the
substance of which is as follows: In an inscription on a Greek marble,
given by Dr. Chandler, page 27, we find these words Ὁ γαμβρος μου Λεων
Αρτεμεισιου, ὁ επικαλουμενος Ιασων, οικονει μεν Μειλησιος, φυσει δε
Ιασευς· "My son-in-law, Leo, the son of Artemisius, who is called a
Jasian, is of the house of Milesius, though by nature he is from Jaso."
That is: Jaso being a town of Caria, this Leo is said to be φυσει
Ιασευς, by nature a Jasian, although he sprang from the Milesian family.
The following examples will place this in a clearer light. Josephus,
Ant. Jud., lib. xi. cap. vi. sec. 5, speaking of Amanes, the Amalekite,
says: Και γαρ φυσει τοις Ιουδαιοις απηχθανετο, ὁτι και το γενος των
Αμαλεκιτων, εξ ὡν ην αυτος, ὑπ' αυτων διεφθαρτο· "For he was by nature
incensed against the Jews, because the nation of the Amalekites, from
whom he sprang, had been destroyed by them;" that is, he had a national
prejudice or hatred to the Jewish people on the above account. The
following example from Dio Chrysostom, Orat. xxxi., is also to the
point: Οἱγε (Αθηναιοι) τον δεινα μεν Ολυμπιον κεκληκασι, ουδε φυσει
πολιτην ἑαυτων· "For they (the Athenians) called this person an
Olympian, though by nature he was not their citizen;" that is, he was
called an Olympian, though he was not naturally of that city, or, in
other words, he was not born there. From these examples, and the scope
of the place, we may argue that the words, we who are Jews by nature,
mean, we who were born in the land of Judea, and of Jewish parents. And
hence the passage in [Eph 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003), which
speaks most evidently of the heathens, "and were by nature the children
of wrath, even as others," may be thus understood: Being Gentiles, and
brought up in gross darkness, without any knowledge of God, abandoned to
all sensual living, we were, from our very condition, and practical
state, exposed to punishment. This sense is at least equally good with
that given of the words in [Rom 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016),
where it is proved that φυσει, in several connections, means truly,
certainly, incontestably; "we were, beyond all controversy, exposed to
punishment, because we had been born among idolaters, and have lived as
they did. Here both senses of the word apply.

[Galatians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 2:16</span></span>

Knowing that a man is not justified - See the notes on [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017); [Rom
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024) (note), [Rom
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027) (note); [Rom
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003) (note). And see on [Act
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038) (note) and [Act
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039) (note), in which places the
subject of this verse is largely discussed. Neither the works of the
Jewish law, nor of any other law, could justify any man; and if
justification or pardon could not have been attained in some other way,
the world must have perished. Justification by faith, in the boundless
mercy of God, is as reasonable as it is Scriptural and necessary.

[Galatians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 2:17</span></span>

But if while we seek to be justified - If, while we acknowledge that we
must be justified by faith in Christ, we ourselves are found sinners,
enjoining the necessity of observing the rites and ceremonies of the
law, which never could and never can justify, and yet, by submitting to
circumcision, we lay ourselves under the necessity of fulfilling the
law, which is impossible, we thus constitute ourselves sinners; is,
therefore, Christ the minister of sin? Christ, who has taught us to
renounce the law, and expect justification through his death? God
forbid! that we should either act so, or think so.

[Galatians 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 2:18</span></span>

For if I build again the things which I destroyed - If I act like a Jew,
and enjoin the observance of the law on the Gentiles, which I have
repeatedly asserted and proved to be abolished by the death of Christ,
then I build up what I destroyed, and thus make myself a transgressor,
by not observing the law in that way in which I appear to enjoin the
observance of it upon others.

[Galatians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 2:19</span></span>

For I through the law am dead to the law - In consequence of properly
considering the nature and requisitions of the law, I am dead to all
hope and expectation of help or salvation from the law, and have been
obliged to take refuge in the Gospel of Christ. Or, probably the word
νομος, Law, is here put for a system of doctrine; as if he had said, I
through the Gospel am dead to the law. The law itself is consigned to
death, and another, the Gospel of Christ, is substituted in its stead.
The law condemns to death, and I have embraced the Gospel that I might
be saved from death, and live unto God.

[Galatians 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 2:20</span></span>

I am crucified with Christ - The death of Christ on the cross has showed
me that there is no hope of salvation by the law; I am therefore as
truly dead to all expectation of justification by the law, as Christ was
dead when he gave up the ghost upon the cross. Through him alone I live
- enjoy a present life, and have a prospect of future glory.

Yet not I - It is not of my natural life I speak, nor of any spiritual
things which I myself have procured; but Christ liveth in me. God made
man to be a habitation of his own Spirit: the law cannot live in me so
as to give me a Divine life; it does not animate, but kill; but Christ
lives in me; he is the soul of my soul; so that I now live to God. But
this life I have by the faith of the Son of God - by believing on Christ
as a sacrifice for sin; for he loved me, and because he did so he gave
himself for me - made himself a sacrifice unto death, that I might be
saved from the bitter pains of death eternal.

[Galatians 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 2:21</span></span>

I do not frustrate - Ουκ αθετω· I do not contemn, despise, or render
useless, the grace of God - the doctrine of Christ crucified; which I
must do if I preach the necessity of observing the law.

For if righteousness - If justification and salvation come by an
observance of the law, then Christ is dead in vain; his death is useless
if an observance of the law can save us; but no observance of the law
can save us, and therefore there was an absolute necessity for the death
of Christ.

1\. The account of the prevarication of Peter in the preceding chapter
teaches us a most useful lesson. Let him who assuredly standeth take
heed lest he fall. No person in a state of probation is infallible; a
man may fall into sin every moment; and he will, if he do not walk with
God. Worldly prudence and fleshly wisdom would have concealed this
account of the prevarication of Peter; but God tells truth. This the
fountain of it; and from him we are to expect not only nothing but the
truth, but also the whole truth. If the Gospel were not of God we had
never heard of the denial and prevarication of Peter, nor of the
contention between Paul and Barnabas. And these accounts are recorded,
not that men may justify or excuse their own delinquencies by them, but
that they may avoid them; for he must be inexcusable who, with these
histories before his eyes, ever denies his Master, or acts the part of a
hypocrite. Had the apostles acted in concert to impose a forgery on the
world as a Divine revelation, the imposture would have now come out. The
falling out of the parties would have led to a discovery of the cheat.
This relation, therefore, is an additional evidence of the truth of the
Gospel.

2\. On, I through the law am dead to the law, etc., pious Quesnel makes
the following useful reflections:

"The ceremonial law, which is no more than a type and shadow of him,
destroys itself by showing us Jesus Christ, who is the truth and the
substance. The moral law, by leaving us under our own inability under
sin and the curse, makes us perceive the necessity of the law of the
heart, and of a Savior to give it. The law is for the old man, as to its
terrible and servile part; and it was crucified and died with Christ
upon the cross as well as the old man. The new man, and the new law,
require a new sacrifice. What need has he of other sacrifices who has
Jesus Christ? They in whom this sacrifice lives, do themselves live to
God alone; but none can live to him except by faith; and this life of
faith consists in dying with Christ to the things of the present world,
and in expecting, as co-heirs with him, the blessings of the eternal
world. And who can work all this in us but only he who lives in us? That
man has arrived to a high degree of mortification, who can say Christ
liveth in me, and I am crucified to the world. Such a one must have
renounced not only earthly things, but his own self also."

3\. Is there, or can there be, any well grounded hope of eternal life
but what comes through the Gospel? In vain has the ingenuity of man
tortured itself for more than 5000 years, to find out some method of
mending the human heart: none has been discovered that even promised any
thing likely to be effectual. The Gospel of Christ not only mends but
completely cures and new makes infected nature. Who is duly apprised of
the infinite excellency and importance of the Gospel? What was the world
before its appearance? What would it be were this light extinguished?
Blessed Lord! let neither infidelity nor false doctrine rise up to
obscure this heavenly splendor!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 3](gal003)

</div>
