<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen010)  [Next](gen012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 11:0</span></span>

All the inhabitants of the earth, speaking one language and dwelling in
one place, [Gen 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001), [Gen
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#002), purpose to build a city and a
tower to prevent their dispersion, [Gen
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#003), [Gen
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004). God confounds their language,
and scatters them over the whole earth, [Gen
11:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#005). Account of the lives and
families of the postdiluvian patriarchs. Shem, [Gen
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#010), [Gen
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#011). Arphaxad, [Gen
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#012), [Gen
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#013). Salah, [Gen
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#014), [Gen
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#015). Eber, [Gen
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#016), [Gen
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#017). Peleg, [Gen
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#018), [Gen
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#019). Ragau or Reu, [Gen
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#020), [Gen
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#021). Serug, [Gen
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#022), [Gen
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#023). Nahor, [Gen
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#024), [Gen
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#025). Terah and his three sons,
Haran, Nahor, and Abram, [Gen 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#026),
[Gen 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#027). The death of Haran, [Gen
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#028). Abram marries Sarai, and Nahor
marries Milcah, [Gen 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#029). Sarai is
barren, [Gen 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#030). Terah, Abram,
Sarai, and Lot, leave Ur of the Chaldees, and go to Haran, [Gen
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031). Terah dies in Haran, aged two
hundred and five years, [Gen 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#032).

[Genesis 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 11:1</span></span>

The whole earth was of one language - The whole earth - all mankind was
of one language, in all likelihood the Hebrew; and of one speech -
articulating the same words in the same way. It is generally supposed,
that after the confusion mentioned in this chapter, the Hebrew language
remained in the family of Heber. The proper names, and their
significations given in the Scripture, seem incontestable evidences that
the Hebrew language was the original language of the earth - the
language in which God spake to man, and in which he gave the revelation
of his will to Moses and the prophets. "It was used," says Mr.
Ainsworth, "in all the world for one thousand seven hundred and
fifty-seven years, till Phaleg, the son of Heber, was born, and the
tower of Babel was in building one hundred years after the flood, [Gen
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#025); [Gen
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#009). After this, it was used among
the Hebrews or Jews, called therefore the Jews' language, [Isa
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#011), until they were carried captive
into Babylon, where the holy tongue ceased from being commonly used, and
the mixed Hebrew (or Chaldee) came in its place." It cannot be
reasonably imagined that the Jews lost the Hebrew tongue entirely in the
seventy years of their captivity in Babylon; yet, as they were mixed
with the Chaldeans, their children would of course learn that dialect,
and to them the pure Hebrew would be unintelligible; and this probably
gave rise to the necessity of explaining the Hebrew Scriptures in the
Chaldee tongue, that the children might understand as well as their
fathers. As we may safely presume the parents could not have forgotten
the Hebrew, so we may conclude the children in general could not have
learned it, as they did not live in an insulated state, but were mixed
with the Babylonians. This conjecture removes the difficulty with which
many have been embarrassed; one party supposing that the knowledge of
the Hebrew language was lost during the Babylonish captivity, and hence
the necessity of the Chaldee Targums to explain the Scriptures; another
party insisting that this was impossible in so short a period as seventy
years.

[Genesis 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 11:2</span></span>

As they journeyed from the east - Assyria, Mesopotamia, and the country
on the borders and beyond the Euphrates, are called the east in the
sacred writings. Balaam said that the king of Moab had brought him from
the mountains of the east, [Num 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#007).

Now it appears, from [Num 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#005), that
Balaam dwelt at Pethor, on the river Euphrates. And it is very probable
that it was from this country that the wise men came to adore Christ;
for it is said they came from the east to Jerusalem, [Mat
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001). Abraham is said to have come from
the east to Canaan, [Isa 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002); but it
is well known that he came from Mesopotamia and Chaldea. [Isa
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#011), represents Cyrus as coming from
the east against Babylon. And the same prophet represents the Syrians as
dwelling eastward of Jerusalem, [Isa
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012) : The Syrians before, מקדם
mikkedem, from the east, the same word which Moses uses here. [Dan
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#044), represents Antiochus as
troubled at news received from the east; i.e. of a revolt in the eastern
provinces, beyond the Euphrates.

Noah and his family, landing after the flood on one of the mountains of
Armenia, would doubtless descend and cultivate the valleys: as they
increased, they appear to have passed along the banks of the Euphrates,
till, at the time specified here, they came to the plains of Shinar,
allowed to be the most fertile country in the east. See Calmet. That
Babel was built in the land of Shinar we have the authority of the
sacred text to prove; and that Babylon was built in the same country we
have the testimony of Eusebius, Praep. Evang., lib. ix., c. 15; and
Josephus, Antiq., lib. i., c. 5.

[Genesis 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 11:3</span></span>

Let us make brick - It appears they were obliged to make use of brick,
as there was an utter scarcity of stones in that district; and on the
same account they were obliged to use slime, that is, bitumen, (Vulg).
ασφαλτος, (Septuagint) for mortar: so it appears they had neither common
stone nor lime-stone; hence they had brick for stone, and asphaltus or
bitumen instead of mortar.

[Genesis 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 11:4</span></span>

Let us build us a city and a tower - On this subject there have been
various conjectures. Mr. Hutchinson supposed that the design of the
builders was to erect a temple to the host of heaven - the sun, moon,
planets, etc.; and, to support this interpretation, he says וראשו בשמים
verosho bashshamayim should be translated, not, whose top may reach unto
heaven, for there is nothing for may reach in the Hebrew, but its head
or summit to the heavens, i.e. to the heavenly bodies: and, to make this
interpretation the more probable, he says that previously to this time
the descendants of Noah were all agreed in one form of religious
worship, (for so he understands ושפה אחת vesaphah achath, and of one
lip), i.e. according to him, they had one litany; and as God confounded
their litany, they began to disagree in their religious opinions, and
branched out into sects and parties, each associating with those of his
own sentiment; and thus their tower or temple was left unfinished.

It is probable that their being of one language and of one speech
implies, not only a sameness of language, but also a unity of sentiment
and design, as seems pretty clearly intimated in [Gen
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#006). Being therefore strictly united
in all things, coming to the fertile plains of Shinar they proposed to
settle themselves there, instead of spreading themselves over all the
countries of the earth, according to the design of God; and in reference
to this purpose they encouraged one another to build a city and a tower,
probably a temple, to prevent their separation, "lest," say they, "we be
scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth:" but God,
miraculously interposing, confounded or frustrated their rebellious
design, which was inconsistent with his will; see [Deu
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008); [Act
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026); and, partly by confounding
their language, and disturbing their counsels, they could no longer keep
in a united state; so that agreeing in nothing but the necessity of
separating, they went off in different directions, and thus became
scattered abroad upon the face of the earth. The Targums, both of
Jonathan ben Uzziel and of Jerusalem, assert that the tower was for
idolatrous worship; and that they intended to place an image on the top
of the tower with a sword in its hand, probably to act as a talisman
against their enemies. Whatever their design might have been, it is
certain that this temple or tower was afterwards devoted to idolatrous
purposes. Nebuchadnezzar repaired and beautified this tower, and it was
dedicated to Bel, or the sun.

An account of this tower, and of the confusion of tongues, is given by
several ancient authors. Herodotus saw the tower and described it. A
sybil, whose oracle is yet extant, spoke both of it and of the confusion
of tongues; so did Eupolemus and Abydenus. See Bochart Geogr. Sacr.,
lib. i., c. 13, edit. 1692. On this point Bochart observes that these
things are taken from the Chaldeans, who preserve many remains of
ancient facts; and though they often add circumstances, yet they are, in
general, in some sort dependent on the text. 1. They say Babel was built
by the giants, because Nimrod, one of the builders, is called in the
Hebrew text גבור gibbor, a mighty man; or, as the Septuagint, γιγας, a
giant. 2. These giants, they say, sprang from the earth, because, in
[Gen 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011), it is said, He went, מן
הארץ ההוא min haarets hahiv, out of that earth; but this is rather
spoken of Asshur, who was another of the Babel builders. 3. These giants
are said to have waged war with the gods, because it is said of Nimrod,
[Gen 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#009), He was a mighty hunter
before the Lord; or, as others have rendered it, a warrior and a rebel
against the Lord. See Jarchi in loco. 4. These giants are said to have
raised a tower up to heaven, as if they had intended to have ascended
thither. This appears to have been founded on "whose top may reach to
heaven," which has been already explained. 5. It is said that the gods
sent strong winds against them, which dispersed both them and their
work. This appears to have been taken from the Chaldean history, in
which it is said their dispersion was made to the four winds of heaven,
בארבע רוחי שמיא bearba ruchey shemaiya, i.e. to the four quarters of the
world. 6. And because the verb פוץ brev eht esua phuts, or נפץ naphats,
used by Moses, signifies, not only to scatter, but also to break to
pieces; whence thunder, [Isa 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030), is
called נפץ nephets, a breaking to pieces; hence they supposed the whole
work was broken to pieces and overturned. It was probably from this
disguised representation of the Hebrew text that the Greek and Roman
poets took their fable of the giants waging war with the gods, and
piling mountain upon mountain in order to scale heaven. See Bochart as
above.

[Genesis 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 11:5</span></span>

And the Lord came down - A lesson, says an ancient Jewish commentator,
to magistrates to examine every evidence before they decree judgment and
execute justice.

[Genesis 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 11:6</span></span>

The people is one, etc. - From this, as before observed, we may infer,
that as the people had the same language, so they had a unity of design
and sentiment. It is very likely that the original language was composed
of monosyllables, that each had a distinct ideal meaning, and only one
meaning; as different acceptations of the same word would undoubtedly
arise, either from compounding terms, or, when there were but few words
in a language, using them by a different mode of pronunciation to
express a variety of things. Where this simple monosyllabic language
prevailed (and it must have prevailed in the first ages of the world)
men would necessarily have simple ideas, and a corresponding simplicity
of manners. The Chinese language is exactly such as this; and the
Hebrew, if stripped of its vowel points, and its prefixes, suffixes, and
postfixes separated from their combinations, so that they might stand by
themselves, it would nearly answer to this character even in its present
state. In order therefore to remove this unity of sentiment and design,
which I suppose to be the necessary consequence of such a language, God
confounded their language - caused them to articulate the same word
differently, to affix different ideas to the same term, and perhaps, by
transposing syllables and interchanging letters, form new terms and
compounds, so that the mind of the speaker was apprehended by the hearer
in a contrary sense to what was intended. This idea is not iii expressed
by an ancient French poet, Du Bartas; and not badly, though rather
quaintly, metaphrased by our countryman, Mr. Sylvester.

Some speak between the teeth, some in the nose, Some in the throat their
words do ill dispose -

"Bring me," quoth one, "a trowel, quickly, quick!"

One brings him up a hammer. "Hew this brick,"

Another bids; and then they cleave a tree;

"Make fast this rope," and then they let it flee.

One calls for planks, another mortar lacks;

They bear the first a stone, the last an axe.

One would have spikes, and him a spade they give;

Another asks a saw, and gets a sieve.

Thus crossly crost, they prate and point in vain:

What one hath made another mars again

These masons then, seeing the storm arrived

Of God's just wrath, all weak and heart-deprived,

Forsake their purpose, and, like frantic fools,

Scatter their stuff and tumble down their tools.

Du Bartas - Babylon.

I shall not examine how the different languages of the earth were
formed. It certainly was not the work of a moment; different climates
must have a considerable share in the formation of tongues, by their
influence on the organs of speech. The invention of new arts and trades
must give birth to a variety of terms and expressions. Merchandise,
commerce, and the cultivation of the sciences, would produce their
share; and different forms of government, modes of life, and means of
instruction, also contribute their quota. The Arabic, Chaldee, Syriac,
and Ethiopic, still bear the most striking resemblance to their parent,
the Hebrew. Many others might be reduced to a common source, yet
everywhere there is sufficient evidence of this confusion. The anomalies
even in the most regular languages sufficiently prove this. Every
language is confounded less or more but that of eternal truth. This is
ever the same; in all countries, climates, and ages, the language of
truth, like that God from whom it sprang, is unchangeable. It speaks in
all tongues, to all nations, and in all hearts: "There is one God, the
fountain of goodness, justice, and truth. Man, thou art his creature,
ignorant, weak, and dependent; but he is all-sufficient - hates nothing
that he has made - loves thee - is able and willing to save thee; return
to and depend on him, take his revealed will for thy law, submit to his
authority, and accept eternal life on the terms proposed in his word,
and thou shalt never perish nor be wretched." This language of truth all
the ancient and modern Babel builders have not been able to confound,
notwithstanding their repeated attempts. How have men toiled to make
this language clothe their own ideas; and thus cause God to speak
according to the pride, prejudice and worst passions of men! But through
a just judgment of God, the language of all those who have attempted to
do this has been confounded, and the word of the Lord abideth for ever.

[Genesis 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 11:7</span></span>

Go to - A form of speech which, whatever it might have signified
formerly, now means nothing. The Hebrew העה habah signifies come, make
preparation, as it were for a journey, the execution of a purpose, etc.
Almost all the versions understand the word in this way; the Septuagint
have δευτε, the Vulgate venite, both signifying come, or come ye. This
makes a very good sense, Come, let its go down, etc. For the meaning of
these latter words see [Gen 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026), and
[Gen 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021).

[Genesis 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 11:9</span></span>

Therefore is the name of it called Babel - בבל babel, from בל bal, to
mingle, confound, destroy; hence Babel, from the mingling together and
confounding of the projects and language of these descendants of Noah;
and this confounding did not so much imply the producing new languages,
as giving them a different method of pronouncing the same words, and
leading them to affix different ideas to them.

Besides Mr. Hutchinson's opinion, (see on [Gen
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004) (note)), there have been various
conjectures concerning the purpose for which this tower was built. Some
suppose it was intended to prevent the effects of another flood, by
affording an asylum to the builders and their families in case of
another general deluge. Others think that it was designed to be a grand
city, the seat of government, in order to prevent a general dispersion.
This God would not permit, as he had purposed that men should be
dispersed over the earth, and therefore caused the means which they were
using to prevent it to become the grand instrument of its
accomplishment. Humanly speaking, the earth could not have so speedily
peopled, had it not been for this very circumstance which the counsel of
man had devised to prevent it. Some say that these builders were divided
into seventy-two nations, with seventy-two different languages; but this
is an idle, unfounded tale.

[Genesis 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 11:10</span></span>

These are the generations of Shem - This may he called the holy family,
as from it sprang Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the twelve patriarchs, David,
Solomon, and all the great progenitors of the Messiah.

We have already seen that the Scripture chronology, as it exists in the
Hebrew text, the Samaritan, the Septuagint, Josephus, and some of the
fathers, is greatly embarrassed; and it is yet much more so in the
various systems of learned and unlearned chronologists. For a full and
rational view of this subject, into which the nature of these notes
forbids me farther to enter, I must refer my reader to Dr. Hales's
laborious work, "A New Analysis of Sacred Chronology," vol. ii., part 1,
etc., in which he enters into the subject with a cautious but firm step;
and, if he has not been able to remove all its difficulties, has thrown
very considerable light upon most parts of it.

[Genesis 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 11:12</span></span>

And Arphaxad lived - The Septuagint bring in here a second Cainan, with
an addition of one hundred and thirty years. St. Luke follows the
Septuagint, and brings in the same person in the same way. But the
Hebrew text, both here and in 1 Chronicles 1:1-28, is perfectly silent
on this subject, and the best chronologists have agreed in rejecting
this as a spurious generation.

[Genesis 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 11:26</span></span>

And Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran - Haran
was certainly the eldest son of Terah, and he appears to have been born
when Terah was about seventy years of age, and his birth was followed in
successive periods with those of Nahor his second, and Abram his
youngest son. Many have been greatly puzzled with the account here,
supposing because Abram is mentioned first, that therefore he was the
eldest son of Terah: but he is only put first by way of dignity. An in
stance of this we have already seen, [Gen
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#032), where Noah is represented as
having Shem, Ham, and Japheth in this order of succession; whereas it is
evident from other scriptures that Shem was the youngest son, who for
dignity is named first, as Abram is here; and Japheth the eldest, named
last, as Haran is here. Terah died two hundred and five years old, [Gen
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#032); then Abram departed from Haran
when seventy-five years old, [Gen
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#004); therefore Abram was born, not
when his father Terah was seventy, but when he was one hundred and
thirty.

When any case of dignity or pre-eminence is to be marked, then even the
youngest son is set before all the rest, though contrary to the usage of
the Scriptures in other cases. Hence we find Shem, the youngest son of
Noah, always mentioned first; Moses is mentioned before his elder
brother Aaron; and Abram before his two elder brethren Haran and Nahor.
These observations are sufficient to remove all difficulty from this
place.

[Genesis 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 11:29</span></span>

Milcah, the daughter of Haran - Many suppose Sarai and Iscah are the
same person under two different names; but this is improbable, as Iscah
is expressly said to be the daughter of Haran, and Sarai was the
daughter of Terah, and half sister of Abram.

[Genesis 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 11:31</span></span>

They went forth - front Ur of the Chaldees - Chaldea is sometimes
understood as comprising the whole of Babylonia; at other times, that
province towards Arabia Deserta, called in Scripture The land of the
Chaldeans. The capital of this place was Babylon, called in Scripture
The beauty of the Chaldees' excellency, [Isa
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#019).

Ur appears to have been a city of some considerable consequence at that
time in Chaldea; but where situated is not well known. It probably had
its name Ur אור, which signifies fire, from the worship practiced there.
The learned are almost unanimously of opinion that the ancient
inhabitants of this region were ignicolists or worshippers of fire, and
in that place this sort of worship probably originated; and in honor of
this element, the symbol of the Supreme Being, the whole country, or a
particular city in it, might have had the name Ur. Bochart has observed
that there is a place called Ouri, south of the Euphrates, in the way
from Nisibis to the river Tigris. The Chaldees mentioned here had not
this name in the time of which Moses speaks, but they were called so in
the time in which Moses wrote. Chesed was the son of Nahor, the son of
Terah, [Gen 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#022). From Chesed
descended the Chasdim, whose language was the same as that of the
Amorites, [Dan 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004); [Dan
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004). These Chasdim, whence the
Χαλδαιοι, Chaldeans, of the Septuagint, Vulgate, and all later versions,
afterwards settled on the south of the Euphrates. Those who dwelt in Ur
were either priests or astronomers, [Dan
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#010), and also idolaters, [Jos
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002), [Jos
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#003), [Jos
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014), [Jos
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015). And because they were much
addicted to astronomy, and probably to judicial astrology, hence all
astrologers were, in process of time, called Chaldeans, [Dan
2:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002).

The building of Babel, the confusion of tongues, and the first call of
Abram, are three remarkable particulars in this chapter; and these led
to the accomplishment of three grand and important designs:

1\. The peopling of the whole earth;

2\. The preservation of the true religion by the means of one family;
and

3\. The preservation of the line uncorrupted by which the Messiah should
come.

When God makes a discovery of himself by a particular revelation, it
must begin in some particular time, and be given to some particular
person, and in some particular place. Where, when, and to whom, are
comparatively matters of small importance. It is God's gift; and his own
wisdom must determine the time, the person, and the place. But if this
be the case, have not others cause to complain because not thus favored?
Not at all, unless the favoring of the one for a time should necessarily
cut off the others for ever. But this is not the case. Abram was first
favored; that time, that country, and that person were chosen by
infinite wisdom, for there and then God chose to commence these mighty
operations of Divine goodness. Isaac and Jacob also received the
promises, the twelve patriarchs through their father, and the whole
Jewish people through them. Afterwards the designs of God's endless
mercy were more particularly unfolded; and the word, which seemed to be
confined for two thousand years to the descendants of a single family,
bursts forth on all hands, salvation is preached to the Gentiles, and
thus in Abram's seed all the nations of the earth are blessed.

Hence none can find fault, and none can have cause to complain; as the
salvation which for a time appeared to be restricted to a few, is now on
the authority of God, liberally offered to the whole human race!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 12](gen012)

</div>
