<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen042)  [Next](gen044) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 43](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 43:0</span></span>

The famine continuing, Jacob desires his sons to go again to Egypt and
buy some food, [Gen 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#001), [Gen
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#002). Judah shows the necessity of
Benjamin's accompanying them, without whom it would be useless to return
to Egypt, [Gen 43:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#003). Jacob
expostulates with him, [Gen 43:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#006).
Judah replies, and offers to become surety for Benjamin, [Gen
43:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#007). Jacob at last consenting and
desires them to take a present with them for the governor of Egypt; and
double money, that which they had brought back in their sacks' mouth,
and the price of the load they were now to bring; and, having prayed for
them, sends them away, [Gen 43:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011).
They arrive in Egypt, and are brought to Joseph's house to dine with
him, at which they are greatly alarmed, [Gen
43:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#016). They speak to the steward of
Joseph's house concerning the money returned in their sacks, [Gen
43:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#019). He gives them encouragement,
[Gen 43:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#023), [Gen
43:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#024). Having made ready the present,
they bring it to Joseph when he came home to dine, [Gen
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#025), [Gen
43:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#026). He speaks kindly to them, and
inquires concerning their health, and that of their father, [Gen
43:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#027), [Gen
43:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#028). Joseph is greatly affected at
seeing his brother Benjamin, [Gen
43:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#029). They dine with him, and are
distinguished according to their seniority; but Benjamin receives marks
of peculiar favor, [Gen 43:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#032).

[Genesis 43:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 43:8</span></span>

Send the lad with me - As the original is not ילד yeled, from which we
have derived our word lad, but נער naar, it would have been better had
our translators rendered it by some other term, such as the youth, or
the young man, and thus the distinction in the Hebrew would have been
better kept up. Benjamin was at this time at least twenty-four years of
age, some think thirty, and had a family of his own. See [Gen
46:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#021).

That we may live, and not die - An argument drawn from
self-preservation, what some have termed the first law of nature. By
your keeping Benjamin we are prevented from going to Egypt; if we go not
to Egypt we shall get no corn; if we get no corn we shall all perish by
famine; and Benjamin himself, who otherwise might live, must, with thee
and the whole family, infallibly die.

[Genesis 43:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 43:9</span></span>

Let me bear the blame for ever - וחטאתי לך כל הימים - re vechatathi
lecha col haiyamim, then shall I sin against thee all my days, and
consequently be liable to punishment for violating my faith.

[Genesis 43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 43:11</span></span>

Carry down the man a present - From the very earliest times presents
were used as means of introduction to great men. This is particularly
noticed by Solomon: A man's gift maketh room for him, and bringeth him
before great men, [Pro 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#016). But what
was the present brought to Joseph on this occasion? After all the labor
of commentators, we are obliged to be contented with probabilities and
conjecture. According to our translation, the gifts were balm, honey,
spices, myrrh, nuts, and almonds.

Balm - צרי tsori is supposed to signify resin in general, or some kind
of gum issuing from trees.

Honey - דבש debash has been supposed to be the same as the rob of
grapes, called in Egypt dibs. Others think that honey, in the common
sense of the term, is to be understood here: we know that honey was
plentiful in Palestine.

Spices - נכאת nechoth is supposed to mean gum storax, which might be
very valuable on account of its qualities as a perfume.

Myrrh - לט lot, supposed by some to mean stacte; by others to signify an
ointment made of myrrh.

Nuts - בטנים botnim, by some rendered pistachio nuts, those produced in
Syria being the finest in the world; by others, dates; others, walnuts;
others, pine apples; others, the nuts of the terebinth tree.

Almonds - שקדים shekedim, correctly enough translated, and perhaps the
only article in the collection of which we know any thing with
certainty. It is generally allowed that the land of Canaan produces the
best almonds in the east; and on this account they might be deemed a
very acceptable present to the governor of Egypt. Those who wish to see
this subject exhausted must have recourse to the Physica Sacra of
Scheuehzer.

[Genesis 43:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 43:12</span></span>

Double money - What was returned in their sacks, and what was farther
necessary to buy another load.

[Genesis 43:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 43:14</span></span>

This verse may be literally translated thus: - "And God, the
all-sufficient, shall give you tender mercies before the man, and send
to you your other brother, and Benjamin; and I, as I shall be childless,
so I shall be childless." That is, I will submit to this privation, till
God shall restore my children. It appears that this verse is spoken
prophetically; and that God at this time gave Jacob a supernatural
evidence that his children should be restored.

[Genesis 43:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 43:16</span></span>

Slay, and make ready - טבח טבח teboach tebach, slay a slaying, or make a
great slaughter - let preparations be made for a great feast or
entertainment. See a similar form of speech, [Pro
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#002) (note); [Sa1
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#011) (note); and [Gen
31:54](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#054) (note).

[Genesis 43:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 43:18</span></span>

And the men were afraid - A guilty conscience needs no accuser. Every
thing alarms them; they now feel that God is exacting retribution, and
they know not what the degrees shall be, nor where it shall stop.

Fall upon us - התגלל עלינו hithgolel alainu, roll himself upon us. A
metaphor taken from wrestlers; when a man has overthrown his antagonist,
he rolls himself upon him, in order to keep him down.

And our asses - Which they probably had in great number with them; and
which, if captured, would have been a great loss to the family of Jacob,
as such cattle must have constituted a principal part of its riches.

[Genesis 43:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 43:20</span></span>

O sir, we came indeed - to buy food - There is a frankness now in the
conduct of Joseph's brethren that did not exist before; they simply and
honestly relate the whole circumstance of the money being found in their
sacks on their return from their last journey. Afflictions from the hand
of God, and under his direction, have a wonderful tendency to humble the
soul. Did men know how gracious his designs are in sending such, no
murmur would ever be heard against the dispensations of Divine
Providence.

[Genesis 43:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 43:23</span></span>

And he said - The address of the steward in this verse plainly proves
that the knowledge of the true God was in Egypt. It is probable that the
steward himself was a Hebrew, and that Joseph had given him intimation
of the whole affair; and though he was not at liberty to reveal it, yet
he gives them assurances that the whole business would issue happily.

I had your money - כספכם בא אלי caspechem ba elai, your money comes to
me. As I am the steward, the cash for the corn belongs to me. Ye have no
reason to be apprehensive of any evil; the whole transaction is between
myself and you; receive therefore the money as a present from the God of
your father, no matter whose hands he makes use of to convey it. The
conduct of the steward, as well as his words, had a great tendency to
relieve their burdened minds.

[Genesis 43:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 43:24</span></span>

Brought the men into Joseph's house, etc. - This is exactly the way in
which a Hindoo receives a guest. As soon as he enters, one of the
civilities is the presenting of water to wash his feet. So indispensable
is this, that water to wash the feet makes a part of the offering to an
image.

[Genesis 43:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 43:27</span></span>

And he asked them of their welfare - This verse may be thus translated:
"And he asked them concerning their prosperity; and he said, is your
father prosperous, the old man who ye told me was alive? And they said,
Thy servant our father prospers; he is yet alive."

[Genesis 43:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 43:29</span></span>

He lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin - They were probably
introduced to him successively; and as Benjamin was the youngest, he
would of course be introduced last.

God be gracious unto thee, my son! - A usual salutation in the east from
the aged and superiors to the younger and inferiors, which, though very
emphatic and expressive in ancient times, in the present day means no
more than "I am your humble servant," or "I am exceedingly glad to see
you;" words which among us mean-just nothing. Even in David's time they
seem to have been, not only devoid of meaning, but to be used as a cloak
for the basest and most treacherous designs: They bless with their
mouths, but they curse inwardly. Hence Joab salutes Amasa, kisses him
with apparent affection, and stabs him in the same moment! The case of
Judas, betraying the Son of man with a kiss, will not be forgotten.

[Genesis 43:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 43:32</span></span>

They set on for him by himself, etc. - From the text it appears evident
that there were three tables, one for Joseph, one for the Egyptians, and
one for the eleven brethren.

The Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews - There might have
been some political reason for this, with which we are unacquainted; but
independently of this, two may be assigned. 1. The Hebrews were
shepherds; and Egypt had been almost ruined by hordes of lawless
wandering bandits, under the name of Hycsos, or King-shepherds, who had
but a short time before this been expelled from the land by Amasis,
after they had held it in subjection for 259 years, according to
Manetho, committing the most wanton cruelties. 2. The Hebrews sacrificed
those animals which the Egyptians held sacred, and fed on their flesh.
The Egyptians were in general very superstitious, and would have no
social intercourse with people of any other nation; hence we are
informed that they would not even use the knife of a Greek, because they
might have reason to suspect it had cut the flesh of some of those
animals which they held sacred. Among the Hindoos different castes will
not eat food cooked in the same vessel. If a person of another caste
touch a cooking vessel, it is thrown away. Some are of opinion that the
Egyptian idolatry, especially their worship of Apis under the figure of
an ox, was posterior to the time of Joseph; ancient monuments are rather
against this opinion, but it is impossible to decide either way. The
clause in the Alexandrian Septuagint stands thus, Βδελυγμα γαρ εστιν
τοις Αιγυπτιοις \[πας ποιμην προβατων,\] "For \[every shepherd\] is an
abomination to the Egyptians;" but this clause is probably borrowed from
[Gen 46:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#034), where it stands in the
Hebrew as well as in the Greek. See Clarke on [Gen
46:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#034) (note).

[Genesis 43:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">gen 43:33</span></span>

The first-born according to his birthright - This must greatly astonish
these brethren, to find themselves treated with so much ceremony, and at
the same time with so much discernment of their respective ages.

[Genesis 43:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 43:34</span></span>

Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of theirs - Sir John
Chardin observes that "in Persia, Arabia, and the Indies, there are
several houses where they place several plates in large salvers, and set
one of these before each person, or before two or three, according to
the magnificence of each house. This is the method among the Hindoos;
the dishes are not placed on the table, but messes are sent to each
individual by the master of the feast or by his substitute. The great
men of the state are always served by themselves, in the feasts that are
made for them; and with greater profusion, their part of each kind of
provision being always Double, Treble, or a Larger proportion of each
kind of meat." The circumstance of Benjamin's having a mess Five times
as large as any of his brethren, shows the peculiar honor which Joseph
designed to confer upon him. See several useful observations on this
subject in Harmer's Observ., vol. ii., p. 101, etc., Edit. 1808.

1\. The scarcity in Canaan was not absolute; though they had no corn,
they had honey, nuts, almonds, etc. In the midst of judgment, God
remembers mercy. If there was scarcity in Canaan, there was plenty in
Egypt; and though his providence had denied one country corn, and
accumulated it in the other, his bounty had placed in the former money
enough to procure it from the latter. How true is the saying, "It is
never ill with any but it might be worse!" Let us be deeply thankful to
God that we have any thing, seeing we deserve no good at his hands.

2\. If we examine our circumstances closely, and call to remembrance the
dealings of God's providence towards us, we shall find that we can sing
much both of mercy and of judgment. For one day of absolute unavoidable
want, we shall find we had three hundred and sixty-four, if not of
fullness, yet of a competency. Famines, though rarely happening, are
everywhere recorded; innumerable years of abundance are scarcely ever
registered! Such is the perverseness and ingratitude of man!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 44](gen044)

</div>
