<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen015)  [Next](gen017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 16:0</span></span>

Sarai, having no child, gives Hagar her maid to Abram for wife, [Gen
16:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001). She conceives and despises her
mistress, [Gen 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#004). Sarai is offended
and upbraids Abram, [Gen 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#005). Abram
vindicates himself; and Hagar, being hardly used by her mistress, runs
away, [Gen 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#006). She is met by an
angel, and counselled to return to her mistress, [Gen
16:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007). God promises greatly to
multiply her seed, [Gen 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#010). Gives
the name of Ishmael to the child that should be born of her, [Gen
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#011). Shows his disposition and
character, [Gen 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012). Hagar calls the
name of the Lord who spoke to her, Thou God seest me, [Gen
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#013). She calls the name of the well
at which the angel met her, Beer-laharoi, [Gen
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#014). Ishmael is born in the 86th
year of Abram's age, [Gen 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#015), [Gen
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#016).

[Genesis 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 16:1</span></span>

She had a handmaid, an Egyptian - As Hagar was an Egyptian, St.
Chrysostom's conjecture is very probable. that she was one of those
female slaves which Pharaoh gave to Abram when he sojourned in Egypt;
see [Gen 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#016). Her name הגר hagar
signifies a stranger or sojourner, and it is likely she got this name in
the family of Abram, as the word is pure Hebrew.

[Genesis 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 16:2</span></span>

Go in unto my maid - It must not be forgotten that female slaves
constituted a part of the private patrimony or possessions of a wife,
and that she had a right, according to the usages of those times, to
dispose of them as she pleased, the husband having no authority in the
case.

I may obtain children by her - The slave being the absolute property of
the mistress, not only her person, but the fruits of her labor, with all
her children, were her owner's property also.

The children, therefore, which were born of the slave, were considered
as the children of the mistress. It was on this ground that Sarai gave
her slave to Abram; and we find, what must necessarily be the
consequence in all cases of polygamy, that strifes and contentions took
place.

[Genesis 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 16:3</span></span>

And Sarai, Abram's wife, took Hagar - and gave her to her husband - to
be his wife - There are instances of Hindoo women, when barren,
consenting to their husbands marrying a second wife for the sake of
children; and second marriages on this account, without consent, are
very common - Ward

[Genesis 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 16:5</span></span>

My wrong be upon thee - This appears to be intended as a reproof to
Abram, containing an insinuation that it was his fault that she herself
had not been a mother, and that now he carried himself more
affectionately towards Hagar than he did to her, in consequence of which
conduct the slave became petulant. To remove all suspicion of this kind,
Abram delivers up Hagar into her hand, who was certainly under his
protection while his concubine or secondary wife; but this right given
to him by Sarai he restores, to prevent her jealousy and uneasiness.

[Genesis 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 16:6</span></span>

Sarah dealt hardly with her - תאנה teanneha, she afflicted her; the term
implying stripes and hard usage, to bring down the body and humble the
mind. If the slave was to blame in this business the mistress is not
less liable to censure. She alone had brought her into those
circumstances, in which it was natural for her to value herself beyond
her mistress.

[Genesis 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 16:7</span></span>

The angel of the Lord - That Jesus Christ, in a body suited to the
dignity of his nature, frequently appeared to the patriarchs, has been
already intimated. That the person mentioned here was greater than any
created being is sufficiently evident from the following particulars: -

1\. From his promising to perform what God alone could do, and
foretelling what God alone could know; "I will multiply thy seed
exceedingly," etc., [Gen 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#010); "Thou
art with child, and shalt bear a son," etc., [Gen
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#011); "He will be a wild man," etc.,
[Gen 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012). All this shows a
prescience which is proper to God alone.

2\. Hagar considers the person who spoke to her as God, calls him אל El,
and addresses him in the way of worship, which, had he been a created
angel, he would have refused. See [Rev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010); [Rev
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#009).

3\. Moses, who relates the transaction, calls this angel expressly
Jehovah; for, says he, she called שם יהוה shem Yehovah, the Name of the
Lord that spake to her, [Gen 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#013).
Now this is a name never given to any created being.

4\. This person, who is here called מלאך היוה malach Yehovah, the Angel
of the Lord, is the same who is called המלאך הגאל dellac hammalach
haggoel, the redeeming Angel or the Angel the Redeemer, [Gen
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016); מלאך פניו malach panaiv, the
Angel of God's presence, [Isa 63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009);
and מלאך הברית malach habberith, the Angel of the Covenant, [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001); and is the same person which the
Septuagint, [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006), term μεγαλης
βουλης αγγελος, the Angel of the Great Counsel or Design, viz., of
redeeming man, and filling the earth with righteousness.

5\. These things cannot be spoken of any human or created being, for the
knowledge, works, etc., attributed to this person are such as belong to
God; and as in all these cases there is a most evident personal
appearance, Jesus Christ alone can be meant; for of God the Father it
has been ever true that no man hath at any time seen his shape, nor has
he ever limited himself to any definable personal appearance.

In the way to Shur - As this was the road from Hebron to Egypt, it is
probable she was now returning to her own country.

[Genesis 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 16:8</span></span>

Hagar, Sarai's maid - This mode of address is used to show her that she
was known, and to remind her that she was the property of another.

[Genesis 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 16:10</span></span>

I will multiply thy seed exceedingly - Who says this? The person who is
called the Angel of the Lord; and he certainly speaks with all the
authority which is proper to God.

[Genesis 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 16:11</span></span>

And shalt call his name Ishmael - ישמאעל Yishmael, from שמע shama, he
heard, and אל El, God; for, says the Angel, The Lord Hath Heard thy
affliction. Thus the name of the child must ever keep the mother in
remembrance of God's merciful interposition in her behalf, and remind
the child and the man that he was an object of God's gracious and
providential goodness. Afflictions and distresses have a voice in the
ears of God, even when prayer is restrained; but how much more
powerfully do they speak when endured in meekness of spirit, with
confidence in and supplication to the Lord!

[Genesis 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 16:12</span></span>

He will be a wild man - פרא אדם pere adam. As the root of this word does
not appear in the Hebrew Bible, it is probably found in the Arabic
farra, to run away, to run wild; and hence the wild ass, from its
fleetness and its untamable nature. What is said of the wild ass, [Job
39:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#005), affords the very best
description that can be given of the Ishmaelites, (the Bedouins and
wandering Arabs), the descendants of Ishmael: "Who hath sent out the
wild ass (פרא pere) free? or who hath loosed the bands (ערוד arod) of
the brayer? Whose house I have made the wilderness, and the barren land
his dwellings. He scorneth the multitude of the city, neither regardeth
he the crying of the driver. The range of the mountains is his pasture,
and he searcheth after every green thing." Nothing can be more
descriptive of the wandering, lawless, freebooting life of the Arabs
than this.

God himself has sent them out free - he has loosed them from all
political restraint. The wilderness is their habitation; and in the
parched land, where no other human beings could live, they have their
dwellings. They scorn the city, and therefore have no fixed habitations;
for their multitude, they are not afraid; for when they make
depredations on cities and towns, they retire into the desert with so
much precipitancy that all pursuit is eluded. In this respect the crying
of the driver is disregarded. They may be said to have no lands, and yet
the range of the mountains is their pasture - they pitch their tents and
feed their flocks, wherever they please; and they search after every
green thing - are continually looking after prey, and seize on every
kind of property that comes in their way.

It is farther said, His hand will be against every man, and every man's
hand against him - Many potentates among the Abyssinians, Persians,
Egyptians, and Turks, have endeavored to subjugate the wandering or wild
Arabs; but, though they have had temporary triumphs, they have been
ultimately unsuccessful. Sesostris, Cyrus, Pompey, and Trajan, all
endeavored to conquer Arabia, but in vain. From the beginning to the
present day they have maintained their independence, and God preserves
them as a lasting monument of his providential care, and an
incontestable argument of the truth of Divine Revelation. Had the
Pentateuch no other argument to evince its Divine origin, the account of
Ishmael and the prophecy concerning his descendants, collated with their
history and manner of life during a period of nearly four thousand
years, would be sufficient. Indeed the argument is so absolutely
demonstrative, that the man who would attempt its refutation, in the
sight of reason and common sense would stand convicted of the most
ridiculous presumption and folly.

The country which these free descendants of Ishmael may be properly said
to possess, stretches from Aleppo to the Arabian Sea, and from Egypt to
the Persian Gulf; a tract of land not less than 1800 miles in length, by
900 in breadth; see [Gen 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#020).

[Genesis 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 16:13</span></span>

And she called the name of the Lord - She invoked (ותקרא vattikra) the
name of Jehovah who spake unto her, thus: Thou God seest me! She found
that the eye of a merciful God had been upon her in all her wanderings
and afflictions; and her words seem to intimate that she had been
seeking the Divine help and protection, for she says, Have I also (or
have I not also) looked after him that seeth me? This last clause of the
verse is very obscure and is rendered differently by all the versions.
The general sense taken out of it is this, That Hagar was now convinced
that God himself had appeared unto her, and was surprised to find that,
notwithstanding this, she was still permitted to live; for it is
generally supposed that if God appeared to any, they must be consumed by
his glories. This is frequently alluded to in the sacred writings. As
the word אחרי acharey, which we render simply after, in other places
signifies the last days or after times, (see [Exo
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#023)), it may probably have a similar
meaning here; and indeed this makes a consistent sense: Have I here also
seen the Latter Purposes or Designs of him who seeth me? An exclamation
which may be referred to that discovery which God made in the preceding
verse of the future state of her descendants.

[Genesis 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 16:14</span></span>

Wherefore the well was called Beer-lahai-roi - It appears, from [Gen
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007), that Hagar had sat down by a
fountain or well of water in the wilderness of Shur, at which the Angel
of the Lord found her; and, to commemorate the wonderful discovery which
God had made of himself, she called the name of the well באר לחי ראי
beer-lachai-roi, "A well to the Living One who seeth me." Two things
seem implied here:

1\. A dedication of the well to Him who had appeared to her; and,

2\. Faith in the promise: for he who is the Living One, existing in all
generations, must have it ever in his power to accomplish promises which
are to be fulfilled through the whole lapse of time.

[Genesis 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 16:15</span></span>

And Hagar bare Abram a son, etc. - It appears, therefore, that Hagar
returned at the command of the angel, believing the promise that God had
made to her.

Called his son's name - Ishmael - Finding by the account of Hagar, that
God had designed that he should be so called. "Ishmael," says Ainsworth,
"is the first man in the world whose name was given him of God before he
was born."

In the preceding chapter we have a very detailed account of the covenant
which God made with Abram, which stated that his seed would possess
Canaan; and this promise, on the Divine authority, he steadfastly
believed, and in simplicity of heart waited for its accomplishment.
Sarai was not like minded. As she had no child herself, and was now
getting old, she thought it necessary to secure the inheritance by such
means as were in her power; she therefore, as we have seen, gave her
slave to Abram, that she might have children by her. We do not find
Abram remonstrating on the subject; and why is he blamed? God had not as
yet told him how he was to have an heir; the promise simply stated, He
that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir, [Gen
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#004). Concubinage, under that
dispensation, was perfectly lawful; therefore he could, with equal
justice and innocence, when it was lawful in itself, and now urged by
the express desire of Sarai, take Hagar to wife. And it is very likely
that he might think that his posterity, whether by wife or concubine, as
both were lawful, might be that intended by the promise.

It is very difficult to believe that a promise which refers to some
natural event can possibly be fulfilled but through some natural means.
And yet, what is nature but an instrument in God's hands? What we call
natural effects are all performed by supernatural agency; for nature,
that is, the whole system of inanimate things, is as inert as any of the
particles of matter of the aggregate of which it is composed, and can be
a cause to no effect but as it is excited by a sovereign power. This is
a doctrine of sound philosophy, and should be carefully considered by
all, that men may see that without an overruling and universally
energetic providence, no effect whatever can be brought about. But
besides these general influences of God in nature, which are all
exhibited by what men call general laws, he chooses often to act
supernaturally, i.e., independently of or against these general laws,
that we may see that there is a God who does not confine himself to one
way of working, but with means, without means, and even against natural
means, accomplishes the gracious purposes of his mercy in the behalf of
man. Where God has promised let him be implicitly credited, because he
cannot lie; and let not hasty nature intermeddle with his work.

The omniscience of God is a subject on which we should often reflect,
and we can never do it unfruitfully while we connect it, as we ever
should, with infinite goodness and mercy. Every thing, person, and
circumstance, is under its notice; and doth not the eye of God affect
his heart? The poor slave, the stranger, the Egyptian, suffering under
the severity of her hasty, unbelieving mistress, is seen by the all-wise
and merciful God. He permits her to go to the desert, provides the
spring to quench her thirst, and sends the Angel of the covenant to
instruct and comfort her. How gracious is God! He permits us to get into
distressing circumstances that he may give us effectual relief; and in
such a way, too, that the excellence of the power may appear to be of
him, and that we may learn to trust in him in all our distresses. God
delights to do his creatures good.

In all transactions between God and man, mentioned in the sacred
writings, we see one uniform agency; the great Mediator in all, and
through all; God ever coming to man by him, and man having access to God
through him. This was, is, and ever will be the economy of grace. "The
Father hath sent me: - and no man cometh unto the Father but by me." God
forbid that he should have cause to complain of us, "Ye will not come
unto me, that ye might have life."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 17](gen017)

</div>
