<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen032)  [Next](gen034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 33:0</span></span>

Esau, with four hundred men, meets Jacob, [Gen
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#001). He places his children under
their respective mothers, passes over before them, and bows himself to
his brother, [Gen 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#002), [Gen
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#003). Esau receives him with great
affection, [Gen 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#004). Receives the
homage of the handmaids, Leah, Rachel, and their children, [Gen
33:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#005). Jacob offers him the present
of cattle, which he at first refuses, but after much entreaty accepts,
[Gen 33:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#008). Invites Jacob to
accompany him to Mount Seir, [Gen
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#012). Jacob excuses himself because
of his flocks and his children, but promises to follow him, [Gen
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#013), [Gen
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#014). Esau offers to leave him some
of his attendants, which Jacob declines, [Gen
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#015). Esau returns to Seir, [Gen
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#016), and Jacob journeys to Succoth,
[Gen 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017), and to Shalem, in the land
of Canaan, [Gen 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018). Buys a parcel
of ground from the children of Hamor, [Gen
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019), and erects an altar which he
calls El-elohe-Israel, [Gen 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#020).

[Genesis 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 33:1</span></span>

Behold, Esau came, and with him four hundred men - It has been generally
supposed that Esau came with an intention to destroy his brother, and
for that purpose brought with him four hundred armed men. But, 1. There
is no kind of evidence of this pretended hostility. 2. There is no proof
that the four hundred men that Esau brought with him were at all armed.
3. But there is every proof that he acted towards his brother Jacob with
all openness and candour, and with such a forgetfulness of past injuries
as none but a great mind could have been capable of. Why then should the
character of this man be perpetually vilified? Here is the secret. With
some people, on the most ungrounded assumption, Esau is a reprobate, and
the type and figure of all reprobates, and therefore he must be
everything that is bad. This serves a system; but, whether true or false
in itself, it has neither countenance nor support from the character or
conduct of Esau.

[Genesis 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 33:2</span></span>

He put the handmaids and their children foremost - There is something so
artificial in this arrangement of Jacob's family, that it must have had
some peculiar design. Was Jacob still apprehensive of danger, and put
those foremost whom he least esteemed, that if the foremost met with any
evil, those who were behind might escape on their swift beasts? [Gen
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#007), [Gen
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#008). Or did he intend to keep his
choicest treasure to the last, and exhibit his beautiful Rachel and
favourite Joseph after Esau had seen all the rest, in order to make the
deeper impression on his mind?

[Genesis 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 33:4</span></span>

Esau ran to meet him - How sincere and genuine is this conduct of Esau,
and at the same time how magnanimous! He had buried all his resentment,
and forgotten all his injuries; and receives his brother with the
strongest demonstrations, not only of forgiveness, but of fraternal
affection.

And kissed him - וישקהו vaiyishshakehu. In the Masoretic Bibles each
letter of this word is noted with a point over it to make it emphatic.
And by this kind of notation the rabbins wished to draw the attention of
the reader to the change that had taken place in Esau, and the sincerity
with which he received his brother Jacob. A Hindoo when he meets a
friend after absence throws his arms round him, and his head across his
shoulders, twice over the right shoulder and once over the left, with
other ceremonies according to the rank of the parties.

[Genesis 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 33:10</span></span>

Receive my present at my hand - Jacob could not be certain that he had
found favor with Esau, unless the present had been received; for in
accepting it Esau necessarily became his friend, according to the custom
of those times, and in that country. In the eastern countries, if your
present be received by your superior, you may rely on his friendship; if
it be not received, you have every thing to fear. It is on this ground
that Jacob was so urgent with Esau to receive his present, because he
knew that after this he must treat him as a friend.

[Genesis 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 33:14</span></span>

Until I come unto my lord unto Seir - It is very likely that Jacob was
perfectly sincere in his expressed purpose of visiting Esau at Seir, but
it is as likely that circumstances afterwards occurred that rendered it
either improper or impracticable; and we find that Esau afterwards
removed to Canaan, and he and Jacob dwelt there together for several
years. See [Gen 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#006).

[Genesis 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 33:17</span></span>

Journeyed to Succoth - So called from סכת succoth, the booths or tents
which Jacob erected there for the resting and convenience of his family,
who in all probability continued there for some considerable time.

[Genesis 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 33:18</span></span>

And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem - The word שלם shalem, in
the Samaritan שלום shalom, should be translated here in peace, or in
safety. After resting some time at Succoth, which was necessary for the
safety of his flocks and the comfort of his family, he got safely to a
city of Shechem, in health of body, without any loss of his cattle or
servants, his wives and children being also in safety. Coverdale and
Matthews translate this word as above, and with them agree the Chaldee
and the Arabic: it is not likely to have been the name of a city, as it
is nowhere else to be found. Shechem is called in [Act
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#016), Sychem, and in [Joh
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#005), Sychar; in the Arabic it is
called Nablous, and to the present day Neapolis. It was near to Samaria;
and the place where the wretched remains of the sect of the Samaritans
were lately found, from whom Dr. Huntington received a perfect copy of
the Samaritan Pentateuch.

[Genesis 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 33:19</span></span>

For a hundred pieces of money - The original, במאה קשיטה bemeah kesitah,
has been a matter of long and learned discussion among critics. As
kesitah signifies a lamb, it may imply that Jacob gave the Hamorites one
hundred lambs for the field; but if it be the same transaction that St.
Stephen refers to in [Act 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#016), it was
money, τιμης αργυριον, a sum or price of silver, which was given on the
occasion. It has been conjectured that the money had the figure of a
lamb stamped on it, because it was on an average the value of a lamb;
and hence it might be called a kesitah or lamb from the impression it
bore. It is certain that in many countries the coin has had its name
from the image it bore; so among our ancestors a coin was called an
angel because it bore the image of an angel; hence also a Jacobus, a
Carolus, a Lewis, (Louis d' Or), a Joe, because certain coins in
England, Spain, France, and Portugal, bore on one side the image of the
kings of those countries, James, Charles, Lewis, Joseph, or Johannes.
The Athenians had a coin called βους, an ox, because it was stamped with
the figure of an ox. Hence the saying in Aeschylus:

Τα δ' αλλα σιγω, βους επι γλωττης

μεγας

Βεβηκεν

Agam. v. 36.

"I must be silent concerning other matters, a great ox has come upon my
tongue;" to signify a person who had received a bribe for secrecy, i.e.,
a sum of money, on each piece of which an ox was stamped, and hence
called βους, an ox. The word opes, riches, is a corruption of the word
oves, sheep, because these animals in ancient times constituted the
principal riches of their owners; but when other cattle were added, the
word pecunia, (from pecus, cattle), which we translate money, and from
which we still have our English term pecuniary, appears to have been
substituted for oves, because pecus, pecoris, and pecus, pecudis, were
used to signify all kinds of cattle large and small. Among our British
and Saxon ancestors we find coins stamped with the figure of an ox,
horse, hog, goat, etc., and this custom arose in all probability, both
among them and other nations, from this circumstance, that in primitive
times the coin was the ordinary value of the animal whose image it bore.
It is, all circumstances weighed, most likely that a piece of money is
here intended, and possibly marked with the image of a lamb; but as the
original word קשיטה kesitah occurs only here, and in [Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032), and [Job
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#011), this is not sufficiently
evident, the word itself being of very doubtful signification. Mr.
Parkhurst is of opinion that the kesitah bore the image of a lamb; and
that these lamb coins of the ancient Hebrews typified the Lamb of God,
who in the Divine purpose was considered as slain from the foundation of
the world, and who purchased us unto God with his own blood. The
conjecture is at least pious, and should lead to useful reflections.
Those who wish to see more on this subject may consult the writers in
the Critici Sacri, and Calmet.

[Genesis 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 33:20</span></span>

And he erected there an altar - It appears that Jacob had a very correct
notion of the providence and mercy of God; hence he says, [Gen
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#005) : The children which God hath
Graciously given thy servant; and in [Gen
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#011) he attributes all his substance
to the bounty of his Maker: Take, I pray thee, my blessing - because God
hath dealt Graciously with me, and because I have enough. Hence he
viewed God as the God of all grace, and to him he erects an altar,
dedicating it to God, the God of Israel, referring particularly to the
change of his own name, and the mercies which he then received; and
hence perhaps it would be best to translate the words, The strong God
(is) the God of Israel; as by the power of his grace and goodness he had
rescued, defended, blessed, and supported him from his youth up until
now. The erecting altars with particular names appears in other places;
so, [Exo 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#015), Moses calls his altar
Jehovah-nissi, "the Lord is my banner."

1\. When a man's way's please God, he maketh even his enemies to be at
peace with him. When Jacob had got reconciled to God, God reconciled his
brother to him. The hearts of all men are in the hands of God, and he
turns them howsoever he will.

2\. Since the time in which Jacob wrestled with the Angel of the
covenant. We see in him much dependence on God, accompanied with a
spirit of deep humility and gratitude. God's grace alone can change the
heart of man, and it is by that grace only that we get a sense of our
obligations; this lays us in the dust, and the more we receive the lower
we shall lie.

3\. "The first thing," says good Bishop Wilson, "that pious men do, is
to provide for the honor and worship of God." Jacob buys a piece of
ground, and erects an altar on it in the land of a heathen, that he
might acknowledge God among his enemies, and turn them to the true
faith; and there is every reason to believe that this expedient would
have been successful, had it not been for the base conduct of his sons.
How true is the saying, One sinner spoileth much good! Reader, beware,
lest thy conduct should become a stumbling block to any.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 34](gen034)

</div>
