<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen003)  [Next](gen005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 4:0</span></span>

The birth, trade, and religion of Cain and Abel, [Gen
4:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001). Cain murders his brother Abel,
[Gen 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#008). God calls him into judgment
for it, [Gen 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#009), [Gen
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010). He is cursed, [Gen
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#011), [Gen
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012). He despairs, [Gen
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#015), [Gen
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#014). A promise given him of
preservation, and a mark set on him to prevent his being killed, [Gen
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#015). He departs from God's presence,
[Gen 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#016). Has a son whom he calls
Enoch; and builds a city, which he calls after his name, [Gen
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#017). Cain has several children, among
whom are Lamech, the first bigamist, [Gen
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#018), [Gen
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#019). Jabal, who taught the use of
tents and feeding cattle, [Gen 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#020).
Jubal, the inventor of musical instruments, [Gen
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#021). Tubal-cain, the inventor of
smith-work, [Gen 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#022). Strange speech
of Lamech to his wives, [Gen 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#023),
[Gen 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#024). Seth born to Adam and Eve
in the place of Abel, [Gen 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#025). Enoch
born, and the worship of God restored, [Gen
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#026).

[Genesis 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 4:1</span></span>

I have gotten a man from the Lord - Cain, קין, signifies acquisition;
hence Eve says קנתי kanithi, I have gotten or acquired a man, את יהוה
eth Yehovah, the Lord. It is extremely difficult to ascertain the sense
in which Eve used these words, which have been as variously translated
as understood. Most expositors think that Eve imagined Cain to be the
promised seed that should bruise the head of the serpent. This
exposition really seems too refined for that period. It is very likely
that she meant no more than to acknowledge that it was through God's
peculiar blessing that she was enabled to conceive and bring forth a
son, and that she had now a well-grounded hope that the race of man
should be continued on the earth. Unless she had been under Divine
inspiration she could not have called her son (even supposing him to be
the promised seed) Jehovah; and that she was not under such an influence
her mistake sufficiently proves, for Cain, so far from being the
Messiah, was of the wicked one; [Jo1
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#012). We may therefore suppose that את
היוה eth Yehovah, The Lord, is an elliptical form of expression for מאת
יהוה meeth Yehovah, From The Lord, or through the Divine blessing.

[Genesis 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 4:2</span></span>

And she again bare his brother Abel - Literally, She added to bear (ותסף
ללדת vattoseph laledeth) his brother. From the very face of this account
it appears evident that Cain and Abel were twins. In most cases where a
subject of this kind is introduced in the Holy Scriptures, and the
successive births of children of the same parents are noted, the acts of
conceiving and bringing forth are mentioned in reference to each child;
here it is not said that she conceived and brought forth Abel, but
simply she added to bring forth Abel his brother; that is, as I
understand it, Cain was the first-born, Abel, his twin brother, came
next.

Abel was a keeper of sheep - Adam was originally a gardener, Abel a
shepherd, and Cain an agriculturist or farmer. These were the three
primitive employments, and, I may add, the most rational, and
consequently the best calculated to prevent strife and an immoderate
love of the world.

[Genesis 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 4:3</span></span>

In process of time - מקץ ימים mikkets yamim, at the end of days. Some
think the anniversary of the creation to be here intended; it is more
probable that it means the Sabbath, on which Adam and his family
undoubtedly offered oblations to God, as the Divine worship was
certainly instituted, and no doubt the Sabbath properly observed in that
family. This worship was, in its original institution, very simple. It
appears to have consisted of two parts:

1\. Thanksgiving to God as the author and dispenser of all the bounties
of nature, and oblations indicative of that gratitude.

2\. Piacular sacrifices to his justice and holiness, implying a
conviction of their own sinfulness, confession of transgression, and
faith in the promised Deliverer. If we collate the passage here with the
apostle's allusion to it, [Heb 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#004),
we shall see cause to form this conclusion.

Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering - מנחה minchah, unto
the Lord. The word minchah is explained, [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001), etc., to be an offering of fine
flour, with oil and frankincense. It was in general a eucharistic or
gratitude offering, and is simply what is implied in the fruits of the
ground brought by Cain to the Lord, by which he testified his belief in
him as the Lord of the universe, and the dispenser of secular blessings.

[Genesis 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 4:4</span></span>

Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock - Dr. Kennicott
contends that the words he also brought, הביא גם הוא hebi gam hu, should
be translated, Abel brought it also, i.e. a minchah or gratitude
offering; and beside this he brought of the first-born (מבכרות
mibbechoroth) of his flock, and it was by this alone that he
acknowledged himself a sinner, and professed faith in the promised
Messiah. To this circumstance the apostle seems evidently to allude,
[Heb 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#004) : By Faith Abel offered
πλειονα θυσιαν, a More or Greater sacrifice; not a more excellent, (for
this is no meaning of the word πλειων), which leads us to infer,
according to Dr. Kennicott, that Abel, besides his minchah or gratitude
offering, brought also θυσια, a victim, to be slain for his sins; and
this he chose out of the first-born of his flock, which, in the order of
God, was a representation of the Lamb of God that was to take away the
sin of the world; and what confirms this exposition more is the
observation of the apostle: God testifying τοις δωροις, of his Gifts,
which certainly shows he brought more than one. According to this
interpretation, Cain, the father of Deism, not acknowledging the
necessity of a vicarious sacrifice, nor feeling his need of an
atonement, according to the dictates of his natural religion, brought a
minchah or eucharistic offering to the God of the universe. Abel, not
less grateful for the produce of his fields and the increase of his
flocks, brought a similar offering, and by adding a sacrifice to it paid
a proper regard to the will of God as far as it had then been revealed,
acknowledged himself a sinner, and thus, deprecating the Divine
displeasure, showed forth the death of Christ till he came. Thus his
offerings were accepted, while those of Cain were rejected; for this, as
the apostle says, was done by Faith, and therefore he obtained witness
that he was righteous, or a justified person, God testifying with his
gifts, the thank-offering and the sin-offering, by accepting them, that
faith in the promised seed was the only way in which he could accept the
services and offerings of mankind. Dr. Magee, in his Discourses on the
Atonement, criticises the opinion of Dr. Kennicott, and contends that
there is no ground for the distinction made by the latter on the words
he also brought; and shows that though the minchah in general signifies
an unbloody offering, yet it is also used to express both kinds, and
that the minchah in question is to be understood of the sacrifice then
offered by Abel. I do not see that we gain much by this
counter-criticism. See [Gen 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007).

[Genesis 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 4:5</span></span>

Unto Cain - As being unconscious of his sinfulness, and consequently
unhumbled, and to his offering, as not being accompanied, as Abel's was,
with faith and a sacrifice for sin, he had not respect - He could not,
consistently with his holiness and justice, approve of the one or
receive the other. Of the manner in which God testified his approbation
we are not informed; it was probably, as in the case of Elijah, by
sending down fire from heaven, and consuming the sacrifice.

Cain was very wroth - That displeasure which should have been turned
against his own unhumbled heart was turned against his innocent brother,
who, though not more highly privileged than he, made a much better use
of the advantages which he shared in common with his ungodly and
unnatural brother.

[Genesis 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 4:6</span></span>

Why art thou wroth? - This was designed as a gracious warning, and a
preventive of the meditated crime.

[Genesis 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 4:7</span></span>

If thou doest well - That which is right in the sight of God, shalt thou
not be accepted? Does God reject any man who serves him in simplicity
and godly sincerity? But if thou doest not well, can wrath and
indignation against thy righteous brother save thee from the displeasure
under which thou art fallen? On the contrary, have recourse to thy Maker
for mercy; לפתח חטאת רבץ lappethach chattath robets, a sin-offering
lieth at thy door; an animal proper to be offered as an atonement for
sin is now couching at the door of thy fold.

The words חטאת chattath, and חטאת chattaah, frequently signify sin; but
I have observed more than a hundred places in the Old Testament where
they are used for sin-offering, and translated ἁμαρτια by the
Septuagint, which is the term the apostle uses, [Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021) : He hath made him to be sin
(ἁμαρτιαν, A Sin-Offering) for us, who knew no sin. Cain's fault now was
his not bringing a sin-offering when his brother brought one, and his
neglect and contempt caused his other offering to be rejected. However,
God now graciously informs him that, though he had miscarried, his case
was not yet desperate, as the means of faith, from the promise, etc.,
were in his power, and a victim proper for a sin-offering was lying (רבץ
robets, a word used to express the lying down of a quadruped) at the
door of his fold. How many sinners perish, not because there is not a
Savior able and willing to save them, but because they will not use that
which is within their power! Of such how true is that word of our Lord,
Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life!

Unto thee shall be his desire, etc. - That is, Thou shalt ever have the
right of primogeniture, and in all things shall thy brother be subject
unto thee. These words are not spoken of sin, as many have understood
them, but of Abel's submission to Cain as his superior, and the words
are spoken to remove Cain's envy.

[Genesis 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 4:8</span></span>

Cain talked with Abel his brother - ויאמר קין vaiyomer Kayin, and Cain
said, etc.; not talked, for this construction the word cannot bear
without great violence to analogy and grammatical accuracy. But why
should it be thus translated? Because our translators could not find
that any thing was spoken on the occasion; and therefore they ventured
to intimate that there was a conversation, indefinitely. In the most
correct editions of the Hebrew Bible there is a small space left here in
the text, and a circular mark which refers to a note in the margin,
intimating that there is a hiatus or deficiency in the verse. Now this
deficiency is supplied in the principal ancient versions, and in the
Samaritan text. In this the supplied words are, Let Us Walk Out Into The
Field. The Syriac has, Let us go to the desert. The Vulgate Egrediamur
foras, Let us walk out. The Septuagint, Διελθωμεν εις το πεδον, Let us
go out into the field. The two Chaldee Targums have the same reading; so
has the Coptic version. This addition is completely lost from every MS.
of the Pentateuch now known; and yet it is sufficiently evident from the
Samaritan text, the Samaritan version, the Syriac, Septuagint, and
Vulgate, that it was in the most authentic copies of the Hebrew before
and some time since the Christian era. The words may therefore be safely
considered as a part of the sacred text, and with them the whole passage
reads clear and consistently: "And Cain said unto Abel his brother, Let
us go out into the field: and it came to pass, when they were in the
field, that Cain rose up," etc. The Jerusalem Targum, and the Targum of
Jonathan ben Uzziel, pretend to give us the subject of their
conversation: as the piece is curious, I shall insert the substance of
it, for the sake of those who may not have access to the originals. "And
Cain said unto Hebel his brother, Let us go out into the field; and it
came to pass that, when they were in the field, Cain answered and said
to Hebel his brother, I thought that the world was created in mercy, but
it is not governed according to the merit of good works nor is there any
judgment, nor a Judge, nor shall there be any future state in which good
rewards shall be given to the righteous, or punishment executed on the
wicked; and now there is respect of persons in judgment. On what account
is it that thy sacrifice has been accepted, and mine not received with
complacency? And Hebel answered and said, The world was created in
mercy, and it is governed according to the fruit of good works; there is
a Judge, a future world, and a coming judgment, where good rewards shall
be given to the righteous, and the impious punished; and there is no
respect of persons in judgment; but because my works were better and
more precious than thine, my oblation was received with complacency. And
because of these things they contended on the face of the field, and
Cain rose up against Hebel his brother, and struck a stone into his
forehead, and killed him."

It is here supposed that the first murder committed in the world was the
consequence of a religious dispute; however this may have been, millions
since have been sacrificed to prejudice, bigotry, and intolerance. Here,
certainly, originated the many-headed monster, religious persecution;
the spirit of the wicked one in his followers impels them to afflict and
destroy all those who are partakers of the Spirit of God. Every
persecutor is a legitimate son of the old murderer. This is the first
triumph of Satan; it is not merely a death that he has introduced, but a
violent one, as the first-fruits of sin. It is not the death of an
ordinary person, but of the most holy man then in being; it is not
brought about by the providence of God, or by a gradual failure and
destruction of the earthly fabric, but by a violent separation of body
and soul; it is not done by a common enemy, from whom nothing better
could be expected, but by the hand of a brother, and for no other reason
but because the object of his envy was more righteous than himself.
Alas! how exceeding sinful does sin appear in its first manifestation!

[Genesis 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 4:10</span></span>

The voice of thy brother's blood - It is probable that Cain, having
killed his brother, dug a hole and buried him in the earth, hoping
thereby to prevent the murder from being known; and that this is what is
designed in the words, Thy brother's blood crieth unto me From The
Ground - which hath opened her mouth to receive it from thy hand. Some
think that by the voice of thy brother's blood the cries of Abel's widow
and children are to be understood, as it is very probable that he was
father of a family; indeed his occupation and sacrifices seem to render
this probable, and probability is all we can expect on such a subject.
God represents these as calling aloud for the punishment of the
murderer; and it is evident that Cain expected to fall by the hands of
some person who, from his consanguinity, had the right of the avenger of
blood; for now that the murder is found out, he expects to suffer death
for it. See [Gen 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#014).

[Genesis 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 4:12</span></span>

A fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be - Thou shalt be expelled from
the presence of God, and from thy family connections, and shalt have no
fixed secure residence in any place. The Septuagint render this στενων
και τρεμων εση, thou shalt be groaning and trembling upon the earth -
the horror of thy crime shall ever haunt thee, and thou shalt never have
any well-grounded hope that God will remit the punishment thou
deservest. No state out of endless perdition can be considered more
awful than this.

[Genesis 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 4:13</span></span>

My punishment is greater than I can bear - The margin reads, Mine
iniquity is greater than that it may be forgiven. The original words,
גדול עוני מנשוא gadol avoni minneso, may be translated, Is my crime too
great to be forgiven? words which we may presume he uttered on the verge
of black despair. It is most probable that עון avon signifies rather the
crime than the punishment; in this sense it is used [Lev
26:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#041), [Lev
26:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#043) [Sa1
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#010); [Kg2
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#009); and נשא nasa signifies to remit
or forgive. The marginal reading is, therefore, to be preferred to that
in the text.

[Genesis 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 4:14</span></span>

Behold, thou hast driven me out - In [Gen
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#011), [Gen
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012), God states two parts of Cain's
punishment:

1\. The ground was cursed, so that it was not to yield any adequate
recompense for his most careful tillage.

2\. He was to be a fugitive and a vagabond having no place in which he
could dwell with comfort or security.

To these Cain himself adds others.

1\. His being hidden from the face of God; which appears to signify his
being expelled from that particular place where God had manifested his
presence in or contiguous to Paradise, whither our first parents
resorted as to an oracle, and where they offered their daily adorations.
So in [Gen 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#016), it is said, Cain went
out from the presence of the Lord, and was not permitted any more to
associate with the family in acts of religious worship.

2\. The continual apprehension of being slain, as all the inhabitants of
the earth were at that time of the same family, the parents themselves
still alive, and each having a right to kill this murderer of his
relative. Add to all this,

3\. The terrors of a guilty conscience; his awful apprehension of God's
judgments, and of being everlastingly banished from the beatific vision.
To this part of the punishment of Cain St. Paul probably alludes, [Th2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009) : Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the
glory of his power. The words are so similar that we can scarcely doubt
of the allusion.

[Genesis 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 4:15</span></span>

The Lord set a mark upon Cain - What this mark was, has given rise to a
number of frivolously curious conjectures. Dr. Shuckford collects the
most remarkable. Some say he was paralytic; this seems to have arisen
from the version of the Septuagint, Στενων και τρεμων εση, Groaning and
trembling shalt thou be. The Targum of Jonathan ben Uzziel says the sign
was from the great and precious name, probably one of the letters of the
word Yehovah. The author of an Arabic Catena in the Bodleian Library
says, "A sword could not pierce him; fire could not burn him; water
could not drown him; the air could not blast him; nor could thunder or
lightning strike him." The author of Bereshith Rabba, a comment on
Genesis, says the mark was a circle of the sun rising upon him.
Abravanel says the sign was Abel's dog, which constantly accompanied
him. Some of the doctors in the Talmud say that it was the letter ת tau
marked on his forehead, which signified his contrition, as it is the
first letter in the word תשובה teshubah, repentance. Rabbi Joseph, wiser
than all the rest, says it was a long horn growing out of his forehead!

Dr. Shuckford farther observes that the Hebrew word אית oth, which we
translate a mark, signifies a sign or token. Thus, [Gen
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#013), the bow was to be לאית leoth,
for a sign or token that the world should not be destroyed; therefore
the words, And the Lord set a mark upon Cain, should be translated, And
the Lord appointed to Cain a token or sign, to convince him that no
person should be permitted to slay him. To have marked him would have
been the most likely way to have brought all the evils he dreaded upon
him; therefore the Lord gave him some miraculous sign or token that he
should not be slain, to the end that he should not despair, but, having
time to repent, might return to a gracious God and find mercy.
Notwithstanding the allusion which I suppose St. Paul to have made to
the punishment of Cain, some think that he did repent and find mercy. I
can only say this was possible. Most people who read this account wonder
why Cain should dread being killed, when it does not appear to them that
there were any inhabitants on the earth at that time besides himself and
his parents. To correct this mistake, let it be observed that the death
of Abel took place in the one hundred and twenty-eighth or one hundred
and twenty-ninth year of the world. Now, "supposing Adam and Eve to have
had no other sons than Cain and Abel in the year of the world one
hundred and twenty-eight, yet as they had daughters married to these
sons, their descendants would make a considerable figure on the earth.
Supposing them to have been married in the nineteenth year of the world,
they might easily have had each eight children, some males and some
females, in the twenty-fifth year. In the fiftieth year there might
proceed from them in a direct line sixty-four persons; in the
seventy-fourth year there would be five hundred and twelve; in the
ninety-eighth year, four thousand and ninety-six; in the one hundred and
twenty-second they would amount to thirty-two thousand seven hundred and
sixty-eight: if to these we add the other children descended from Cain
and Abel, their children, and their children's children, we shall have,
in the aforesaid one hundred and twenty-eight years four hundred and
twenty-one thousand one hundred and sixty-four men capable of
generation, without reckoning the women either old or young, or such as
are under the age of seventeen." See Dodd.

But this calculation may be disputed, because there is no evidence that
the antediluvian patriarchs began to have children before they were
sixty-five years of age. Now, supposing that Adam at one hundred and
thirty years of age had one hundred and thirty children, which is quite
possible, and each of these a child at sixty-five years of age, and one
in each successive year, the whole, in the one hundred and thirtieth
year of the world, would amount to one thousand two hundred and nineteen
persons; a number sufficient to found several villages, and to excite
the apprehensions under which Cain appeared at this time to labor.

[Genesis 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 4:16</span></span>

The land of Nod - As נוד nod signifies the same as נד sa , a vagabond,
some think this verse should be rendered, And Cain went out from the
presence of the Lord, from the east of Eden, and dwelt a vagabond on the
earth; thus the curse pronounced on him, [Gen
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012), was accomplished.

[Genesis 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 4:17</span></span>

She - bare Enoch - As חנוך Chanoch signifies instructed, dedicated, or
initiated, and especially in sacred things, it may be considered some
proof of Cain's repentance, that he appears to have dedicated this son
to God, who, in his father's stead, might minister in the sacerdotal
office, from which Cain, by his crime, was for ever excluded.

[Genesis 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 4:19</span></span>

Lamech took - two wives - He was the first who dared to reverse the
order of God by introducing polygamy; and from him it has been retained,
practiced, and defended to the present day.

[Genesis 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 4:20</span></span>

Jabal - was the father - The inventor or teacher, for so the word is
understood, [Sa1 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#012). He was the
first who invented tent-making, and the breeding and managing of cattle;
or he was, in these respects, the most eminent in that time. Though Abel
was a shepherd, it is not likely he was such on an extensive scale.

[Genesis 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 4:21</span></span>

Jubal - the father - i.e. The inventor of musical instruments, such as
the כנור kinnor, which we translate harp, and the עוגב ugab, which we
render organ; it is very likely that both words are generic, the former
including under it all stringed instruments, and the latter, all wind
instruments.

[Genesis 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 4:22</span></span>

Tubal-cain - The first smith on record, who taught how to make warlike
instruments and domestic utensils out of brass and iron.

Agricultural instruments must have been in use long before, for Cain was
a tiller of the ground, and so was Adam, and they could not have
cultivated the ground without spades, hooks, etc. Some of these arts
were useless to man while innocent and upright, but after his fall they
became necessary. Thus is the saying verified: God made man upright, but
they have sought out many inventions. As the power to get wealth is from
God, so also is the invention of useful arts.

M. De Lavaur, in his Conference de la Fable avec l'Histoire Sainte,
supposes that the Greeks and Romans took their smith-god Vulcan from
Tubal-cain, the son of Lamech. The probability of this will appear,

1\. From the name, which, by the omission of the Tu and turning the b
into v, a change frequently made among the Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans,
makes Vulcain or Vulcan.

2\. From his occupation he was an artificer, a master smith in brass and
iron.

3\. He thinks this farther probable from the names and sounds in this
verse. The melting metals in the fire, and hammering them, bears a near
resemblance to the hissing sound of צלה tsillah, the mother of
Tubal-cain; and צלל tsalal signifies to tinkle or make a sound like a
bell, [Sa1 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#011) [Kg2
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#012).

4\. Vulcan is said to have been lame; M. De Lavaur thinks that this
notion was taken from the noun צלא tsela, which signifies a halting or
lameness.

5\. Vulcan had to wife Venus, the goddess of beauty; Naamah, the sister
of Tubal-cain, he thinks, may have given rise to this part of the fable,
as her name in Hebrew signifies beautiful or gracious.

6\. Vulcan is reported to have been jealous of his wife, and to have
forged nets in which he took Mars and her, and exposed them to the view
of the whole celestial court: this idea he thinks was derived from the
literal import of the name Tubal-cain; תבל tebel signifies an incestuous
mixture of relatives, [Lev 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#012); and
קנא kana, to burn with jealousy; from these and concomitant
circumstances the case of the detected adultery of Mars and Venus might
be easily deduced. He is of opinion that a tradition of this kind might
have readily found its way from the Egyptians to the Greeks, as the
former had frequent intercourse with the Hebrews.

Of Naamah nothing more is spoken in the Scriptures; but the Targum of
Jonathan ben Uzziel makes her the inventress of funeral songs and
lamentations. R. S. Jarchi says she was the wife of Noah, and quotes
Bereshith Rabba in support of the opinion. Some of the Jewish doctors
say her name is recorded in Scripture because she was an upright and
chaste woman; but others affirm that the whole world wandered after her,
and that of her evil spirits were born into the world. This latter
opinion gives some countenance to that of M. De Lavaur.

[Genesis 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 4:23</span></span>

And Lamech said unto his wives - The speech of Lamech to his wives is in
hemistichs in the original, and consequently, as nothing of this kind
occurs before this time, it is very probably the oldest piece of poetry
in the world. The following is, as nearly as possible, a literal
translation:

"And Lamech said unto his wives,

Adah and Tsillah, hear ye my voice;

Wives of Lamech, hearken to my speech;

For I have slain a man for wounding me,

And a young man for having bruised me.

If Cain shall be avenged seven-fold,

Also Lamech seventy and seven."

It is supposed that Lamech had slain a man in his own defense, and that
his wives being alarmed lest the kindred of the deceased should seek his
life in return, to quiet their fears he makes this speech, in which he
endeavors to prove that there was no room for fear on this account; for
if the slayer of the wilful murderer, Cain, should suffer a seven-fold
punishment, surely he, who should kill Lamech for having slain a man in
self-defense, might expect a seventy-seven-fold punishment.

This speech is very dark, and has given rise to a great variety of very
strange conjectures. Dr. Shuckford supposes there is an ellipsis of some
preceding speech or circumstance which, if known, would cast a light on
the subject. In the antediluvian times, the nearest of kin to a murdered
person had a right to revenge his death by taking away the life of the
murderer. This, as we have already seen, appears to have contributed not
a little to Cain's horror, [Gen 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#014).
Now we may suppose that the descendants of Cain were in continual
alarms, lest some of the other family should attempt to avenge the death
of Abel on them, as they were not permitted to do it on Cain; and that
in order to dismiss those fears, Lamech, the seventh descendant from
Adam, spoke to this effect to his wives: "Why should you render
yourselves miserable by such ill-founded fears? We have slain no person;
we have not done the least wrong to our brethren of the other family;
surely then reason should dictate to you that they have no right to
injure us. It is true that Cain, one of our ancestors, killed his
brother Abel; but God, willing to pardon his sin, and give him space to
repent, threatened to punish those with a seven-fold punishment who
should dare to kill him. If this be so, then those who should have the
boldness to kill any of us who are innocent, may expect a punishment
still more rigorous. For if Cain should be avenged seven-fold on the
person who should slay him, surely Lamech or any of his innocent family
should be avenged seventy-seven-fold on those who should injure them."
The Targums give nearly the same meaning, and it makes a good sense; but
who can say it is the true sense? If the words be read interrogatively,
as they certainly may, the sense will be much clearer, and some of the
difficulties will be removed:

"Have I slain a man, that I should be wounded?

Or a young man, that I should be bruised?"

But even this still supposes some previous reason or conversation. I
shall not trouble my readers with a ridiculous Jewish fable, followed by
St. Jerome, of Lamech having killed Cain by accident, etc.; and after
what I have already said, I must leave the passage, I fear, among those
which are inscrutable.

[Genesis 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 4:25</span></span>

God - hath appointed me another seed instead of Abel - Eve must have
received on this occasion some Divine communication, else how could she
have known that this son was appointed in the place of Abel, to continue
that holy line by which the Messiah was to come? From this we see that
the line of the Messiah was determined from the beginning, and that it
was not first fixed in the days of Abraham; for the promise was then
only renewed, and that branch of his family designated by which the
sacred line was to be continued. And it is worthy of remark, that Seth's
posterity alone continued after the flood, when all the other families
of the earth were destroyed, Noah being the tenth descendant from Adam
through Seth.

Though all these persons are mentioned in the following chapter, I shall
produce them here in the order of their succession:

1\. Adam;

2\. Seth;

3\. Enos;

4\. Cainan;

5\. Mahalaleel;

6\. Jared;

7\. Enoch;

8\. Methuselah;

9\. Lamech, (the second);

10\. Noah.

In order to keep this line distinct, we find particular care was taken
that, where there were two or more sons in a family, the one through
whom God particularly designed to bring his Son into the world was, by
some especial providence, pointed out. Thus in the family of Adam, Seth
was chosen; in the family of Noah, Shem; in the family of Abraham,
Isaac; and in that of David, Solomon and Nathan. All these things God
watched over by an especial providence from the beginning, that when
Jesus Christ should come it might be clearly seen that he came by the
promise, through grace, and not by nature.

[Genesis 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 4:26</span></span>

Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord - The marginal reading
is, Then began men to call themselves by the name of the Lord; which
words are supposed to signify that in the time of Enos the true
followers of God began to distinguish themselves, and to be
distinguished by others, by the appellation of sons of God; those of the
other branch of Adam's family, among whom the Divine worship was not
observed, being distinguished by the name, children of men. It must not
be dissembled that many eminent men have contended that הוחל huchal,
which we translate began, should be rendered began profanely, or then
profanation began, and from this time they date the origin of idolatry.
Most of the Jewish doctors were of this opinion, and Maimonides has
discussed it at some length in his Treatise on Idolatry; as this piece
is curious, and gives the most probable account of the origin and
progress of idolatry, I shall insert it here.

"In the days of Enos the sons of Adam erred with great error, and the
counsel of the wise men of that age became brutish, and Enos himself was
(one) of them that erred; and their error was this: they said, Forasmuch
as God hath created these stars and spheres to govern the world, and set
them on high, and imparted honor unto them, and they are ministers that
minister before him; it is meet that men should laud, and glorify, and
give them honor. For this is the will of God, that we magnify and honor
whomsoever he magnifieth and honoureth; even as a king would have them
honored that stand before him, and this is the honor of the king
himself. When this thing was come up into their hearts they began to
build temples unto the stars, and to offer sacrifice unto them, and to
laud and glorify them with words, and to worship before them, that they
might in their evil opinion obtain favor of the Creator; and this was
the root of idolatry, etc. And in process of time there stood up false
prophets among the sons of Adam, which said that God had commanded and
said unto them, Worship such a star, or all the stars, and do sacrifice
unto them thus and thus; and build a temple for it, and make an image of
it, that all the people, women, and children may worship it. And the
false prophet showed them the image which he had feigned out of his own
heart, and said it was the image of such a star, which was made known
unto him by prophecy. And they began after this manner to make images in
temples, and under trees, and on tops of mountains and hills, and
assembled together and worshipped them, etc. And this thing was spread
through all the world, to serve images with services different one from
another, and to sacrifice unto and worship them. So, in process of time,
the glorious and fearful name (of God) was forgotten out of the mouth of
all living, and out of their knowledge, and they acknowledged him not.

And there was found no people on the earth that knew aught, save images
of wood and stone, and temples of stone, which they had been trained up
from their childhood to worship and serve, and to swear by their names.
And the wise men that were among them, as the priests and such like,
thought there was no God save the stars and spheres, for whose sake and
in whose likeness they had made these images; but as for the Rock
everlasting, there was no man that acknowledged him or knew him save a
few persons in the world, as Enoch, Methuselah, Noah, Sham, and Heber.
And in this way did the world walk and converse till that pillar of the
world, Abraham our father, was born." Maim. in Mishn, and Ainsworth in
loco.

1\. We see here the vast importance of worshipping God according to his
own mind; no sincerity, no uprightness of intention, can atone for the
neglect of positive commands delivered in Divine revelation, when this
revelation is known. He who will bring a eucharistic offering instead of
a sacrifice, while a sin-offering lieth at the door, as he copies Cain's
conduct, may expect to be treated in the same manner. Reader, remember
that thou hast an entrance unto the holiest through the veil, that is to
say his flesh; and those who come in this way, God will in nowise cast
out.

2\. We see the horrible nature of envy: its eye is evil merely because
God is good; it easily begets hatred; hatred, deep-settled malice; and
malice, murder! Watch against the first appearance of this most
destructive passion, the prime characteristic of which is to seek the
destruction of the object of its malevolence, and finally to ruin its
possessor.

3\. Be thankful to God that, as weakness increased and wants became
multiplied, God enabled man to find out useful inventions, so as to
lessen excessive labor, and provide every thing indispensably necessary
for the support of life. He who carefully attends to the dictates of
honest, sober industry, is never likely to perish for lack of the
necessaries of life.

4\. As the followers of God at this early period found it indispensably
necessary to separate themselves from all those who were irreligious and
profane, and to make a public profession of their attachment to the
truth, so it should be now. There are still men of profane minds whose
spirit and conduct are destructive to godliness; and in reference to
such the permanent order of God is, Come out from among them, touch not
the unclean thing, and I will receive you. He who is not determined to
be a Christian at all events, is not far from being an infidel. Those
only who confess Christ among men shall be acknowledged before his
Father and the angels of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 5](gen005)

</div>
