<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen006)  [Next](gen008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 7:0</span></span>

God informs Noah that within seven days he shall send a rain upon the
earth, that shall continue for forty days and nights; and therefore
commands him to take his family, with the different clean and unclean
animals, and enter the ark, [Gen
7:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001). This command punctually obeyed,
[Gen 7:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#005). In the seventeenth day of
the second month, in the six hundredth year of Noah's life, the waters,
from the opened windows of heaven, and the broken up fountains of the
great deep, were poured out upon the earth, [Gen
7:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#010). The different quadrupeds,
fowls, and reptiles come unto Noah, and the Lord shuts him and them in,
[Gen 7:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#013). The waters increase, and
the ark floats, [Gen 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#017). The whole
earth is covered with water fifteen cubits above the highest mountains,
[Gen 7:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#018). All terrestrial animals
die, [Gen 7:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#021). And the waters
prevail one hundred and fifty days, [Gen
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#024).

[Genesis 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 7:1</span></span>

Thee have I seen righteous - See the note on [Gen
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#008)

[Genesis 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 7:2</span></span>

Of every clean beast - So we find the distinction between clean and
unclean animals existed long before the Mosaic law. This distinction
seems to have been originally designed to mark those animals which were
proper for sacrifice and food, from those that were not. See Leviticus
11.

[Genesis 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 7:4</span></span>

For yet seven days - God spoke these words probably on the seventh or
Sabbath day, and the days of the ensuing week were employed in entering
the ark, in embarking the mighty troop, for whose reception ample
provision had been already made.

Forty days - This period became afterwards sacred, and was considered a
proper space for humiliation. Moses fasted forty days, [Deu
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#009), [Deu
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#011); so did Elijah, [Kg1
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008); so did our Lord, [Mat
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002). Forty days' respite were given to
the Ninevites that they might repent, [Jon
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#004); and thrice forty (one hundred and
twenty) years were given to the old world for the same gracious purpose,
[Gen 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003). The forty days of Lent, in
commemoration of our Lord's fasting, have a reference to the same thing;
as each of these seems to be deduced from this primitive judgment.

[Genesis 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 7:11</span></span>

In the six hundredth year, etc. - This must have been in the beginning
of the six hundredth year of his life; for he was a year in the ark,
[Gen 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#013); and lived three hundred and
fifty years after the flood, and died nine hundred and fifty years old,
[Gen 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#029); so it is evident that, when
the flood commenced, he had just entered on his six hundredth year.

Second month - The first month was Tisri, which answers to the latter
half of September, and first half of October; and the second was
Marcheshvan, which answers to part of October and part of November.
After the deliverance from Egypt, the beginning of the year was changed
from Marcheshvan to Nisan, which answers to a part of our March and
April. But it is not likely that this reckoning obtained before the
flood. Dr. Lightfoot very probably conjectures that Methuselah was alive
in the first month of this year. And it appears, says he, how clearly
the Spirit of prophecy foretold of things to come, when it directed his
father Enoch almost a thousand years before to name him Methuselah,
which signifies they die by a dart; or, he dieth, and then is the dart;
or, he dieth, end then it is sent. And thus Adam and Methuselah had
measured the whole time between the creation and the flood, and lived
above two hundred and forty years together. See Genesis 5 at the end,
[Gen 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#032) (note).

Were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows of
heaven were opened - It appears that an immense quantity of waters
occupied the center of the antediluvian earth; and as these burst forth,
by the order of God, the circumambient strata must sink, in order to
fill up the vacuum occasioned by the elevated waters. This is probably
what is meant by breaking up the fountains of the great deep. These
waters, with the seas on the earth's surface, might be deemed sufficient
to drown the whole globe, as the waters now on its surface are nearly
three-fourths of the whole, as has been accurately ascertained by Dr.
Long. See the note on [Gen 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#010).

By the opening of the windows of heaven is probably meant the
precipitating all the aqueous vapours which were suspended in the whole
atmosphere, so that, as Moses expresses it, [Gen
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#007), the waters that were above the
firmament were again united to the waters which were below the
firmament, from which on the second day of creation they had been
separated. A multitude of facts have proved that water itself is
composed of two airs, oxygen and hydrogen; and that 85 parts of the
first and 15 of the last, making 100 in the whole, will produce exactly
100 parts of water. And thus it is found that these two airs form the
constituent parts of water in the above proportions. The electric spark,
which is the same as lightning, passing through these airs, decomposes
them and converts them to water. And to this cause we may probably
attribute the rain which immediately follows the flash of lightning and
peal of thunder. God therefore, by the means of lightning, might have
converted the whole atmosphere into water, for the purpose of drowning
the globe, had there not been a sufficiency of merely aqueous vapours
suspended in the atmosphere on the second day of creation. And if the
electric fluid were used on this occasion for the production of water,
the incessant glare of lightning, and the continual peals of thunder,
must have added indescribable horrors to the scene. See the note on [Gen
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001). These two causes concurring were
amply sufficient, not only to overflow the earth, but probably to
dissolve the whole terrene fabric, as some judicious naturalists have
supposed: indeed, this seems determined by the word מבול mabbul,
translated flood, which is derived from בל bal בלל or balal, to mix,
mingle, confound, confuse, because the aqueous and terrene parts of the
globe were then mixed and confounded together; and when the supernatural
cause that produced this mighty change suspended its operations, the
different particles of matter would settle according to their specific
gravities, and thus form the various strata or beds of which the earth
appears to be internally constructed. Some naturalists have controverted
this sentiment, because in some cases the internal structure of the
earth does not appear to justify the opinion that the various portions
of matter had settled according to their specific gravities; but these
anomalies may easily be accounted for, from the great changes that have
taken place in different parts of the earth since the flood, by volcanic
eruptions, earthquakes, etc. Some very eminent philosophers are of the
opinion "that, by the breaking up of the fountains of the great deep, we
are to understand an eruption of waters from the Southern Ocean." Mr.
Kirwan supposes "that this is pretty evident from such animals as the
elephant and rhinoceros being found in great masses in Siberia, mixed
with different marine substances; whereas no animals or other substances
belonging to the northern regions have been ever found in southern
climates. Had these animals died natural deaths in their proper climate,
their bodies would not have been found in such masses. But that they
were carried no farther northward than Siberia, is evident from there
being no remains of any animals besides those of whales found in the
mountains of Greenland. That this great rush of waters was from the
south or south-east is farther evident, he thinks, from the south and
south-east sides of almost all great mountains being much steeper than
their north or north-west sides, as they necessarily would be if the
force of a great body of water fell upon them in that direction." On a
subject like this men may innocently differ. Many think the first
opinion accords best with the Hebrew text and with the phenomena of
nature, for mountains do not always present the above appearance.

[Genesis 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 7:12</span></span>

The rain was upon the earth - Dr. Lightfoot supposes that the rain began
on the 18th day of the second month, or Marcheshvan, and that it ceased
on the 28th of the third month, Cisleu.

[Genesis 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 7:15</span></span>

And they went in, etc. - It was physically impossible for Noah to have
collected such a vast number of tame and ferocious animals, nor could
they have been retained in their wards by mere natural means. How then
were they brought from various distances to the ark and preserved there?
Only by the power of God. He who first miraculously brought them to Adam
that he might give them their names, now brings them to Noah that he may
preserve their lives. And now we may reasonably suppose that their
natural enmity was so far removed or suspended that the lion might dwell
with the lamb, and the wolf lie down with the kid, though each might
still require his peculiar aliment. This can be no difficulty to the
power of God, without the immediate interposition of which neither the
deluge nor the concomitant circumstances could have taken place.

[Genesis 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 7:16</span></span>

The Lord shut him in - This seems to imply that God took him under his
especial protection, and as he shut Him in, so he shut the Others out.
God had waited one hundred and twenty years upon that generation; they
did not repent; they filled up the measure of their iniquities, and then
wrath came upon them to the uttermost.

[Genesis 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 7:20</span></span>

Fifteen cubits upward - Should any person object to the universality of
the deluge because he may imagine there is not water sufficient to drown
the whole globe in the manner here related, he may find a most
satisfactory answer to all the objections he can raise on this ground in
Mr. Ray's Physico-theological Discourses, 2d edit., 8vo., 1693.

[Genesis 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 7:22</span></span>

Of all that was in the dry land - From this we may conclude that such
animals only as could not live in the water were preserved in the ark.

[Genesis 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 7:24</span></span>

And the waters prevailed upon the earth a hundred and fifty days - The
breaking up of the fountains of the great deep, and the raining forty
days and nights, had raised the waters fifteen cubits above the highest
mountains; after which forty days it appears to have continued at this
height for one hundred and fifty days more. "So," says Dr. Lightfoot,
"these two sums are to be reckoned distinct, and not the forty days
included in the one hundred and fifty; so that when the one hundred and
fifty days were ended, there were six months and ten days of the flood
past." For an improvement of this awful judgment, see the conclusion of
the following chapter, [Gen 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022)
(note).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 8](gen008)

</div>
