<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen007)  [Next](gen009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 8:0</span></span>

At the end of one hundred and fifty days the waters begin to subside,
[Gen 8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001). The ark rests on Mount
Ararat, [Gen 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#004). On the first of the
tenth month the tops of the hills appear, [Gen
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#005). The window opened and the raven
sent out, [Gen 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#006), [Gen
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#007). The dove sent forth, and returns,
[Gen 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#008), [Gen
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#009). The dove sent forth a second
time, and returns with an olive leaf, [Gen
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#010), [Gen
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#011). The dove sent out the third
time, and returns no more, [Gen 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#012).
On the twentieth day of the second month the earth is completely dried,
[Gen 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#013), [Gen
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#014). God orders Noah, his family, and
all the creatures to come out of the ark, [Gen
8:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#015). Noah builds an altar, and
offers sacrifices to the Lord, [Gen
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020). They are accepted; and God
promises that the earth shall not be cursed thus any more,
notwithstanding the iniquity of man, [Gen
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021), [Gen
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022).

[Genesis 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 8:1</span></span>

And God made a wind to pass over the earth - Such a wind as produced a
strong and sudden evaporation. The effects of these winds, which are
frequent in the east, are truly astonishing. A friend of mine, who had
been bathing in the Tigris, not far from the ancient city of Ctesiphon,
and within five days' journey of Bagdad, having on a pair of Turkish
drawers, one of these hot winds, called by the natives samiel, passing
rapidly across the river just as he had got out of the water, so
effectually dried him in a moment, that not one particle of moisture was
left either on his body or in his bathing dress! With such an
electrified wind as this, how soon could God dry the whole of the
earth's surface! An operation something similar to the conversion of
water into its two constituent airs, oxygen and hydrogen, by means of
the galvanic fluid, as these airs themselves may be reconverted into
water by means of the electric spark. See the note [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011). And probably this was the agent
that restored to the atmosphere the quantity of water which it had
contributed to this vast inundation. The other portion of waters, which
had proceeded from the breaking up of the fountains of the great deep,
would of course subside more slowly, as openings were made for them to
run off from the higher lands, and form seas. By the first cause, the
hot wind, the waters were assuaged, and the atmosphere having its due
proportion of vapours restored, the quantity below must be greatly
lessened. By the second, the earth was gradually dried, the waters, as
they found passage, lessening by degrees till the seas and gulfs were
formed, and the earth completely drained. This appears to be what is
intended in the third and fifth verses by the waters decreasing
continually, or, according to the margin, they were in going and
decreasing, [Gen 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#005).

[Genesis 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 8:4</span></span>

The mountains of Ararat - That Ararat was a mountain of Armenia is
almost universally agreed. What is commonly thought to be the Ararat of
the Scriptures, has been visited by many travelers, and on it there are
several monasteries. For a long time the world has been amused with
reports that the remains of the ark were still visible there; but Mr.
Tournefort, a famous French naturalist, who was on the spot, assures us
that nothing of the kind is there to be seen. As there is a great chain
of mountains which are called by this name, it is impossible to
determine on what part of them the ark rested; but the highest part,
called by some the finger mountain, has been fixed on as the most likely
place. These things we must leave, and they are certainly of very little
consequence.

From the circumstance of the resting of the ark on the 17th of the
seventh month, Dr. Lightfoot draws this curious conclusion: That the ark
drew exactly eleven cubits of water. On the first day of the month Ab
the mountain tops were first seen, and then the waters had fallen
fifteen cubits; for so high had they prevailed above the tops of the
mountains. This decrease in the waters took up sixty days, namely, from
the first of Sivan; so that they appear to have abated in the proportion
of one cubit in four days. On the 16th of Sivan they had abated but four
cubits; and yet on the next day the ark rested on one of the hills, when
the waters must have been as yet eleven cubits above it. Thus it appears
that the ark drew eleven cubits of water.

[Genesis 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 8:7</span></span>

He sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro - It is generally
supposed that the raven flew off, and was seen no more, but this meaning
the Hebrew text will not bear; ויצא יצוא ושוב vaiyetse yatso vashob, and
it went forth, going forth and returning. From which it is evident that
she did return, but was not taken into the ark. She made frequent
excursions, and continued on the wing as long as she could, having
picked up such aliment as she found floating on the waters; and then, to
rest herself, regained the ark, where she might perch, though she was
not admitted. Indeed this must be allowed, as it is impossible she could
have continued twenty one days upon the wing, which she must have done
had she not returned. But the text itself is sufficiently determinate.

[Genesis 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 8:8</span></span>

He sent forth a dove - The dove was sent forth thrice; the first time
she speedily returned, having, in all probability, gone but a little way
from the ark, as she must naturally be terrified at the appearance of
the waters. After seven days, being sent out a second time, she returned
with an olive leaf pluckt off, [Gen
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#011), an emblem of the restoration of
peace between God and the earth; and from this circumstance the olive
has been the emblem of peace among all civilized nations. At the end of
the other seven days the dove being sent out the third time, returned no
more, from which Noah conjectured that the earth was now sufficiently
drained, and therefore removed the covering of the ark, which probably
gave liberty to many of the fowls to fly off, which circumstance would
afford him the greater facility in making arrangements for disembarking
the beasts and reptiles, and heavy-bodied domestic fowls, which might
yet remain. See [Gen 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#017).

[Genesis 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 8:14</span></span>

And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day - From this it
appears that Noah was in the ark a complete solar year, or three hundred
and sixty-five days; for he entered the ark the 17th day of the second
month, in the six hundredth year of his life, [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011), [Gen
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#013), and continued in it till the
27th day of the second month, in the six hundredth and first year of his
life, as we see above. The months of the ancient Hebrews were lunar; the
first six consisted of thirty days each, the latter six of twenty-nine;
the whole twelve months making three hundred and fifty-four days: add to
this eleven days, (for though he entered the ark the preceding year on
the seventeenth day of the second month, he did not come out till the
twenty-seventh of the same month in the following year), which make
exactly three hundred and sixty-five days, the period of a complete
solar revolution; the odd hours and minutes, as being fractions of time,
noncomputed, though very likely all included in the account. This year,
according to the Hebrew computation, was the one thousand six hundred
and fifty-seventh year from the creation; but according to the reckoning
of the Septuagint it was the two thousand two hundred and forty-second,
and according to Dr. Hales, the two thousand two hundred and
fifty-sixth. See on [Gen 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#012) (note).

[Genesis 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 8:20</span></span>

Noah builded an altar - As we have already seen that Adam, Cain, and
Abel, offered sacrifices, there can be no doubt that they had altars on
which they offered them; but this, builded by Noah, is certainly the
first on record. It is worthy of remark that, as the old world began
with sacrifice, so also did the new. Religion or the proper mode of
worshipping the Divine Being, is the invention or institution of God
himself; and sacrifice, in the act and design, is the essence of
religion. Without sacrifice, actually offered or implied, there never
was, there never can be, any religion. Even in the heavens, a lamb is
represented before the throne of God as newly slain, [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006), [Rev
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012), [Rev
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013). The design of sacrificing is
two-fold: the slaying and burning of the victim point out, 1st, that the
life of the sinner is forfeited to Divine justice; 2dly, that his soul
deserves the fire of perdition.

The Jews have a tradition that the place where Noah built his altar was
the same in which the altar stood which was built by Adam, and used by
Cain and Abel, and the same spot on which Abraham afterwards offered up
his son Isaac.

The word מזבח mizbach, which we render altar, signifies properly a place
for sacrifice, as the root זבח zabach signifies simply to slay. Altar
comes from the Latin altus, high or elevated, because places for
sacrifice were generally either raised very high or built on the tops of
hills and mountains; hence they are called high places in the
Scriptures; but such were chiefly used for idolatrous purposes.

Burnt-offerings - See the meaning of every kind of offering and
sacrifice largely explained on Leviticus 7:1-38.

[Genesis 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 8:21</span></span>

The Lord smelled a sweet savor - That is, he was well pleased with this
religious act, performed in obedience to his own appointment, and in
faith of the promised Savior. That this sacrifice prefigured that which
was offered by our blessed Redeemer in behalf of the world, is
sufficiently evident from the words of St. Paul, [Eph
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002) : Christ hath loved us, and given
himself for its an offering and a sacrifice to God for a Sweet-Smelling
Savor; where the words οσμην ευωδιας of the apostle are the very words
used by the Septuagint in this place.

I will not again curse the ground - לא אסף lo osiph, I will not add to
curse the ground - there shall not be another deluge to destroy the
whole earth: for the imagination of man's heart, כי ki, Although the
imagination of man's heart should be evil, i.e. should they become
afterwards as evil as they have been before, I will not destroy the
earth by a Flood. God has other means of destruction; and the next time
he visits by a general judgment, Fire is to be the agent. [Pe2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007).

[Genesis 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 8:22</span></span>

While the earth remaineth, seed-time and harvest, etc. - There is
something very expressive in the original, עד כל ימי הארץ od col yemey
haarets, until all the Days of the earth; for God does not reckon its
duration by centuries, and the words themselves afford a strong
presumption that the earth shall not have an endless duration.

Seed-time and harvest - It is very probable that the seasons, which were
distinctly marked immediately after the deluge, are mentioned in this
place; but it is difficult to ascertain them. Most European nations
divide the year into four distinct parts, called quarters or seasons;
but there are six divisions in the text, and probably all intended to
describe the seasons in one of these postdiluvian years, particularly in
that part of the globe, Armenia, where Noah was when God gave him, and
mankind through him, this gracious promise. From the Targum of Jonathan
on this verse we learn that in Palestine their seed-time was in
September, at the autumnal equinox; their harvest in March, at the
vernal equinox; that their winter began in December, at the solstice;
and their summer at the solstice in June.

The Copts begin their autumn on the 15th of September, and extend it to
the 15th of December. Their winter on the 15th of December, and extend
it to the 15th of March. Their spring on the 15th of March, and extend
it to the 15th of June. Their summer on the 15th of June, and extend it
to the 15th of September, assigning to each season three complete
months. Calmet.

There are certainly regions of the earth to which neither this nor our
own mode of division can apply: there are some where summer and winter
appear to divide the whole year, and others where, besides summer,
winter, autumn, and spring, there are distinct seasons that may be
denominated the hot season, the cold season, the rainy season, etc.,
etc.

This is a very merciful promise to the inhabitants of the earth. There
may be a variety in the seasons, but no season essentially necessary to
vegetation shall utterly fail. The times which are of greatest
consequence to the preservation of man are distinctly noted; there shall
be both seed-time and harvest - a proper time to deposit the different
grain in the earth, and a proper time to reap the produce of this seed.

Thus ends the account of the general deluge, its cause, circumstances,
and consequences. An account that seems to say to us, Behold the
goodness and severity of God! Both his justice and long-suffering are
particularly marked in this astonishing event. His justice, in the
punishment of the incorrigibly wicked, and his mercy, in giving them so
fair and full a warning, and in waiting so long to extend his grace to
all who might seek him. Such a convincing proof has the destruction of
the world by water given of the Divine justice, such convincing
testimony of the truth of the sacred writings, that not only every part
of the earth gives testimony of this extraordinary revolution, but also
every nation of the universe has preserved records or traditions of this
awful display of the justice of God.

A multitude of testimonies, collected from the most authentic sources in
the heathen world, I had intended for insertion in this place, but want
of room obliges me to lay them aside. But the state of the earth itself
is a sufficient proof. Every part of it bears unequivocal evidence of
disruption and violence. From the hand of the God of order it never
could have proceeded in its present state. In every part we see marks of
the crimes of men, and of the justice of God. And shall not the living
lay this to heart? Surely God is not mocked; that which a man soweth he
shall reap. He who soweth to the flesh shall of it reap destruction; and
though the plague of water shall no more destroy the earth, yet an equal
if not sorer punishment awaits the world of the ungodly, in the
threatened destruction by fire.

In ancient times almost every thing was typical, and no doubt the ark
among the rest; but of what and in what way farther than revelation
guides, it is both difficult and unsafe to say. It has been considered a
type of our blessed Lord; and hence it has been observed, that "as all
those who were out of the ark perished by the flood, so those who take
not refuge in the meritorious atonement of Christ Jesus must perish
everlastingly." Of all those who, having the opportunity of hearing the
Gospel, refuse to accept of the sacrifice it offers them, this saying is
true; but the parallel is not good. Myriads of those who perished during
the flood probably repented, implored mercy, and found forgiveness; for
God ever delights to save, and Jesus was the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world. And though, generally, the people continued in
carnal security and sensual gratifications till the flood came, there is
much reason to believe that those who during the forty days' rain would
naturally flee to the high lands and tops of the highest mountains,
would earnestly implore that mercy which has never been denied, even to
the most profligate, when under deep humiliation of heart they have
returned to God. And who can say that this was not done by multitudes
while they beheld the increasing flood; or that God, in this last
extremity, had rendered it impossible?

St. Peter, [Pe1 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021), makes the ark a
figure of baptism, and intimates that we are saved by this, as the eight
souls were saved by the ark. But let us not mistake the apostle by
supposing that the mere ceremony itself saves any person; he tells us
that the salvation conveyed through this sacred rite is not the putting
away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward
God; i.e. remission of sins and regeneration by the Holy Spirit, which
are signified by this baptism. A good conscience never existed where
remission of sins had not taken place; and every person knows that it is
God's prerogative to forgive sins, and that no ordinance can confer it,
though ordinances may be the means to convey it when piously and
believingly used.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 9](gen009)

</div>
