<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Habakkuk Index](hab)  
  [Previous](nah003)  [Next](hab002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Habakkuk Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)

[Habakkuk](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hab 1:0</span></span>

The prophet enters very abruptly on his subject, his spirit being
greatly indignant at the rapid progress of vice and impiety, [Hab
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001). Upon which God is introduced
threatening very awful and sudden judgments to be indicted by the
ministry of the Chaldeans, [Hab
1:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005). The Babylonians attribute
their wonderful successes to their idols, [Hab
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011). The prophet then, making a
sudden transition, expostulates with God (probably personating the Jews)
for permitting a nation much more wicked than themselves, as they
supposed, to oppress and devour them, as fishers and foulers do their
prey, [Hab 1:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012).

We know little of this prophet; for what we find in the ancients
concerning him is evidently fabulous, as well as that which appears in
the Apocrypha. He was probably of the tribe of Simeon, and a native of
Beth-zacar. It is very likely that he lived after the destruction of
Nineveh, as he speaks of the Chaldeans, but makes no mention of the
Assyrians. And he appears also to have prophesied before the Jewish
captivity, see [Hab 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005); [Hab
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001); [Hab
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002), [Hab
3:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#016); and therefore Abp. Newcome
thinks he may be placed in the reign of Jehoiakim, between the years 606
b.c. and 598 b.c.

As a poet, Habakkuk holds a high rank among the Hebrew prophets. The
beautiful connection between the parts of his prophecy, its diction,
imagery, spirit, and sublimity, cannot be too much admired; and his
hymn, chap. 3, is allowed by the best judges to be a masterpiece of its
kind. See Lowth's Praelect. xxi., xxviii.

[Habakkuk 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hab 1:1</span></span>

The burden - המשא hammassa signifies not only the burdensome prophecy,
but the prophecy or revelation itself which God presented to the mind of
Habakkuk, and which he saw-clearly perceived, in the light of prophecy
and then faithfully declared, as this book shows. The word signifies an
oracle or revelation in general; but chiefly, one relative to future
calamities.

[Habakkuk 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hab 1:2</span></span>

O Lord, how long shall I cry - The prophet feels himself strongly
excited against the vices which he beheld; and which, it appears from
this verse, he had often declaimed against, but in vain; the people
continued in their vices, and God in his longsuffering.

Habakkuk begins his prophecy under a similar feeling, and nearly in
similar words, as Juvenal did his Satires: -

Semper ego auditor tantum?

Nunquamne reponam?

Vexatus toties rauci Theseide Codri?

Sat. 1:1.

"Shall I always be a hearer only?

Shall I never reply?

So often vexed?"

Of violence - The most unlawful and outrageous acts.

[Habakkuk 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hab 1:3</span></span>

And cause me to behold grievance - עמל amal, labor, toil, distress,
misery, etc., the common fruits of sin.

[Habakkuk 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hab 1:4</span></span>

The law is slacked - They pay no attention to it; it has lost all its
vigor, its restraining and correcting power, it is not executed; right
judgment is never pronounced; and the poor righteous man complains in
vain that he is grievously oppressed by the wicked, and by those in
power and authority. That the utmost depravity prevailed in the land of
Judah is evident from these verses; and can we wonder, then, that God
poured out such signal judgments upon them? When judgment doth not
proceed from the seat of judgment upon earth, it will infallibly go
forth from the throne of judgment in heaven.

[Habakkuk 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hab 1:5</span></span>

Behold ye among the heathen - Instead of בגוים baggoyim, among the
nations or heathen, some critics think we should read בגדים bogedim,
transgressors; and to the same purpose the Septuagint, Syriac, and
Arabic have read; and thus it is quoted by St. Paul [Act
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041). But neither this, nor any
tantamount reading, is found in any of the MSS. yet collated. Newcome
translates, "See, ye transgressors, and behold a wonder, and perish."

I will work a work in your days - As he is speaking of the desolation
that should be produced by the Chaldeans, it follows, as Bp. Newcome has
justly observed, that the Chaldeans invaded Judah whilst those were
living whom the prophet addressed.

Which ye will not believe - Nor did they, after all the declarations of
various prophets. They still supposed that God would not give them up
into the hands of their enemies, though they continued in their
abominations!

It is evident that St. Paul, in the above place, accommodates this
prediction to his own purpose. And possibly this sense might have been
the intention of the Divine Spirit when he first spoke the words to the
prophet; for, as God works in reference to eternity, so he speaks in
reference to the same; and therefore there is an infinity of meaning in
his Word. These appear to be the words of God in answer to the prophet,
in which he declares he will entirely ruin this wicked people by means
of the Chaldeans.

[Habakkuk 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hab 1:6</span></span>

That bitter and hasty nation - Cruel and oppressive in their
disposition; and prompt and speedy in their assaults and conquests.

[Habakkuk 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hab 1:7</span></span>

Their judgment - shall proceed of themselves - By revolting from the
Assyrians, they have become a great nation. Thus, their judgment and
excellence were the result of their own valor. Other meanings are given
to this passage.

[Habakkuk 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hab 1:8</span></span>

Their horses also are swifter than the leopards - The Chaldean cavalry
are proverbial for swiftness, courage, etc. In Jeremiah, [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013), it is said, speaking of
Nebuchadnezzar, "His chariots are as a whirlwind; his horses are swifter
than eagles."

Oppian, speaking of the horses bred about the Euphrates, says, "They are
by nature warhorses, and so intrepid that neither the sight nor the
roaring of the lion appals them; and, besides, they are astonishingly
fleet." The leopard, of all quadrupeds, is allowed to be the swiftest.

The evening wolves - The wolf is remarkable for his quick sight. Aelian
says, Οξυωτεστατον εστι ζωον, και μεντοι, και νυκτος και σεληνης ουκ
ουσης ὁδε ὁρᾳ; "The wolf is a very fleet animal; and, besides, it can
see by night, even when there is no moonlight." Some think the hyena is
meant: it is a swift, cruel, and untameable animal. The other prophets
speak of the Chaldeans in the same way. See [Deu
28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049); [Jer
48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040); [Jer
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#022); [Eze
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#005); [Lam
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#019).

[Habakkuk 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hab 1:9</span></span>

Their faces shall sup up as the east wind - This may be an allusion to
those electrical winds which prevail in that country. Mr. Jackson, in
his overland journey from India, mentions his having bathed in the
Tigris. On his coming out of the river one of those winds passed over
him, and, in a moment, carried off every particle of water that was on
his body and in his bathing dress. So, the Chaldeans shall leave no
substance behind them; their faces, their bare appearance, is the proof
that nothing good shall be left.

Shall gather the captivity as the sand - They shall carry off
innumerable captives.

[Habakkuk 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hab 1:10</span></span>

They shall scoff at the kings - No power shall be able to stand before
them. It will be only as pastime to them to take the strongest places.
They will have no need to build formidable ramparts: by sweeping the
dust together they shall make mounts sufficient to pass over the walls
and take the city.

[Habakkuk 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hab 1:11</span></span>

Then shall his mind change - This is thought to relate to the change
which took place in Nebuchadnezzar, when "a beast's heart was given to
him," and he was "driven from the dwellings of men." And this was
because of his offending - his pride and arrogance; and his attributing
all his success, etc., to his idols.

[Habakkuk 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hab 1:12</span></span>

Art thou not frown everlasting - The idols change, and their worshippers
change and fail: but thou, Jehovah, art eternal; thou canst not change,
and they who trust in thee are safe. Thou art infinite in thy mercy;
therefore, "we shall not die," shall not be totally exterminated.

Thou hast ordained them for judgment - Thou hast raised up the Chaldeans
to correct and punish us; but thou hast not given them a commission to
destroy us totally.

Instead of לא נמות lo namuth, "we shall not die," Houbigant and other
critics, with a little transposition of letters, read אל אמת El emeth,
"God of truth;" and then the verse will stand thus: "Art thou not from
everlasting, O Jehovah, my God, my Holy One? O Jehovah, God of Truth,
thou hast appointed them for judgment." But this emendation, however
elegant, is not supported by any MS.; nor, indeed, by any of the ancient
versions, though the Chaldee has something like it. The common reading
makes a very good sense.

[Habakkuk 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">hab 1:13</span></span>

Thou art of purer eyes - Seeing thou art so pure, and canst not look on
iniquity - it is so abominable - how canst thou bear with them who "deal
treacherously, and hold thy tongue when the wicked devour the
righteous?" All such questions are easily solved by a consideration of
God's ineffable mercy, which leads him to suffer long and be kind. He
has no pleasure in the death of a sinner.

[Habakkuk 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hab 1:14</span></span>

Makest men as the fishes of the sea - Easily are we taken and destroyed.
We have no leader to guide us, and no power to defend ourselves.
Nebuchadnezzar is here represented as a fisherman, who is constantly
casting his nets into the sea, and enclosing multitudes of fishes; and,
being always successful, he sacrifices to his own net - attributes all
his conquests to his own power and prudence; not considering that he is
only like a net that after having been used for a while, shall at last
be thrown by as useless, or burnt in the fire.

[Habakkuk 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">hab 1:16</span></span>

They sacrifice unto their net - He had no God; he cared for none; and
worshipped only his armor and himself. King Mezentius, one of the worst
characters in the Aeneid of Virgil, is represented as invoking his own
right hand and his spear in battle. Aen. 10:773.

Dextra mihi Deus, et telum quod missile libro, Nunc adsint.

"My strong right hand and sword, assert my stroke.

Those only gods Mezentius will invoke."

Dryden.

And Capaneus, in Statius, gives us a more decisive proof of this
self-idolatry. Thebaid, lib. x.

Ades, O mihi dextera tantum

Tu praeses belli, et inevitabile Numen,

Te voco, te solum Superum contemptor adoro.

"Only thou, my right hand, be my aid; I contemn the gods, and adore thee
as the chief in battle, and the irresistible deity."

The poet tells us that, for his impiety, Jupiter slew him with thunder.

This was an ancient idolatry in this country, and has existed till
within about a century. There are relics of it in different parts of
Europe; for when military men bind themselves to accomplish any
particular purpose, it is usual to lay their hand upon their sword: but
formerly they kissed it, when swearing by it. With most heroes, the
sword is both their Bible and their God. To the present day it is a
custom among the Hindoos annually to worship the implements of their
trades. See Ward.

[Habakkuk 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">hab 1:17</span></span>

And not spare continually to slay the nation? - They are running from
conquest to conquest; burning, slaying, sacking, and slaughtering. Like
the fishermen, who throw cast after cast while any fish are to be
caught, so Nebuchadnezzar is destroying one nation after another. This
last sentence explains the allegory of the net.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk Chapter 2](hab002)

</div>
