<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb009)  [Next](heb011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 10:0</span></span>

The insufficiency of the legal sacrifices to take away sin, [Heb
10:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001). The purpose and will of God,
as declared by the Psalmist, relative to the salvation of the world by
the incarnation of Christ; and our sanctification through that will,
[Heb 10:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005). Comparison between the
priesthood of Christ and that of the Jews, [Heb
10:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#011). The new covenant which God
promised to make, and the blessings of it, [Heb
10:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#015). The access which genuine
believers have to the holiest by the blood of Jesus, [Heb
10:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#018). Having a High Priest over
the Church of God, we should have faith, walk uprightly, hold fast our
profession, exhort and help each other, and maintain Christian
communion, [Heb 10:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#021). The danger
and awful consequences of final apostasy, [Heb
10:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#026). In order to our
perseverance, we should often reflect on past mercies, and the support
afforded us in temptations and afflictions; and not cast away our
confidence, for we shall receive the promise if we patiently fulfill the
will of God, [Heb 10:32-37](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032). The just
by faith shall live; but the soul that draws back shall die, [Heb
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038). The apostle's confidence in the
believing Hebrews, [Heb 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#039).

[Hebrews 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 10:1</span></span>

The law, having a shadow of good things to come - A shadow, σκια,
signifies,

1\. Literally, the shade cast from a body of any kind, interposed
between the place on which the shadow is projected, and the sun or
light; the rays of the light not shining on that place, because
intercepted by the opacity of the body, through which they cannot pass.

2\. It signifies, technically, a sketch, rude plan, or imperfect draught
of a building, landscape, man, beast, etc.

3\. It signifies, metaphorically, any faint adumbration, symbolical
expression, imperfect or obscure image of a thing; and is opposed to
σωμα, body, or the thing intended to be thereby defined.

4\. It is used catachrestically among the Greek writers, as umbra is
among the Latins, to signify any thing vain, empty, light, not solid;
thus Philostratus, Vit. Soph., lib. i. cap. 20: Ὁτι σκια και ονειρατα αἱ
ἡδοναι πασαι· All pleasures are but Shadows and dreams. And Cicero, in
Pison., cap. 24: Omnes umbras falsae gloriae consectari. "All pursue the
Shadows of False Glory." And again, De Offic., lib. iii. cap. 17: Nos
veri juris germanaeque justitiae solidam et expressam effigiem nullam
tenemus; umbra et itnaginibus utimur. "We have no solid and express
effigy of true law and genuine justice, but we employ shadows and images
to represent them."

And not the very image - Εικων, image, signifies,

1\. A simple representation, from εικω, I am like.

2\. The form or particular fashion of a thing.

3\. The model according to which any thing is formed.

4\. The perfect image of a thing as opposed to a faint representation.

5\. Metaphorically, a similitude, agreement, or conformity.

The law, with all its ceremonies and sacrifices, was only a shadow of
spiritual and eternal good. The Gospel is the image or thing itself, as
including every spiritual and eternal good.

We may note three things here:

1\. The shadow or general outline, limiting the size and proportions of
the thing to be represented.

2\. The image or likeness completed from this shadow or general outline,
whether represented on paper, canvass, or in statuary,

3\. The person or thing thus represented in its actual, natural state of
existence; or what is called here the very image of the things, αυτην
την εικονα των πραγματων.

Such is the Gospel, when compared with the law; such is Christ, when
compared with Aaron; such is his sacrifice, when compared with the
Levitical offerings; such is the Gospel remission of sins and
purification, when compared with those afforded by the law; such is the
Holy Ghost, ministered by the Gospel, when compared with its types and
shadows in the Levitical service; such the heavenly rest, when compared
with the earthly Canaan. Well, therefore, might the apostle say, The law
was only the shadow of good things to come.

Can never - make the comers thereunto perfect - Cannot remove guilt from
the conscience, or impurity from the heart. I leave preachers to improve
these points.

[Hebrews 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 10:2</span></span>

Would they not have ceased to be offered? - Had they made an effectual
reconciliation for the sins of the world, and contained in their once
offering a plenitude of permanent merit, they would have ceased to be
offered, at least in reference to any individual who had once offered
them; because, in such a case, his conscience would be satisfied that
its guilt had been taken away. But no Jew pretended to believe that even
the annual atonement cancelled his sin before God; yet he continued to
make his offerings, the law of God having so enjoined, because these
sacrifices pointed out that which was to come. They were offered,
therefore, not in consideration of their own efficacy, but as referring
to Christ; See on [Heb 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009) (note).

[Hebrews 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 10:4</span></span>

For it is not possible - Common sense must have taught them that
shedding the blood of bulls and goats could never satisfy Divine
justice, nor take away guilt from the conscience; and God intended that
they should understand the matter so: and this the following quotation
from the Psalmist sufficiently proves.

[Hebrews 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 10:5</span></span>

When he (the Messiah) cometh into the world - Was about to be
incarnated, He saith to God the Father, Sacrifice and offering thou
wouldest not - it was never thy will and design that the sacrifices
under thy own law should be considered as making atonement for sin, they
were only designed to point out my incarnation and consequent
sacrificial death, and therefore a body hast thou prepared me, by a
miraculous conception in the womb of a virgin, according to thy word,
The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent.

A body hast thou prepared me - The quotation in this and the two
following verses is taken from Psalm 40, 6th, 7th, and 8th verses, as
they stand now in the Septuagint, with scarcely any variety of reading;
but, although the general meaning is the same, they are widely different
in verbal expression in the Hebrew. David's words are, אזנים כרית לי
oznayim caritha li, which we translate, My ears hast thou opened; but
they might be more properly rendered, My ears hast thou bored, that is,
thou hast made me thy servant for ever, to dwell in thine own house; for
the allusion is evidently to the custom mentioned, [Exo
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#002), etc.: "If thou buy a Hebrew
servant, six years he shall serve, and in the seventh he shall go out
free; but if the servant shall positively say, I love my master, etc., I
will not go out free, then his master shall bring him to the door post,
and shall bore his ear through with an awl, and he shall serve him for
ever." But how is it possible that the Septuagint and the apostle should
take a meaning so totally different from the sense of the Hebrew? Dr.
Kennicott has a very ingenious conjecture here: he supposes that the
Septuagint and apostle express the meaning of the words as they stood in
the copy from which the Greek translation was made; and that the present
Hebrew text is corrupted in the word אזנים oznayim, ears, which has been
written through carelessness for אז גוה az gevah, Then a Body. The first
syllable אז, Then, is the same in both; and the latter נים, which joined
to אז, makes אזנים oznayim, might have been easily mistaken for גוה
gevah, Body; נ nun, being very like ג gimel; י yod, like ו vau; and ה
he, like final ם mem; especially if the line on which the letters were
written in the MS. happened to be blacker than ordinary, which has often
been a cause of mistake, it might have been easily taken for the under
stroke of the mem, and thus give rise to a corrupt reading: add to this
the root כרה carah, signifies as well to prepare as to open, bore, etc.
On this supposition the ancient copy, translated by the Septuagint, and
followed by the apostle, must have read the text thus: אז גוה כרית לי az
gevah caritha li, σωμα δε κατηρτισω μοι, then a body thou hast prepared
me: thus the Hebrew text, the version of the Septuagint, and the
apostle, will agree in what is known to be an indisputable fact in
Christianity, namely, that Christ was incarnated for the sin of the
world.

The Ethiopic has nearly the same reading; the Arabic has both, A body
hast thou prepared me, and mine ears thou hast opened. But the Syriac,
the Chaldee, and the Vulgate, agree with the present Hebrew text; and
none of the MSS. collated by Kennicott and De Rossi have any various
reading on the disputed words.

It is remarkable that all the offerings and sacrifices which were
considered to be of an atoning or cleansing nature, offered under the
law, are here enumerated by the psalmist and the apostle, to show that
none of them nor all of them could take away sin, and that the grand
sacrifice of Christ was that alone which could do it.

Four kinds are here specified, both by the psalmist and the apostle,
viz.:

Sacrifice, זבח zebach, θυσια·

Offering, מנחה minchah, προσφορα·

Burnt-Offering, עולה olah, ὁλοκαυτωμα·

Sin-Offering, חטאה chataah, περι ἁμαρτιας.

Of all these we may say, with the apostle, it was impossible that the
blood of bulls and goats, etc., should take away sin.

[Hebrews 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 10:6</span></span>

Thou hast had no pleasure - Thou couldst never be pleased with the
victims under the law; thou couldst never consider them as atonements
for sin; as they could never satisfy thy justice, nor make thy law
honorable.

[Hebrews 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 10:7</span></span>

In the volume of the book - במגלת ספר bimgillath sepher, "in the roll of
the book." Anciently, books were written on skins and rolled up. Among
the Romans these were called volumina, from volvo, I roll; and the
Pentateuch, in the Jewish synagogues, is still written in this way.
There are two wooden rollers; on one they roll on, on the other they
roll off, as they proceed in reading. The book mentioned here must be
the Pentateuch, or five books of Moses; for in David's time no other
part of Divine revelation had been committed to writing. This whole book
speaks about Christ, and his accomplishing the will of God; not only in,
The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the serpent, and, In thy
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, but in all the
sacrifices and sacrificial rites mentioned in the law.

To do thy will - God willed not the sacrifices under the law, but he
willed that a human victim of infinite merit should be offered for the
redemption of mankind. That there might be such a victim, a body was
prepared for the eternal Logos; and in that body he came to do the will
of God, that is, to suffer and die for the sins of the world.

[Hebrews 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 10:9</span></span>

He taketh away the first - The offerings, sacrifices, burnt-offerings,
and sacrifices for sin, which were prescribed by the law.

That he may establish the second - The offering of the body of Jesus
once for all. It will make little odds in the meaning if we say, he
taketh away the first covenant, that he may establish the second
covenant; he takes away the first dispensation, that he may establish
the second; he takes away the law, that he may establish the Gospel. In
all these cases the sense is nearly the same: I prefer the first.

[Hebrews 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 10:10</span></span>

By the which will we are sanctified - Closing in with this so solemnly
declared Will of God, that there is no name given under heaven among
men, by which we can be saved, but Jesus the Christ, we believe in him,
find redemption in his blood, and are sanctified unto God through the
sacrificial offering of his body.

1\. Hence we see that the sovereign Will of God is, that Jesus should be
incarnated; that he should suffer and die, or, in the apostle's words,
taste death for every man; that all should believe on him, and be saved
from their sins: for this is the Will of God, our sanctification.

2\. And as the apostle grounds this on the words of the psalm, we see
that it is the Will of God that that system shall end; for as the
essence of it is contained in its sacrifices, and God says he will not
have these, and has prepared the Messiah to do his will, i.e. to die for
men, hence it necessarily follows, from the psalmist himself, that the
introduction of the Messiah into the world is the abolition of the law,
and that his sacrifice is that which shall last for ever.

[Hebrews 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 10:11</span></span>

Every priest standeth - The office of the Jewish priest is here compared
with the office of our High Priest. The Jewish priest stands daily at
the altar, like a servant ministering, repeating the same sacrifices;
our High Priest offered himself once for all, and sat down at the right
hand of God, as the only-begotten Son and Heir of all things, [Heb
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#012). This continual offering argued
the imperfection of the sacrifices. Our Lord's once offering, proves his
was complete.

[Hebrews 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 10:13</span></span>

Till his enemies be made his footstool - Till all that oppose his high
priesthood and sacrificial offering shall be defeated, routed, and
confounded; and acknowledge, in their punishment, the supremacy of his
power as universal and eternal King, who refused to receive him as their
atoning and sanctifying Priest. There is also an oblique reference here
to the destruction of the Jews, which was then at hand; for Christ was
about to take away the second with an overwhelming flood of desolations.

[Hebrews 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 10:14</span></span>

For by one offering - His death upon the cross.

He hath perfected for ever - He has procured remission of sins and
holiness; fur it is well observed here, and in several parts of this
epistle, that τελειοω, to make perfect, is the same as αφεσιν ἁμαρτιων
ποιεω, to procure remission of sins.

Them that are sanctified - Τους ἁγιαζομενους· Them that have received
the sprinkling of the blood of this offering. These, therefore,
receiving redemption through that blood, have no need of any other
offering; as this was a complete atonement, purification, and title to
eternal glory.

[Hebrews 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">heb 10:15</span></span>

The Holy Ghost - is a witness to us - The words are quoted from [Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033), [Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034), and here we are assured that
Jeremiah spoke by the inspiration of the Spirit of God. Had said before
- See [Heb 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010), [Heb
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#012), and the notes there.

[Hebrews 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">heb 10:18</span></span>

Now where remission of these is - In any case, where sin is once
pardoned, there is no farther need of a sin-offering; but every believer
on Christ has his sin blotted out, and therefore needs no other offering
for that sin.

"If," says Dr. Macknight, "after remission is granted to the sinner,
there is no need of any more sacrifice for sin; and if Christ, by
offering himself once, has perfected for ever the sanctified, [Heb
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#014), the sacrifice of the mass, as
it is called, about which the Romish clergy employ themselves so
incessantly, and to which the papists trust for the pardon of their
sins, has no foundation in Scripture. Nay, it is an evident impiety, as
it proceeds upon the supposition that the offering of the body of Christ
once is not sufficient to procure the pardon of sin, but must be
frequently repeated. If they reply that their mass is only the
representation and commemoration of the sacrifice of Christ, they give
up the cause, and renounce an article of their faith, established by the
council of Trent, which, in session xxii. can. 1, 3, declared the
sacrifice of the mass to be a true and propitiatory sacrifice for sin. I
say, give up the cause; for the representation and commemoration of a
sacrifice is not a sacrifice. Farther, it cannot be affirmed that the
body of Christ is offered in the mass, unless it can be said that, as
often as it is offered, Christ has suffered death; for the apostle says
expressly, [Heb 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#025), [Heb
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026), that if Christ offered himself
often, he must often have suffered since the foundation of the world."
Let him disprove this who can.

[Hebrews 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">heb 10:19</span></span>

Having therefore, brethren, boldness - The apostle, having now finished
the doctrinal part of his epistle, and fully shown the superiority of
Christ to all men and angels, and the superiority of his priesthood to
that of Aaron and his successors, the absolute inefficacy of the Jewish
sacrifices to make atonement for sin, and the absolute efficacy of that
of Christ to make reconciliation of man to God, proceeds now to show
what influence these doctrines should have on the hearts and lives of
those who believe in his merits and death.

Boldness to enter - Παρῥησιαν εις την εισοδον· Liberty, full access to
the entrance of the holy place, των ἁγιων· This is an allusion to the
case of the high priest going into the holy of holies. He went with fear
and trembling, because, if he had neglected the smallest item prescribed
by the law, he could expect nothing but death. Genuine believers can
come even to the throne of God with confidence, as they carry into the
Divine presence the infinitely meritorious blood of the great atonement;
and, being justified through that blood, they have a right to all the
blessings of the eternal kingdom.

[Hebrews 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">heb 10:20</span></span>

By a new and living way - It is a new way; no human being had ever
before entered into the heaven of heavens; Jesus in human nature was the
first, and thus he has opened the way to heaven to mankind, his own
resurrection and ascension to glory being the proof and pledge of ours.

The way is called ὁδον προσφατον και ζωσαν, new or fresh, and living.
This is evidently an allusion to the blood of the victim newly shed,
uncoagulated, and consequently proper to be used for sprinkling. The
blood of the Jewish victims was fit for sacrificial purposes only so
long as it was warm and fluid, and might be considered as yet possessing
its vitality; but when it grew cold, it coagulated, lost its vitality,
and was no longer proper to be used sacrificially. Christ is here, in
the allusion, represented as newly slain, and yet living; the blood ever
considered as flowing and giving life to the world. The way by the old
covenant neither gave life, nor removed the liability to death. The way
to peace and reconciliation, under the old covenant, was through the
dead bodies of the animals slain; but Christ is living, and ever liveth,
to make intercession for us; therefore he is a new and living way.

In the Choephorae of Aeschylus, ver. 801, there is an expression like
this of the apostle: -

Αγετε, των παλαι πεπραγμενων

Αυσασθ' ἁιμα προσφατοις δικαις.

Agite, olim venditorum

Solvite sanguinem recenti vindicta.

This way, says Dr. Owen, is new,

1\. Because it was but newly made and prepared.

2\. Because it belongs unto the new covenant.

3\. Because it admits of no decays, but is always new, as to its
efficacy and use, as in the day of its first preparation.

4\. The way of the tabernacle waxed old, and so was prepared for a
removal; but the Gospel way of salvation shall never be altered, nor
changed, nor decay; it is always new, and remains for ever.

It is also called ζωσαν, living,

1\. In opposition to the way into the holiest under the tabernacle,
which was by death; nothing could be done in it without the blood of a
victim.

2\. It was the cause of death to any who might use it, except the high
priest himself; and he could have access to it only one day in the year.

3\. It is called living, because it has a spiritual vital efficacy in
our access to God.

4\. It is living as to its effects; it leads to life, and infallibly
brings those who walk in it unto life eternal.

Through the veil - As the high priest lifted up or drew aside the veil
that separated the holy from the most holy place, in order that he might
have access to the Divine Majesty; and as the veil of the temple was
rent from the top to the bottom at the crucifixion of Christ, to show
that the way to the holiest was then laid open; so we must approach the
throne through the mediation of Christ, and through his sacrificial
death. His pierced side is the way to the holiest. Here the veil - his
humanity, is rent, and the kingdom of heaven opened to all believers.

[Hebrews 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">heb 10:21</span></span>

A high priest over the house of God - The house or family of God is the
Christian Church, or all true believers in the Lord Jesus. Over this
Church, house, or family, Christ is the High Priest - in their behalf he
offers his own blood, and their prayers and praises; and as the high
priest had the ordering of all things that appertained to the house and
worship of God, so has Christ in the government of his Church. This
government he never gave into other hands. As none can govern and
preserve the world but God, so none can govern and save the Church but
the Lord Jesus: He is over the house; He is its President; he instructs,
protects, guides, feeds, defends, and saves the flock. Those who have
such a President may well have confidence; for with him is the fountain
of life, and he has all power in the heavens and in the earth.

[Hebrews 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">heb 10:22</span></span>

Let us draw near - Let us come with the blood of our sacrifice to the
throne of God: the expression is sacrificial.

With a true heart - Deeply convinced of our need of help, and truly in
earnest to obtain it.

In full assurance of faith - Being fully persuaded that God will accept
us for the sake of his Son, and that the sacrificial death of Christ
gives us full authority to expect every blessing we need.

Having our hearts sprinkled - Not our bodies, as was the case among the
Hebrews, when they had contracted any pollution, for they were to be
sprinkled with the water of separation, see [Num
19:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#002); but our hearts, sprinkled by
the cleansing efficacy of the blood of Christ, without which we cannot
draw nigh to God.

From an evil conscience - Having that deep sense of guilt which our
conscience felt taken all away, and the peace and love of God shed
abroad ill our hearts by the Holy Ghost given unto us.

Our bodies washed with pure water - The high priest, before he entered
into the inner tabernacle, or put on his holy garments, was to wash his
flesh in water, [Lev 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#004), and the
Levites were to be cleansed the same way, [Num
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007). The apostle probably alludes to
this in what he says here, though it appears that he refers principally
to baptisms, the washing by which was an emblem of the purification of
the soul by the grace and Spirit of Christ; but it is most likely that
it is to the Jewish baptisms, and not the Christian, that the apostle
alludes.

[Hebrews 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">heb 10:23</span></span>

Let us hold fast the profession of our faith - The word ὁμολογια, from
ὁμου, together, and λογος, a word, implies that general consent that was
among Christians on all the important articles of their faith and
practice; particularly their acknowledgment of the truth of the Gospel,
and of Jesus Christ, as the only victim for sin, and the only Savior
from it. If the word washed above refer to Christian baptism in the ease
of adults, then the profession is that which the baptized then made of
their faith in the Gospel; and of their determination to live and die in
that faith.

The various readings on this clause are many in the MSS., etc. Της
ελπιδος την ὁμολογιαν, the confession of our Hope; D\*, two of the
Itala, Vulgate, Erpen's Arabic, and the Ethiopic. Ὁμολογιαν της πιστεως,
the confession of Faith; one of the Barberini MSS. and two others. This
is the reading which our translators have followed; but it is of very
little authority. Την επαγγελιαν της ελπιδος, the promise of Hope; St.
Chrysostom. Την ελπιδα της ὁμολογιας, the Hope of our Profession; one of
Petavius's MSS. But among all these, the confession or profession of
Hope is undoubtedly the genuine reading. Now, among the primitive
Christians, the hope which they professed was the resurrection of the
body, and everlasting life; every thing among these Christians was done
and believed in reference to a future state; and for the joy that this
set before them, they, like their Master, endured every cross, and
despised all shame: they expected to be with God, through Christ; this
hope they professed to have; and they confessed boldly and publicly the
faith on which this hope was built. The apostle exhorts them to hold
fast this confession without wavering - never to doubt the declarations
made to them by their Redeemer, but having the full assurance of faith
that their hearts were sprinkled from an evil conscience, that they had
found redemption in the blood of the lamb, they might expect to be
glorified with their living Head in the kingdom of their Father.

He is faithful that promised - The eternal life, which is the object of
your hope, is promised to you by him who cannot lie; as he then is
faithful who has given you this promise, hold fast the profession of
your hope.

[Hebrews 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">heb 10:24</span></span>

And let us consider one another - Κατανοωμεν· Let us diligently and
attentively consider each other's trials, difficulties, and weaknesses;
feel for each other, and excite each other to an increase of love to God
and man; and, as the proof of it, to be fruitful in good works. The
words εις παροξυσμον, to the provocation, are often taken in a good
sense, and signify excitement, stirring up, to do any thing laudable,
useful, honorable, or necessary. Xenophon, Cyrop., lib. vi., page 108,
speaking of the conduct of Cyrus towards his officers, says: Και τουτους
επαινων τε, παρωξυνε, και χαριζομενος αυτοις ὁ τι δυναιτο. "He by
praises and gifts excited them as much as possible." See the note on
[Act 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039), where the subject is
farther considered.

[Hebrews 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">heb 10:25</span></span>

Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves - Επισυναγωγην ἑαυτων. Whether
this means public or private worship is hard to say; but as the word is
but once more used in the New Testament, ([Th2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001)), and there means the gathering
together of the redeemed of the Lord at the day of judgment, it is as
likely that it means here private religious meetings, for the purpose of
mutual exhortation: and this sense appears the more natural here,
because it is evident that the Church was now in a state of persecution,
and therefore their meetings were most probably held in private. For
fear of persecution, it seems as if some had deserted these meetings,
καθως εθος τισιν, as the custom of certain persons is. They had given up
these strengthening and instructive means, and the others were in danger
of following their example.

The day approaching - Την ἡμεραν· That day - the time in which God would
come and pour out his judgments on the Jewish nation. We may also apply
it to the day of death and the day of judgment. Both of these are
approaching to every human being. He who wishes to be found ready will
carefully use every means of grace, and particularly the communion of
saints, if there be even but two or three in the place where he lives,
who statedly meet together in the name of Christ. Those who relinquish
Christian communion are in a backsliding state; those who backslide are
in danger of apostasy. To prevent this latter, the apostle speaks the
awful words following. See at the end of this chapter ([Heb
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#039) (note)).

[Hebrews 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">heb 10:26</span></span>

For if we sin wilfully - If we deliberately, for fear of persecution or
from any other motive, renounce the profession of the Gospel and the
Author of that Gospel, after having received the knowledge of the truth
so as to be convinced that Jesus is the promised Messiah, and that he
had sprinkled our hearts from an evil conscience; for such there
remaineth no sacrifice for sins; for as the Jewish sacrifices are
abolished, as appears by the declaration of God himself in the fortieth
Psalm, and Jesus being now the only sacrifice which God will accept,
those who reject him have none other; therefore their case must be
utterly without remedy. This is the meaning of the apostle, and the case
is that of a deliberate apostate - one who has utterly rejected Jesus
Christ and his atonement, and renounced the whole Gospel system. It has
nothing to do with backsliders in our common use of that term. A man may
be overtaken in a fault, or he may deliberately go into sin, and yet
neither renounce the Gospel, nor deny the Lord that bought him. His case
is dreary and dangerous, but it is not hopeless; no case is hopeless but
that of the deliberate apostate, who rejects the whole Gospel system,
after having been saved by grace, or convinced of the truth of the
Gospel. To him there remaineth no more sacrifice for sin; for there was
but the One, Jesus, and this he has utterly rejected.

[Hebrews 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">heb 10:27</span></span>

A certain fearful looking for of judgment - From this it is evident that
God will pardon no man without a sacrifice for sin; for otherwise, as
Dr. Macknight argues, it would not follow, from there remaining to
apostates no more sacrifice for sin, that there must remain to them a
dreadful expectation of judgment.

And fiery indignation - Και πυρος ζηλος· A zeal, or fervor of fire;
something similar to the fire that came down from heaven and destroyed
Korah and his company; [Num 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#035).

Probably the apostle here refers to the case of the unbelieving Jews in
general, as in chap. 6 to the dreadful judgment that was coming upon
them, and the burning up their temple and city with fire. These people
had, by the preaching of Christ and his apostles, received the knowledge
of the truth. It was impossible that they could have witnessed his
miracles and heard his doctrine without being convinced that he was the
Messiah, and that their own system was at an end; but they rejected this
only sacrifice at a time when God abolished their own: to that nation,
therefore, there remained no other sacrifice for sin; therefore the
dreadful judgment came, the fiery indignation was poured out, and they,
as adversaries, were devoured by it.

[Hebrews 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">heb 10:28</span></span>

He that despised Moses' law - Αθετησας· He that rejected it, threw it
aside, and denied its Divine authority by presumptuous sinning, died
without mercy - without any extenuation or mitigation of punishment;
[Num 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030).

Under two or three witnesses - That is, when convicted by the testimony
of two or three respectable witnesses. See [Deu
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006).

[Hebrews 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">heb 10:29</span></span>

Of how much sorer punishment - Such offenses were trifling in comparison
of this, and in justice the punishment should be proportioned to the
offense.

Trodden under foot the Son of God - Treated him with the utmost contempt
and blasphemy.

The blood of the covenant - an unholy thing - The blood of the covenant
means here the sacrificial death of Christ, by which the new covenant
between God and man was ratified, sealed, and confirmed. And counting
this unholy, or common, κοινον, intimates that they expected nothing
from it in a sacrificial or atoning way. How near to those persons, and
how near to their destruction, do they come in the present day who
reject the atoning blood, and say, "that they expect no more benefit
from the blood of Christ than they do from that of a cow or a sheep!" Is
not this precisely the crime of which the apostle speaks here, and to
which he tells us God would show no mercy?

Despite unto the Spirit of grace? - Hath insulted the Spirit of grace.
The apostle means the Holy Spirit, whose gifts were bestowed in the
first age on believers for the confirmation of the Gospel. See [Heb
6:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004). Wherefore, if one apostatized
in the first age, after having been witness to these miraculous gifts,
much more after having possessed them himself, he must, like the scribes
and Pharisees, have ascribed them to evil spirits; than which a greater
indignity could not be done to the Spirit of God. Macknight. This is
properly the sin against the Holy Ghost, which has no forgiveness.

[Hebrews 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">heb 10:30</span></span>

Vengeance belongeth unto me - This is the saying of God, [Deu
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035), in reference to the idolatrous
Gentiles, who were the enemies of his people; and is here with propriety
applied to the above apostates, who, being enemies to God's ordinances,
and Christ's ministry and merits, must also be enemies to Christ's
people; and labor for the destruction of them, and the cause in which
they are engaged.

The Lord shall judge his people - That is, he shall execute judgment for
them; for this is evidently the sense in which the word is used in the
place from which the apostle quotes, [Deu
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036) : For the Lord shall judge his
people, and repent himself for his servants, when he seeth that their
power is gone. So God will avenge and vindicate the cause of
Christianity by destroying its enemies, as he did in the case of the
Jewish people, whom he destroyed from being a nation, and made them a
proverb of reproach and monuments of his wrathful indignation to the
present day.

[Hebrews 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">heb 10:31</span></span>

It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God - To fall
into the hands of God is to fall under his displeasure; and he who lives
for ever can punish for ever. How dreadful to have the displeasure of an
eternal, almighty Being to rest on the soul for ever! Apostates, and all
the persecutors and enemies of God's cause and people, may expect the
heaviest judgments of an incensed Deity: and these, not for a time, but
through eternity.

[Hebrews 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">heb 10:32</span></span>

But call to remembrance - It appears from this, and indeed from some
parts of the Gospel history, that the first believers in Judea were
greatly persecuted; our Lord's crucifixion, Stephen's martyrdom, the
persecution that arose after the death of Stephen, [Act
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001), Herod's persecution, [Act
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001), in which James was killed, and
the various persecutions of St. Paul, sufficiently show that this
disposition was predominant among that bad people.

A great fight of afflictions - Πολλην αθλησιν παθηματων· A great combat
or contention of sufferings. Here we have an allusion to the combats at
the Grecian games, or to exhibitions of gladiators at the public
spectacles; and an intimation how honorable it was to contend for the
faith once delivered to the saints, and to overcome through the blood of
the Lamb, and their own testimony.

[Hebrews 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">heb 10:33</span></span>

Ye were made a gazing-stock - Θεατριζομενοι· Ye were exhibited as wild
beasts and other shows at the theatres. See the note on [Co1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009), where all this is illustrated.

Companions of them that were so used - It appears, from [Th1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#014), [Th1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#015), that the Churches of God in
Judea were greatly persecuted, and that they believed with courage and
constancy in their persecutions. When any victim of persecuting rage was
marked out, the rest were prompt to take his part, and acknowledge
themselves believers in the same doctrine for which he suffered. This
was a noble spirit; many would have slunk into a corner, and put off the
marks of Christ, that they might not be exposed to affliction on this
account.

[Hebrews 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">heb 10:34</span></span>

Ye had compassion of me in my bonds - Συνεπαθησατε· Ye suffered with me,
ye sympathized with me, when bound for the testimony of Jesus. This
probably refers to the sympathy they showed towards him, and the help
they afforded him, during his long imprisonment in Caesarea and
Jerusalem. But instead of τοις δεσμοις μου, my bonds, τοις δεσμιοις, the
prisoners, is the reading of AD, and several others, both the Syriac,
the Arabic of Erpen, the Coptic, Armenian, Vulgate, some of the Itala,
and several of the Greek fathers. This reading appears to be so well
supported, that Griesbach has admitted it into the text. If it be
genuine, it shows that there had been, and perhaps were then, several
bound for the testimony of Jesus, and that the Church in Judea had shown
its attachment to Christ by openly acknowledging these prisoners, and
ministering to them.

Took joyfully the spoiling of your goods - They were deprived of their
inheritances, turned out of their houses, and plundered of their goods;
they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented. To suffer such persecution patiently was great; to
endure it without a murmur was greater; to rejoice in it was greatest of
all. But how could they do all this? The next clause informs us.

Knowing in yourselves - They had the fullest evidence that they were the
children of God, the Spirit itself bearing this witness to their
spirits; and if children than heirs, heirs of God and joint heirs with
Christ. They knew that heaven was their portion, and that to it they had
a sure right and indefeasible title by Christ Jesus. This accounts, and
this alone can account, for their taking joyfully the spoiling of their
goods: they had Christ in their hearts; they knew that they were his
children, and that they had a kingdom, but that kingdom was not of this
world. They had the support they needed, and they had it in the time in
which they needed it most.

[Hebrews 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">heb 10:35</span></span>

Cast not away therefore your confidence - Την παρῥησιαν ὑμων· Your
liberty of access to God; your title and right to approach his throne;
your birthright as his sons and daughters; and the clear evidence you
have of his favor, which, if you be not steady and faithful, you must
lose. Do not throw it away, μη αποβαλητε· neither men nor devils can
take it from you, and God will never deprive you of it if you continue
faithful. There is a reference here to cowardly soldiers, who throw away
their shields, and run away from the battle. This is your shield, your
faith in Christ, which gives you the knowledge of salvation; keep it,
and it will keep you.

The Lacedemonian women, when they presented the shields to their sons
going to battle, were accustomed to say: Η ταν, η επι τας· "Either bring
this back, or be brought back upon it;" alluding to the custom of
bringing back a slain soldier on his own shield, a proof that he had
preserved it to the last, and had been faithful to his country. They
were accustomed also to excite their courage by delivering to them their
fathers' shields with the following short address. Ταυτην ὁ πατηρ σοι
αει εσωζε· και συ ουν ταυταν σωζε, η μη εσο· "This shield thy father
always preserved; do thou preserve it also, or perish;" Lacaenarum
Apophthegmata, Plut. Opera, a Wittenbach, vol. i. p. 682. Thus spake the
Lacedemonian mothers to their sons; and what say the oracles of God to
us? Μη αποβαλητε την παρῥησιαν ὑμων· Cast not away your confession of
faith. This is your shield; keep it, and it will ever be your sure
defense; for by it you will quench every fiery dart of the wicked one.
The Church of Christ speaks this to all her sons, and especially to
those employed in the work of the ministry. Of this shield, of this
glorious system of salvation by Jesus Christ, illustrated and defended
in this work, I say to each of my children: Ταυτην ὁ πατηρ σοι αει
εσωζε· και συ ουν ταυταν σωζε, η μη εσο· This faith, thy father, by the
grace of God, hath always kept; keep thou it also, or thou must expect
to perish! May this be received both as a warning and encouragement!

Great recompense of reward - No less than God's continual approbation;
the peace that passeth all understanding ruling the heart here; and the
glories of heaven as an eternal portion. Conscientiously keep the
shield, and all these shall be thine. This will be thy reward; but
remember that it is the mercy of God that gives it.

[Hebrews 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">heb 10:36</span></span>

Ye have need of patience - Having so great a fight of sufferings to pass
through, and they of so long continuance. God furnishes the grace; you
must exercise it. The grace or principle of patience comes from God; the
use and exercise of that grace is of yourselves. Here ye must be workers
together with God. Patience and perseverance are nearly the same.

Have done the will of God - By keeping the faith, and patiently
suffering for it.

[Hebrews 10:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">heb 10:37</span></span>

For yet a little while - Ετι γαρ μικρον ὁσον· For yet a very little
time. In a very short space of time the Messiah will come, and execute
judgment upon your rebellious country. This is determined, because they
have filled up the measure of their iniquity, and their destruction
slumbereth not. The apostle seems to refer to [Hab
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003), [Hab
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004), and accommodates the words to his
own purpose.

[Hebrews 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">heb 10:38</span></span>

Now the just shall live by faith - Ὁ δε δικαιος εκ πιστεως ζησεται· But
the just by faith, i.e. he who is justified by faith, shall live - shall
be preserved when this overflowing scourge shall come. See this meaning
of the phrase vindicated, [Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017).
And it is evident, both from this text, and [Gal
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011), that it is in this sense that
the apostle uses it.

But if any man draw back - Και εαν ὑποστειληται· But if he draw back;
he, the man who is justified by faith; for it is of him, and none other,
that the text speaks. The insertion of the words any man, if done to
serve the purpose of a particular creed, is a wicked perversion of the
words of God. They were evidently intended to turn away the relative
from the antecedent, in order to save the doctrine of final and
unconditional perseverance; which doctrine this text destroys.

My soul shall have no pleasure in him - My very heart shall be opposed
to him who makes shipwreck of faith and a good conscience. The word
ὑποστελλειν signifies, not only to draw back, but to slink away and hide
through fear. In this sense it is used by the very best Greek writers,
as well as by Josephus and Philo. As dastards and cowards are hated by
all men, so those that slink away from Christ and his cause, for fear of
persecution or secular loss, God must despise; in them he cannot
delight; and his Spirit, grieved with their conduct, must desert their
hearts, and lead them to darkness and hardness.

[Hebrews 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">heb 10:39</span></span>

But we are not of them who draw back - Ουκ εσμεν ὑποστολης - , αλλα
πιστεως· "We are not the cowards, but the courageous." I have no doubt
of this being the meaning of the apostle, and the form of speech
requires such a translation; it occurs more than once in the New
Testament. So, [Gal 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#007) : Οἱ εκ
πιστεως, they who are of the faith, rather the faithful, the believers;
[Rom 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026) : Ὁ εκ πιστεως, the
believer; [Rom 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008) : Οἱ εξ εριθειας,
the contentious; in all which places the learned reader will find that
the form of speech is the same. We are not cowards who slink away, and
notwithstanding meet destruction; but we are faithful, and have our
souls saved alive. The words περιποιησις ψυχης signify the preservation
of the life. See the note, [Eph 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014).
He intimates that, notwithstanding the persecution was hot, yet they
should escape with their lives.

1\. It is very remarkable, and I have more than once called the reader's
attention to it, that not one Christian life was lost in the siege and
destruction of Jerusalem. Every Jew perished, or was taken captive; all
those who had apostatized, and slunk away from Christianity, perished
with them: all the genuine Christians escaped with their lives. This
very important information, which casts light on many passages in the
New Testament, and manifests the grace and providence of God in a very
conspicuous way, is given both by Eusebius and Epiphanius. I shall
adduce their words: "When the whole congregation of the Church in
Jerusalem, according to an oracle given by revelation to the approved
persons among them before the war, κατα τινα χρησμον τοις αυτοθι
δοκιμοις δι' αποκαλυψεως δοθεντα προ του πολεμου, μεταναστηναι της
πολεως, και τινα της περαιας πολιν οικειν κεκελευσμενου, Πελλαν αυτην
ονομαζουσιν, were commanded to depart from the city, and inhabit a
certain city which they call Pella, beyond Jordan, to which, when all
those who believed in Christ had removed from Jerusalem, and when the
saints had totally abandoned the royal city which is the metropolis of
the Jews; then the Divine vengeance seized them who had dealt so
wickedly with Christ and his apostles, and utterly destroyed that wicked
and abominable generation." Euseb. Hist. Eccles, l. iii. c. v. vol. i.
p. 93. Edit. a Reading.

St. Epiphanius, in Haeres. Nazaren, c. 7, says: "The Christians who
dwelt in Jerusalem, being forewarned by Christ of the approaching siege,
removed to Pella."

The same, in his book De Ponderibus et Mensuris, says: "The disciples of
Christ being warned by an angel, removed to Pella; and afterwards, when
Adrian rebuilt Jerusalem, and called it after his own name, Aelia
Colonia, they returned thither." As those places in Epiphanius are of
considerable importance, I shall subjoin the original: Εκειθεν γαρ ἡ
αρχη γεγονε μετα την απο των Ἱεροσολυμων μεταστασιν, παντων των μαθητων
των εν Πελλῃ ῳκηκοτων, Χριστου φησαντος καταλειψαι τα Ἱεροσολυμα, και
αναχωρησαι, επειδη ημελλε πασχειν πολιορκιαν. Epiph. adver. Haeres., l.
i. c. 7, vol. i. p. 123. Edit. Par. 1622. The other place is as follows:
Ἡνικα γαρ εμελλεν ἡ πολις ἁλισκεσθαι ὑπο των Ῥωμαιων, προεχρηματισθησαν
ὑπο Αγγελου παντες οἱ μαθηται μεταστηναι απο της πολεως, μελλουσης αρδην
απολλυσθαι. Οἱ τινες και μετανασται γενομενοι ῳκησαν εν Πελλῃ - περαν
του Ιορδανου, ἡ τις εκ Δεκαπολεως λεγεται ειναι. Ibid. De Pon. et Mens.,
vol. ii. p. 171.

These are remarkable testimonies, and should be carefully preserved.
Pella, it appears, was a city of Coelesyria, beyond Jordan, in the
district of Decapolis. Thus it is evident that these Christians held
fast their faith, preserved their shields, and continued to believe to
the saving of their lives as well as to the saving of their souls. As
the apostle gives several hints of the approaching destruction of
Jerusalem, it is likely that this is the true sense in which the words
above are to be understood.

2\. I have already said a little, from [Heb
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025), on the importance of social
worship. Public worship is not of less consequence. Were it not for
public, private worship would soon be at an end. To this, under God, the
Church of Christ owes its being and its continuance. Where there is no
public worship there is no religion. It is by this that God is
acknowledged; and he is the universal Being; and by his bounty and
providence all live; consequently, it is the duty of every intelligent
creature publicly to acknowledge him, and offer him that worship which
himself has prescribed in his word. The ancient Jews have some good
maxims on this subject which may be seen in Schoettgen. I shall quote a
few.

In Berachoth, fol. 8, it is written: "Rabbi Levi said, He who has a
synagogue in his city, and does not go thither to pray, shall be
esteemed a bad citizen," or a bad neighbor. And to this they apply the
words of the prophet, [Jer 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014) :
Thus saith the Lord against all my evil neighbors - behold, I will pluck
them out of their land.

In Mechilta, fol. 48: "Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Jacob, said," speaking
as from God, "If thou wilt come to my house, I will go to thy house; but
if thou wilt not come to my house, I will not enter thy house. The place
that my heart loveth, to that shall my feet go." We may safely add, that
those who do not frequent the house of God can never expect his presence
or blessing in their own.

In Taanith, fol. 11, it is said that "to him who separates himself from
the congregation shall two angels come, and lay their hands upon his
head and say, This man, who separates himself from the congregation,
shall not see the comfort which God grants to his afflicted Church." The
wisest and best of men have always felt it their duty and their interest
to worship God in public. As there is nothing more necessary, so there
is nothing more reasonable; he who acknowledges God in all his ways may
expect all his steps to be directed. The public worship of God is one
grand line of distinction between the atheist and the believer. He who
uses not public worship has either no God, or has no right notion of his
being; and such a person, according to the rabbins, is a bad neighbor;
it is dangerous to live near him, for neither he nor his can be under
the protection of God. No man should be forced to attend a particular
place of worship, but every man should be obliged to attend some place;
and he who has any fear of God will not find it difficult to get a place
to his mind.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 11](heb011)

</div>
