<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](dan012)  [Next](hos001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to the Book of the Prophet Hosea

Hosea, the son of Beeri, is the first of the minor prophets. Epiphanius
says that he was of the town of Belemoth, in the tribe of Issachar;
which is no other, in all probability, than Beelmeon, towards Esdraelon,
in this tribe. The rabbins say that Bura was his father, who is
mentioned in the Chronicles, and was prince of the tribe of Reuben at
the time when Tiglath-pileser carried some of the tribes of Israel into
captivity. But if it be so, Hosea must be said to be of the tribe of
Reuben; and a native of Beelmeon, beyond Jordan. This prophet lived in
the kingdom of Samaria; and his prophecies for the most part have a view
to this state, though there are likewise some particular things which
concern the kingdom of Judah.

We read, in the introduction to his prophecy, that he prophesied under
the kings of Judah, Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, and under
Jeroboam II., king of Israel. If he prophesied in the reign of all these
princes, he must have lived a very long time; for there are a hundred
and twelve years from the beginning of Uzziah's reign to the end of
Hezekiah's reign. Uzziah began to reign A.M. 3194, and Hezekiah's reign
ended in 3306. Add, if you please, twenty or five and twenty years,
which might be the age of Hosea when he began to prophesy; and this will
make one hundred and thirty-two, or one hundred and thirty-seven years.
And if we were to take ten years from Uzziah, and as many from Hezekiah,
during which Hosea might not have prophesied, there will still remain
one hundred and twelve, or one hundred and fifteen years.

In the whole collection of Hosea's prophecies, we find nothing which
proves that he prophesied so long. And, besides, why should his
prophecies be dated in the title by the reigns of the kings of Judah,
when he did not live under their dominion? It is therefore very probable
that this title is not Hosea's, but some ancient transcriber's; and that
the true beginning of this prophet's work is at these words: "The
beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea." It is our opinion that he
began about the end of Jeroboam's reign, who was the second king of
Israel of this name. See Calmet.

St. Jerome and many others believe Hosea to be the oldest prophet, whose
writings are in our possession; and that he was witness to the first
captivity of the four tribes carried away by Tiglath-pileser, and the
extinction of the kingdom of Samaria by Shalmaneser. St. Jerome will
have it that he prophesied even afterwards. The first verses of 1: have
a view to the death of Zechariah, king of Israel, and son of Jeroboam
II: From the sixth verse of the first chapter to the third chapter, is a
prediction of the captivity of Israel: but after he has foretold this
captivity, he declares the return and end of it. He inveighs strongly
against the disorders which prevailed in the kingdom of the ten tribes.
It appears that in his time there were idols; not only at Dan, Beth-el,
and Samaria, but likewise at Gilgal, upon Tabor, at Sichem, Beer-sheba,
and upon the mountains of Gilead. He speaks of the Israelites as of a
people entirely corrupted, and the measure of whose sins was filled up;
he foretells that their golden calves should be pulled down, cast upon
the ground, and carried into Assyria.

He reflects, with the same severity, upon the irregularities which
reigned in Judah. He stands up against those who went to worship false
gods at Gilgal. He speaks of Sennacherib's invading the territories of
Judah. He foretells that the people of Judah should still continue some
time in their country after the captivity of the ten tribes; but that
after this they themselves should likewise be carried captives beyond
the Euphrates, from whence the Lord would bring them back after a
certain number of years. The style of Hosea is obscure, and his
expressions often dubious and perplexed. The things whereof he speaks
contribute farther to his obscurity, by reason of their distance, and
our ignorance of the history of those times.

In the beginning of Hosea's prophecy, we read that the Lord directed him
"to take unto him a wife of whoredoms, and children of whoredoms;" that
is, to marry a woman who, before her marriages had lived a debauched
life, but who, after her marriage, should retire from all bad
conversation, and whose children should be legitimate, notwithstanding
that, by reason of the blemish which their mother had contracted by her
former life, they were called the children of whoredoms. This prostitute
woman, and the children who were to be born of her, were a figure and a
kind of real prophecy which described the idolatry and infidelity of
Samaria and the ten tribes, formerly the Lord's spouse, but who
afterwards became idolatrous and corrupt.

The children of this faithless woman are children of prostitution, since
they imitate the idolatry of their mother. God gives these children the
names of Jezreel, God will disperse; Lo-rechamah, or Without mercy; and
Lo-ammi, Thou art no longer my people; to show, -

1\. That God was going to revenge upon the house of Jehu, king of
Israel, the sins which he had committed at Jezreel, when he usurped the
kingdom of the ten tribes.

2\. That the Lord would treat his idolatrous and sinful people without
mercy.

3\. That he would reject them, and no more look upon them as his people.

Hosea is concise, sententious, and abrupt. It is his manner to omit the
connexive and adversative particles; an observation which we should
recollect when we observe them occasionally supplied by versions or
manuscripts. These are among the causes of that obscurity for which he
is remarkable: but the greatest difficulties arise from the corrupt
readings which deform the printed text. He chiefly addresses Israel; but
introduces frequent mention of Judah. He not only inveighs against the
vices of the people, but sharply arraigns the conduct of their kings,
princes, and priests.

Like many of the Hebrew prophets, he tempers denunciations of God's
vengeance against an idolatrous and vicious people, with promises of
abundant mercies in store for them; and his transitions from one of
these subjects to the other are rapid and unexpected. He abounds with
short and lively comparisons; and, like the best Greek and Roman
writers, often omits the particle of similitude. These comparisons he
sometimes accumulates in the spirit of that poetry which is most
admired. See [Hos 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003), [Hos
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004); [Hos
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010); [Hos
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#011); [Hos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#003); [Hos
14:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005). He has often a Great Force of
Expression. See [Hos 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007); [Hos
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#003), [Hos
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#018), [Hos
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#021), [Hos
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#022); [Hos
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#002); [Hos
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005); [Hos
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#004); [Hos
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#001). He is sometimes Highly Animated.
See [Hos 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#014); [Hos
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#008); [Hos
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001); [Hos
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#005), [Hos
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#014); [Hos
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#010), [Hos
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014). Many Beautiful Passages occur
in this prophet, as in the Similes throughout; in the Allegories, [Hos
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#002), [Hos
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#020); [Hos
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#011), [Hos
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#012), [Hos
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007); [Hos
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#011), [Hos
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012), [Hos
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#013); [Hos
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#015); in the Pathos, [Hos
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#003); and [Hos
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008), [Hos
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#009); in the Figures, [Hos
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#012); [Hos
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002). There are also some parts which
are truly Sublime, as [Hos 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014), [Hos
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#015); [Hos
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007); [Hos
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#008); [Hos
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007), [Hos
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#008).

I have already, at the beginning of Isaiah, given a table of the
chronological succession of all the prophets: that of Archbishop Newcome
on the twelve minor prophets I subjoin here, because it contains some
differences from the preceding.

Order and Time in Which the Twelve Minor Prophets Flourished

1\. Jonah Prophesied between 823 b.c. and 783 b.c. in the reign of
Jeroboam II., king of Israel. See [Kg2
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025).

2\. Amos prophesied from about 823 b.c. to about 785 b.c. in the reign
of Uzziah, king of Judah, and in that of Jeroboam II., king of Israel.
See [Amo 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001).

3\. Hosea flourished from about 809 b.c. to about 698 b.c., in the
reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in
that of Jeroboam II., king of Israel. See [Hos
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001). \[But see the observations in the
preceding page\].

4\. Micah flourished between 757 b.c. and 698 b.c., in the reigns of
Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. See [Mic
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001).

5\. Nahum is supposed to have prophesied between 720 b.c. and 698 b.c.,
in the reign of Hezekiah.

6\. Joel is supposed to have prophesied between 697 b.c. and 660 b.c.,
in the reign of Manasseh.

7\. Zephaniah prophesied between 640 b.c. and 609 b.c., in the reign of
Josiah. See [Zep 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001).

8\. Habakkuk is thought to have prophesied between 606 b.c. and 598
b.c., in the reign of Jehoiakim.

9\. Obadiah prophesied soon after 587 b.c., between the taking of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, and the destruction of the Edomites by the
same prince.

10\. Haggai prophesied about 520 b.c. after the return from Babylon. See
[Hag 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001).

11\. Zechariah prophesied from 520 b.c. to about 518 b.c.; and was
contemporary with Haggai. See [Zac
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001).

12\. Malachi is generally believed to have prophesied about 436 b.c.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 1](hos001)

</div>
