<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos009)  [Next](hos011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 10:0</span></span>

This chapter treats of the same subject, but elegantly varied. It begins
with comparing Israel to a fruitful vine but corrupted by too much
prosperity, [Hos 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001). It next
reproves and threatens them for their idolatry, [Hos
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#002); anarchy, [Hos
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#003); and breach of covenant, [Hos
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#004). Their idolatry is then enlarged
on; and its fatal consequences declared in terms full of sublimity and
pathos, [Hos 10:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005). God is now
introduced complaining of their excessive guilt; and threatening them
with captivity in terms that bear a manifest allusion to their favourite
idolatry, the worshiping the similitude of a calf or heifer, [Hos
10:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#009). Upon which the prophet, in a
beautiful allegory suggested by the preceding metaphors, exhorts them to
repentance; and warns them of the dreadful consequences of their evil
courses, if obstinately persisted in, [Hos
10:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012).

[Hosea 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 10:1</span></span>

Israel is an empty vine - Or, a vine that casteth its grapes.

He bringeth forth fruit - Or, he laid up fruit for himself. He abused
the blessings of God to the purposes of idolatry. He was prosperous; but
his prosperity corrupted his heart.

According to the multitude of his fruit - He became idolatrous in
proportion to his prosperity; and in proportion to their wealth was the
costliness of their images, and the expensiveness of their idol worship.

True is the homely saying of old Quarles: -

"So God's best gifts, usurp'd by wicked ones,

To poison turn, by their con-ta-gi-ons."

Another poet, of a higher order, but worse school, says: -

Effodiuntur opes, irritamenta malorum.

Ovid.

Of which the words of St. Paul are nearly a literal rendering: -

Ῥιζα γαρ πανθων των κακων εστιν ἡ θιλαργυρια.

"For the love of money is the root of all these evils"

[Ti1 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010).

Pity that this beautiful metal, on which God has bestowed such a large
portion of mineral perfection, and then hid in the earth, should, on its
being digged up by man, become the incentive to so many vices, and draw
away his heart from the Creator of all things, and the fountain of
ineffable perfection and goodness.

[Hosea 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 10:2</span></span>

Their heart is divided - They wish to serve God and Mammon, Jehovah and
Baal: but this is impossible. Now God will do in judgment what they
should have done in contrition, "break down their altars, and spoil
their images."

[Hosea 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 10:3</span></span>

We have no king - We have rejected the King of kings; and had we any
king, he would be of no service to us in this state, as he would be a
captive like ourselves; nor could we have the approbation of God, as we
now justly lie under his displeasure.

[Hosea 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 10:4</span></span>

They have spoken words - Vain, empty, deceitful words.

Swearing falsely - This refers to the alliances made with strange
powers, to whom they promised fidelity without intending to be faithful;
and from whom they promised themselves protection and support,
notwithstanding God was against them, and they knew it. All their words
were vain, and in the end as bitter as gall.

Judgment springeth up as hemlock - As our land lies without cultivation,
so that we have nothing but noxious weeds instead of crops; so we have
no administration of justice. What is done in this way is a perversion
of law, and is as hurtful to society as hemlock would be to animal life.
All this may refer to the anarchy that was in the kingdom of Israel
before Hoshea's reign, and which lasted, according to Archbishop Usher,
nine years. They then, literally, "had no king."

[Hosea 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 10:5</span></span>

The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear - According to Calmet, shall
worship the calves of Beth-aven; those set up by Jeroboam, at Beth-el.
Fear is often taken for religious reverence.

The people thereof shall mourn - On seeing the object of their worship
carried into captivity, as well as themselves.

And the priests thereof - כמרים kemarim. The priests of Samaria, says
Calmet, are here called kemarim, that is, black coats, or shouters,
because they made loud cries in their sacrifices. Instead of יגילו
yagilu, "they shall rejoice;" learned men propose ילילו yalilu, "shall
howl," which is likely to be the true reading, but it is not supported
by any of the MSS. yet discovered. But the exigentia loci, the necessity
of the place, requires some such word.

[Hosea 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 10:6</span></span>

A present to King Jareb - See on [Hos
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013) (note). If this be a proper name,
the person intended is not known in history: but it is most likely that
Pul, king of Assyria, is intended, to whom Menahem, king of Israel,
appears to have given one of the golden calves, to insure his
assistance.

[Hosea 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 10:7</span></span>

Her king is cut off as the foam - As lightly as a puff of wind blows off
the foam that is formed below by a fall of water, so shall the kings of
Israel be cut off. We have already seen that not less than four of them
died by assassination in a very short time. See on [Hos
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#007) (note).

[Hosea 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 10:8</span></span>

The high-places - Idol temples.

Of Aven - Beth-aven.

The thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars - Owing to the
uncultivated and unfrequented state of the land, and of their places of
idol worship, the people being all carried away into captivity.

"And they shall say to the mountains, Cover us, And to the hills, Fall
on us."

"This sublime description of fear and distress our Lord had in view,
[Luk 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#030), which may be a reference,
and not a quotation. However, the Septuagint, in the Codex Alexandrinus,
has the same order of words as occurs in the evangelist. The parallelism
makes the passages more beautiful than [Rev
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016); and [Isa
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019) wants the animated dramatic form.
That there is a reference to the caverns that abounded in the
mountainous countries of Palestine, see the note on [Isa
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019) (note)." - Newcome.

[Hosea 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 10:9</span></span>

Thou hast sinned from the days of Gibeah - This is another reference to
the horrible rape and murder of the Levite's wife, [Jdg
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#013), [Jdg
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#014).

There they stood - Only one tribe was nearly destroyed, viz., that of
Benjamin. They were the criminals, the children of iniquity; the others
were faultless, and stood only for the rights of justice and mercy.

[Hosea 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hos 10:10</span></span>

When they shall bind themselves in their two furrows - "When they are
chastised for their two iniquities," i.e., the calves in Dan and
Beth-el. - Newcome. But this double iniquity may refer to what Jeremiah
says, [Jer 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#013) : "My people have
committed two evils." -

1\. They have forsaken me.

2\. They have joined themselves to idols.

[Hosea 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 10:11</span></span>

Ephraim is as a heifer that is taught - One thoroughly broken in to the
yoke.

And loveth to tread out - Goes peaceably in the yoke; and is pleased
because, not being muzzled, she eats of the corn.

I passed over upon her fair neck - I brought the yoke upon it, that she
should not tread out the corn merely, but draw the plough and drag the
harrow. These operations of husbandry are all referred to here, with
some others. Ephraim shall tread out the corn, that there may be seed
for the fields.

Judah shall plough - That the furrows may receive it.

Jacob shall break his clods - Harrow - that the seed may be covered with
the mould.

Israel very frequently made great depredations on Judah; and as this
heifer loved to tread out the corn, and not plough, it is therefore
added that he should be made to plough, be put under the yoke, namely,
that of the Assyrians. What is added, "Judah and Jacob shall plough for
themselves," means, that Judah should not now plough for Israel, but for
himself; as Israel shall no more make depredations upon him. - Dodd.

[Hosea 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hos 10:12</span></span>

Sow to yourselves in righteousness - Let the seed you sow be of the best
kind, and in just measure.

Reap in mercy - By the blessing of God on this ploughing, sowing, and
harrowing, you may expect a good crop in harvest.

Break up your fallow ground - Do not be satisfied with a slight furrow;
let the land that was fallowed (slightly ploughed) be broken up again
with a deep furrow.

For it is time to seek the Lord - This should be immediately done: the
season is passing; and if you do not get the seed in the ground, the
early rain will be past, and your fields will be unfruitful.

Rain righteousness upon you - God will give you the early rain in due
time, and in proper measure. Here are the metaphors, and the application
cannot be difficult.. Here are ploughing, fallowing, sowing, harrowing,
watering, reaping, threshing, and feeding on the produce of
well-directed labor. All may be applied to the human heart, and the work
of God upon it. Correction, contrition, conversion, receiving the grace
of Christ, bringing forth fruit, etc.

[Hosea 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">hos 10:13</span></span>

Ye have ploughed wickedness - Ye have labored sinfully.

Ye have reaped iniquity - The punishment due to your iniquity.

Ye have eaten the fruit of lies - Your false worship and your false gods
have brought you into captivity and misery.

Because thou didst trust in thy way - Didst confide in thy own counsels,
and in thy mighty men, and not in the God who made you.

[Hosea 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hos 10:14</span></span>

Shall a tumult arise - The enemy shall soon fall upon thy people, and
take all thy fortified places.

As Shalman spoiled Beth-arbel - Some think that this refers to
Jerubbaal, or Gideon's victory over Zalmunna, general of the Midianites;
see [Jdg 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#008). Others think that an
allusion is made here to the destruction of Arbela, a city of Armenia,
by Shalmaneser, here called Shalman; and this while he was only general
of the Assyrian forces, and not yet king. I think the history to which
this refers is unknown. It seems that it was distinguished by some
remarkable ferocities.

The mother was dashed in pieces upon her children - But when, where,
how, and by whom, still remain unknown. Conjecture in such a case must
be useless.

[Hosea 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">hos 10:15</span></span>

So shall Beth-el do unto you - This shall be the consequence of your
idolatry.

In a morning shall the king of Israel utterly be cut off - Suddenly,
unexpectedly. Hoshea, the king of Israel, shall be cut off by the
Assyrians. There are some allusions to facts in this chapter, which
cannot be easily verified, as we have not sufficient acquaintance with
the history of those times.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 11](hos011)

</div>
