<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos006)  [Next](hos008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 7:0</span></span>

Here God complains that though he had employed every means for reforming
Israel, they still persisted in their iniquity, without fearing the
consequences, [Hos 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#001), [Hos
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#002); that those who ought to check
their crimes were pleased with them, [Hos
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#003); and that they all burned with
adultery, as an oven when fully heated, and ready to receive the kneaded
dough, [Hos 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#004). The fifth verse
alludes to some recent enormities; the sixth charges them with dividing
their time between inactivity and iniquity; the seventh alludes to their
civil broils and conspiracies; (see [Kg2
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#010), [Kg2
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#014), [Kg2
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#025)); the eighth to their joining
themselves with idolatrous nations; and the ninth describes the sad
consequence. The tenth verse reproves their pride and open contempt of
God's worship; the eleventh reproves their foolish conduct in applying
for aid to their enemies; (see [Kg2
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019); [Kg2
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#004)); the twelfth and thirteenth
threaten them with punishments; the fourteenth charges them with
hypocrisy in their acts of humiliation; the fifteenth with ingratitude;
and the image of the deceitful bow, in the sixteenth verse, is highly
expressive of their frequent apostasies; and their hard speeches against
God shall be visited upon them by their becoming a reproach in the land
of their enemies.

[Hosea 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 7:1</span></span>

When I would have healed Israel - As soon as one wound was healed,
another was discovered. Scarcely was one sin blotted out till another
was committed.

The thief cometh in - Their own princes spoil them.

The troop of robbers spoileth without - The Assyrians, under different
leaders, waste and plunder the country.

[Hosea 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 7:2</span></span>

They consider not in their hearts - They do not consider that my eye is
upon all their ways; they do not think that I record all their
wickedness; and they know not their own evil doings are as a host of
enemies encompassing them about.

[Hosea 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 7:3</span></span>

They make the king glad - They pleased Jeroboam by coming readily into
his measures, and heartily joining with him in his idolatry. And they
professed to be perfectly happy in their change, and to be greatly
advantaged by their new gods; and that the religion of the state now was
better than that of Jehovah. Thus, they made all their rulers, "glad
with their lies."

[Hosea 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 7:4</span></span>

As an oven heated by the baker - Calmet's paraphrase on this and the
following verses expresses pretty nearly the sense: Hosea makes a
twofold comparison of the Israelites; to an oven, and to dough. Jeroboam
set fire to his own oven - his kingdom - and put the leaven in his
dough; and afterwards went to rest, that the fire might have time to
heat his oven, and the leaven to raise his dough, that the false
principles which he introduced might infect the whole population. This
prince, purposing to make his subjects relinquish their ancient
religion, put, in a certain sense, the fire to his own oven, and mixed
his dough with leaven. At first he used no violence, but was satisfied
with exhorting them, and proclaiming a feast. This fire spread very
rapidly, and the dough was very soon impregnated by the leaven. All
Israel was seen running to this feast, and partaking in these
innovations. But what shall become of the oven - the kingdom; and the
bread - the people? The oven shall be consumed by these flames; the
king, the princes, and the people shall be enveloped in the burning,
[Hos 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#007). Israel was put under the
ashes, as a loaf well kneaded and leavened; but not being carefully
turned, it was burnt on one side before those who prepared it could eat
of it; and enemies and strangers came and carried off the loaf. See [Hos
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#008), [Hos
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#009). Their lasting captivity was the
consequence of their wickedness and their apostasy from the religion of
their fathers. On this explication [Hos
7:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#004), may be easily understood.

[Hosea 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 7:7</span></span>

All their kings are fallen - There was a pitiful slaughter among the
idolatrous kings of Israel; four of them had fallen in the time of this
prophet. Zechariah was slain by Shallum; Shallum, by Menahem; Pekahiah,
by Pekah; and Pekah, by Hoshea, 2 Kings 15. All were idolaters, and all
came to an untimely death.

[Hosea 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 7:8</span></span>

A cake not turned - In the East having heated the hearth, they sweep one
corner, put the cake upon it, and cover it with embers; in a short time
they turn it, cover it again, and continue this several times, till they
find it sufficiently baked. All travelers into Asiatic countries have
noted this.

[Hosea 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 7:9</span></span>

Gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knoweth not - The kingdom
is grown old in iniquity; the time of their captivity is at hand, and
they are apprehensive of no danger. They are in the state of a silly old
man, who through age and infirmities is become nearly bald, and the few
remaining hairs on his head are quite gray. But he does not consider his
latter end; is making no provision for that eternity on the brink of
which he is constantly standing; does not apply to the sovereign
Physician to heal his spiritual diseases; but calls in the doctors to
cure him of old age and death! This miserable state and preposterous
conduct we witness every day. O how fast does the human being cling to
his native earth! Reader, hear the voice of an old man: -

O my coevals! remnants of yourselves,

Shall our pale withered hands be still stretched out?

Trembling at once with eagerness and age;

With avarice and ambition grasping-fast

Grasping at air! For what hath earth beside?

We want but little; nor That Little long.

[Hosea 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hos 7:10</span></span>

The pride of Israel - The same words as at [Hos
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#006) (note), where see the note.

[Hosea 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 7:11</span></span>

Ephraim also is like a silly dove without heart - A bird that has little
understanding; that is easily snared and taken; that is careless about
its own young, and seems to live without any kind of thought. It has
been made, by those who, like itself, are without heart, the symbol of
conjugal affection. Nothing worse could have been chosen, for the dove
and its mate are continually quarrelling.

They call to Egypt, they go to Assyria - They strive to make these their
allies and friends; but in this they showed that they were without
heart, had not a sound understanding; for these were rival nations, and
Israel could not attach itself to the one without incurring the jealousy
and displeasure of the other. Thus, like the silly dove, they were
constantly falling into snares; sometimes of the Egyptians, at others of
the Assyrians. By the former they were betrayed; by the latter, ruined.

[Hosea 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hos 7:12</span></span>

When they shall go - To those nations for help: -

I will spread my net upon them - I will cause them to be taken by those
in whom they trusted.

I will bring them down - They shall no sooner set off to seek this
foreign help, than my net shall bring them down to the earth. The
allusion to the dove, and to the mode of taking the fowls of heaven, is
still carried on.

As their congregation hath heard - As in their solemn assemblies they
before have heard; in the reading of my law, and the denunciation of my
wrath against idolaters.

Bishop Newcome translates: "I will chastise them when they hearken to
their assembly." That is, when they take the counsel of their elders to
go down to Egypt for help, and trust in the arm of the Assyrians for
succor.

[Hosea 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">hos 7:13</span></span>

Wo unto them! - They shall have wo, because they have fled from me. They
shall have destruction, because they have transgressed against me.

Though I have redeemed them - Out of Egypt; and given them the fullest
proof of my love and power.

Yet they have spoken lies against me - They have represented me as
rigorous and cruel; and my service as painful and unprofitable.

[Hosea 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hos 7:14</span></span>

They have not cried unto me with their heart - They say they have sought
me, but could not find me; that they have cried unto me, but I did not
answer. I know they have cried, yea, howled; but could I hear them when
all was forced and hypocritical, not one sigh coming from their heart?

They assemble themselves for corn and wine - In dearth and famine they
call and howl: but they assemble themselves, not to seek Me, but to
invoke their false gods for corn and wine.

[Hosea 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">hos 7:15</span></span>

Though I have bound and strengthened their arms - Whether I dealt with
them in judgment or mercy, it was all one; in all circumstances they
rebelled against me.

[Hosea 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">hos 7:16</span></span>

They return, but not to the Most High - They go to their idols.

They are like a deceitful bow - Which, when it is reflexed, in order to
be strung, suddenly springs back into its quiescent curve; for the
eastern bows stand in their quiescent state in a curve; and in order to
be strung must be beaded back in the opposite direction. This bending of
the bow requires both strength and skill; and if not properly done, it
will fly back, and regain its former position; and in this recoil
endanger the archer - may even break an arm. I have been in this danger
myself in bending the Asiatic bow. For want of this knowledge not one
commentator has hit the meaning of the passage.

Shall fall by the sword - Their tongue has been enraged against Me; the
sword shall be enraged against them. They have mocked me, ([Hos
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#005)), and their fall is now a subject
of derision in the land of Egypt. What they have sown, that do they now
reap.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 8](hos008)

</div>
