<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos011)  [Next](hos013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 12:0</span></span>

The prophet, in very pointed terms, describes the unprofitableness and
destruction attending vicious courses; particularly such as Ephraim
pursued, who forsook God, and courted the alliance of idolatrous
princes, [Hos 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#001). Judah is also
reproved, [Hos 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#002). He is reminded of
the extraordinary favor of God to his father Jacob, in giving him the
birthright; and exhorted, after his example, to wrestle with God (the
Angel of the covenant, the same unchangeable Jehovah) for a blessing;
and to love mercy and execute justice, [Hos
12:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#003). Ephraim is accused of pursuing
practices that are deceitful, although pretending to integrity, [Hos
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#007), [Hos
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008). God then threatens to deprive
this people of their possessions, [Hos
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#009), as they had rejected every means
of reformation, [Hos 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#010), and given
themselves up to gross impieties, [Hos
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#011). And, as an aggravation of their
guilt, they are reminded from what humble beginnings they had been
raised, [Hos 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#012), [Hos
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#013). The Divine judgments about to
fall upon Israel are declared to be the result of great provocation,
[Hos 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#014).

[Hosea 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 12:1</span></span>

Ephraim feedeth on wind - He forms and follows empty and unstable
counsels.

Followeth after the east wind - They are not only empty, but dangerous
and destructive. The east wind was, and still is, in all countries, a
parching, wasting, injurious wind.

He daily increaseth lies - He promises himself safety from foreign
alliances. He "made a covenant with the Assyrians," and sent a subsidy
of "oil to Egypt." The latter abandoned him; the former oppressed him.

[Hosea 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 12:2</span></span>

The Lord hath also a controversy with Judah - The rest of the prophecy
belongs both to Judah and Israel. He reproaches both with their
ingratitude, and threatens them with God's anger. In order to make their
infidelity the more hateful, and their malice the more sensible, he
opposes to them the righteousness, obedience, and piety of their father
Jacob. He recalls to their minds the benefits they had received since
they returned from Egypt. He speaks afterwards of their kings; and how,
in their ingratitude, they refused to have him for their monarch. Having
mentioned this fact, he subjoins reflections, exhortations, invectives,
and threatenings, and continues this subject in this and the two
following chapters. - Calmet.

[Hosea 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 12:3</span></span>

He took his brother by the heel - See on [Gen
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026) (note); [Gen
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024) (note), etc.

[Hosea 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 12:4</span></span>

He had power over the Angel - Who represented the invisible Jehovah.

He wept, and made supplication - He entreated with tears that God would
bless him; and he prevailed. The circumstance of his weeping is not
mentioned in Genesis.

He found him in Beth-el - It was there that God made those glorious
promises to Jacob relative to his posterity. See [Gen
28:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#013).

[Hosea 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 12:5</span></span>

The Lord is his memorial - He is the same God as when Jacob so
successfully wrestled with him.

[Hosea 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 12:6</span></span>

Therefore turn thou to thy God - Because he is the same, and cannot
change. Seek him as faithfully and as fervently as Jacob did, and you
will find him the same merciful and compassionate Being.

[Hosea 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 12:7</span></span>

He is a merchant - Or a Canaanite; referring to the Phoenicians, famous
for their traffic. Ephraim is as corrupt as those heathenish traffickers
were. He kept, as many in all ages have done, a weight and a weight; a
heavy one to buy with and a light one to sell by.

[Hosea 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 12:8</span></span>

I am become rich - They boasted in their riches, notwithstanding the
unjust manner in which they were acquired.

In all my labors they shall find none iniquity in me - This is
frequently the language of merchants, tradesmen, etc. None are so full
of professions of equity and justice, while all the time they are
endeavoring to overreach, both in buying and selling. "Sir, I cannot
afford it at that price." "It is not mine for that money." "I assure you
that it cost me more than you offer." "I am sorry I cannot take your
money; but if I did, I should lose by the article," etc., etc., etc. I
have heard such language over and over, when I knew every word was
false. Truth is a sacred thing in the sight of God; but who regards it
as he should? There are, however, many noble exceptions among merchants
and tradesmen. Bp. Newcome gives another turn to the subject, by
translating: -

"All his labors shall not be found profitable unto him,

For the iniquity wherewith he hath sinned."

[Hosea 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 12:9</span></span>

And I - the Lord thy God - I who brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
will again make thee to dwell in tabernacles. This appears to be a
threatening. I will reduce you to as miserable a state in the land of
your captivity, as you often were through your transgressions in the
wilderness. This was the opinion of some of the ancients on this verse;
and the context requires it to be understood in this way. I do not think
that the feast of tabernacles is referred to.

[Hosea 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hos 12:10</span></span>

I have also spoken - I have used every means, and employed every method,
to instruct and save you. I have sent prophets, who spake plainly,
exhorting, warning, and beseeching you to return to me. They have had
Divine visions, which they have declared and interpreted. They have used
similitudes, symbols, metaphors, allegories, etc., in order to fix your
attention, and bring you back to your duty and interest. And, alas! all
is in vain; you have not profited by my condescension. This text St.
Paul seems to have had full in view, when he wrote, [Heb
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001) (note): "God who, at Sundry Times
and in Divers Manners, spake in time past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets." See the note on the above.

Dr. Dodd supposes that there are three distinct kinds of prophecy
mentioned here:

1\. Immediate inspiration, when God declares the very words.

2\. Vision; a representation of external objects to the mind, in as
lively a manner as if there were conveyed by the senses.

3\. Parables and apt resemblances.

[Hosea 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 12:11</span></span>

Iniquity in Gilead - Gilgal and Gilead are equally iniquitous, and
equally idolatrous. Gilead, which was beyond Jordan, had already been
brought under subjection by Tiglath-Pileser. Gilgal, which was on this
side Jordan, shall share the same fate; because it is now as idolatrous
as the other.

Their altars are as heaps - They occur everywhere. The whole land is
given to idolatry.

[Hosea 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hos 12:12</span></span>

Served for a wife - Seven years for Rachel.

For a wife he kept sheep - Seven years for Leah; having been cheated by
Laban, who gave him first Leah, instead of Rachel; and afterwards made
him serve seven years more before he would confirm his first engagement.
Critics complain of want of connection here. Why is this isolated fact
predicted? Thus, in a detached sentence, the prophet speaks of the low
estate of their ancestors, and how amply the providence of God had
preserved and provided for them. This is all the connection the place
requires.

[Hosea 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">hos 12:13</span></span>

By a prophet (Moses) the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a
prophet (Joshua) was he preserved - Joshua succeeded Moses, and brought
the Israelites into the promised land; and when they passed the Jordan
at Gilgal, he received the covenant of circumcision; and yet this same
place was now made by them the seat of idolatry! How blind and how
ungrateful!

[Hosea 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hos 12:14</span></span>

Therefore shall he leave his blood upon him - He will not remove his
guilt. These are similar to our Lord's words, [Joh
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036); [Joh
9:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#041) : "He that believeth not on the
Son of God, shall not see life, for the wrath of God Abideth On Him" -
shall not be removed by any remission, as he rejects the only way in
which he can be saved. Because ye say, We see; therefore, Your Sin
Remaineth, i.e., it still stands charged against you. Your miseries and
destruction are of your own procuring; your perdition is of yourselves.
God is as merciful as he is just.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 13](hos013)

</div>
