<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos005)  [Next](hos007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 6:0</span></span>

The prophet earnestly exhorts to repentance, [Hos
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001). God is then introduced as very
tenderly and pathetically remonstrating against the backslidings of
Ephraim and Judah, [Hos 6:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004).

[Hosea 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 6:1</span></span>

Come, and let us return unto the Lord - When God had purposed to abandon
them, and they found that he had returned to his place - to his temple,
where alone he could be successfully sought; they, feeling their
weakness, and the fickleness, weariness, and unfaithfulness of their
idols and allies, now resolve to "return to the Lord;" and, referring to
what he said, [Hos 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014) : "I will tear
and go away;" they say, he "hath torn, but he will heal us;" their
allies had torn, but they gave them no healing. While, therefore, they
acknowledge the justice of God in their punishment, they depend on his
well-known mercy and compassion for restoration to life and health.

[Hosea 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 6:2</span></span>

After two days will he revive - Such is his power that in two or three
days he can restore us. He can realize all our hopes, and give us the
strongest token for good.

In the third day he will raise us up - In so short a time can he give us
complete deliverance. These words are supposed to refer to the death and
resurrection of our Lord; and it is thought that the apostle refers to
them, [Co1 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#004) : "Christ rose again
the third day, according to the Scriptures;" and this is the only place
in the Scriptures, i.e., of the Old Testament, where his resurrection on
the third day seems to be hinted at. The original, יקמנו yekimenu, has
been translated, he will raise him up. Then they who trusted in him
could believe that they should be quickened together with him.

And we shall live in his sight - His resurrection being a proof of
theirs.

[Hosea 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 6:3</span></span>

Then shall we know - We shall have the fullest evidence that we have not
believed in vain.

If we follow on to know the Lord - If we continue to be as much in
earnest as we now are.

His going forth - The manifestation of his mercy to our souls is as
certain as the rising of the sun at the appointed time.

And he shall come unto us as the rain - As surely as the early and the
latter rain come. The first, to prepare the earth for the seed; this
fell in autumn: the second, to prepare the full ear for the harvest;
this fell in spring. Here is strong confidence; but not misplaced,
however worthless the persons were. As surely as the sun, who is now
set, is running his course to arise on us in the morning, and make a
glorious day after a dreary night, so surely shall the Lord come again
from his place, and the Sun of righteousness shall arise on our souls
with healing in his wings. He is already on his way to save us.

[Hosea 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 6:4</span></span>

O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? - This is the answer of the Lord
to the above pious resolutions; sincere while they lasted, but
frequently forgotten, because the people were fickle. Their goodness
(for goodness it was while it endured) was like the morning cloud that
fadeth away before the rising sun, or like the early dew which is
speedily evaporated by heat. Ephraim and Judah had too much goodness in
them to admit of their total rejection, and too much evil to admit of
their being placed among the children. Speaking after the manner or men,
the justice and mercy of Good seem puzzled how to act toward them. When
justice was about to destroy them for their iniquity, it was prevented
by their repentance and contrition: when mercy was about to pour upon
them as penitents its choicest blessings, it was prevented by their
fickleness and relapse! These things induce the just and merciful God to
exclaim, "O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do
unto thee?" The only thing that could be done in such a case was that
which God did.

[Hosea 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 6:5</span></span>

Therefore have I hewed them by the prophets - I have sent my prophets to
testify against their fickleness. They have smitten them with the most
solemn and awful threatenings; they have, as it were, slain them by the
words of my mouth. But to what purpose?

Thy judgments are as the light that goeth forth - Instead of ומשפטיך אור
יצא umispateycha or yetse, "and thy judgments a light that goeth forth,"
the versions in general have read ומשפטי כאור umishpati keor, "and my
judgment is as the light." The final כ caph in the common reading has by
mistake been taken from אור aur, and joined to משפטי mishpati; and thus
turned it from the singular to the plural number, with the postfix כ
cha. The proper reading is, most probably, "And my judgment is as the
light going forth." It shall be both evident and swift; alluding both to
the velocity and splendour of light.

[Hosea 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 6:6</span></span>

I desired mercy, and not sacrifice - I taught them righteousness by my
prophets; for I desired mercy. I was more willing to save than to
destroy; and would rather see them full of penitent and holy
resolutions, than behold them offering the best and most numerous
victims upon my altar. See [Mat 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013).

[Hosea 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 6:7</span></span>

But they like men (כאדם keadam, "like Adam") have transgressed the
covenant - They have sinned against light and knowledge as he did. This
is sense, the other is scarcely so. There was a striking similarity in
the two cases. Adam, in Paradise, transgressed the commandment, and I
cast him out: Israel, in possession of the promised land, transgressed
my covenant, and I cast them out, and sent them into captivity.

[Hosea 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 6:8</span></span>

Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity - In this place Jacob and
Laban made their covenant, and set up a heap of stones, which was called
Galeed, the heap of testimony; and most probably idolatry was set up
here. Perhaps the very heap became the object of superstitious
adoration.

[Hosea 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 6:9</span></span>

As troops of robbers - What a sad picture is this of the state of the
priesthood! The country of Gilead was infamous for its robberies and
murders. The idolatrous priests there formed themselves into companies,
and kept possession of the roads and passes; and if they found any
person going to Jerusalem to worship the true God, they put him to
death. The reason is given: -

For they commit lewdness - They are gross idolaters.

[Hosea 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hos 6:10</span></span>

I have seen a horrible thing - That is, the idolatry that prevailed in
Israel to such a degree that the whole land was defiled.

[Hosea 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 6:11</span></span>

O Judah, he hath set a harvest for thee - Thou also hast transgressed;
thy harvest will come; thou shalt be reaped down and sent into
captivity. The sickle is already thrust in. That which thou hast sowed
shalt thou reap. They who sow unto the flesh shall reap corruption.

When I returned the captivity of my people - Bp. Newcome translates,
"Among those who lead away the captivity of my people." There is thy
harvest; they who have led Israel into captivity shall lead thee also
into the same. The Assyrians and Babylonians were the same kind of
people; equally idolatrous, equally oppressive, equally cruel. From the
common reading some suppose this to be a promise of return from
captivity. It is true that Judah was gathered together again and brought
back to their own land, but the majority of the Israelites did not
return, and are not now to be found.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 7](hos007)

</div>
