<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa031)  [Next](isa033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 32:0</span></span>

Prophecy of great prosperity under Hezekiah; but, in its highest sense,
applicable to Christ, [Isa 32:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001).
Description of impending calamities, [Isa
32:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#009). Rejection of the Jews, and
calling of the Gentiles, [Isa 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#015).
The future prosperity of the Church, [Isa
32:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#016).

[Isaiah 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 32:1</span></span>

Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness - If King Hezekiah were a
type of Christ, then this prophecy may refer to his time; but otherwise
it seems to have Hezekiah primarily in view. It is evident, however,
that in the fullest sense these words cannot be applied to any man; God
alone can do all that is promised here.

And princes - ושרים ve-sarim, without ל lamed, to; so the ancient
Versions. An ancient MS. has ושריו vesaraiv, and his princes.

[Isaiah 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 32:2</span></span>

As the shadow of a great rock - The shadow of a great projecting rock is
the most refreshing that is possible in a hot country, not only as most
perfectly excluding the rays of the sun, but also as having in itself a
natural coolness, which it reflects and communicates to every thing
about it.

Speluncaeque tegant, et saxea procubet umbra.

Virg. Georg. 3:145.

"Let the cool cave and shady rock protect them."

Επει κεφαλην και γουνατα Σειριος αζει,

Αυαλεος δε τε χρως απο καυματος· αλλα τοτ' ηδη

Ειη πετραιη τε σκιν, και Βιβλινος οινος.

Hesiod. 2:206.

"When Sirius rages, and thine aching head,

Parched skin, and feeble knees refreshment need;

Then to the rock's projected shade retire,

With Biblin wine recruit thy wasted powers."

[Isaiah 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 32:3</span></span>

And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim "And him the eyes of
those that see shall regard" - For ולא velo, and not, Le Clerc reads ולו
velo, and to him, of which mistake the Masoretes acknowledge there are
fifteen instances; and many more are reckoned by others. The removal of
the negative restores to the verb its true and usual sense.

[Isaiah 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 32:5</span></span>

The vile person shall no more be called liberal - The different epithets
here employed require minute explanation.

The vile person - נבל nabal, the pampered, fattened, brainless fellow,
who eats to live, and lives to eat; who will scarcely part with any
thing, and that which he does give he gives with an evil eye and a
grudging heart.

Liberal - נדיב nadib; the generous, openhearted, princely man, who
writes on all his possessions, For myself and mankind, and lives only to
get and to do good.

The churl - כילי kilai, the avaricious man; he who starves himself
amidst his plenty, and will not take the necessaries of life for fear of
lessening his stock.

Thus he differs from נבל nabal, who feeds himself to the full, and
regards no one else; like the rich man in the Gospel. The avaricious man
is called כילי kilai, from כי ki, for, לי li, myself; or contracted from
כל col, all, and לי li, to myself: all is mine; all I have is my own;
and all I can get is for myself: and yet this man enjoys nothing; he
withholds

From back and belly too their proper fare: -

O cursed lust of gold, when for thy sake

The wretch throws up his interest in both worlds,

First starved in this, then damned in that to come!

Bountiful - שוע shoa, he who is abundantly rich; who rejoices in his
plenty, and deals out to the distressed with a liberal hand.

[Isaiah 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 32:6</span></span>

The vile person will speak villany "The fool will still utter folly" - A
sort of proverbial saying, which Euripides (Bacchae, 369) has expressed
in the very same manner and words: Μωρα γαρ μωρος λεγει· "The fool
speaks folly. "Of this kind of simple and unadorned proverb or parable,
see De S. Poes, Hebr. Praelect. xxiv.

Against the Lord "Against Jehovah" - For אל El, two MSS. read אל al,
more properly; but both are of nearly the same meaning.

[Isaiah 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 32:7</span></span>

The instruments also of the churl are evil "As for the niggard, his
instruments are evil" - His machinations, his designs. The paronomasia,
which the prophet frequently deals in, suggested this expression וכלי
כליו vechelai kelaiv. The first word is expressed with some variety in
the MSS. Seven MSS. read וכילי vekili, one וכל vechol, another וכולי
vecoli.

To destroy the poor with lying words "To defeat the assertions of the
poor in judgment" - A word seems to have been lost here, and two others
to have suffered a small alteration, which has made the sentence very
obscure. The Septuagint have happily retained the rendering of the lost
word, and restored the sentence in all its parts: Και διασκεδασαι λογους
ταπεινων εν κρισει· ולהפר דברי אביון במשפט ulehapher dibrey ebyon
bemishpat, "And disperse the words of the poor in judgment. "They
frequently render the verb הפר haphar by διασκεδασαι, A MS. reads ולדבר
uledabber, which gives authority for the preposition ל lamed, to,
necessary to the sense, and the Septuagint, Syriac, and Chaldee read
במשפט bemishpat, In judgment.

[Isaiah 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 32:8</span></span>

Liberal things "Generous purposes" - "Of the four sorts of persons
mentioned [Isa 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005), three are
described, [Isa 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#006), [Isa
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#007), and [Isa
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#008), but not the fourth." - Secker.
Perhaps for והוא vehu, and he, we ought to read ושוע veshoa, the
bountiful.

[Isaiah 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 32:9</span></span>

Rise up, ye women "ye provinces. "Ye careless daughters "ye cities." -
Targum.

From this verse to the end of the fourteenth, the desolation of Judea by
the Chaldeans appears to be foretold.

[Isaiah 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 32:11</span></span>

Gird sackcloth - שק sak, sackcloth, a word necessary to the sense, is
here lost, but preserved by the Septuagint, MSS. Alex. and Pachom., and
1. D. II., and edit. Ald. and Comp., and the Arabic and Syriac.

Tremble - be troubled - strip you - פשטה peshotah, רגזה regazah, etc.
These are infinitives, with a paragogic ה he, according to Schultens,
Institut. Ling. Hebr. p. 453, and are to be taken in an imperative
sense.

[Isaiah 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 32:12</span></span>

They shall lament - for the pleasant fields "Mourn ye for the pleasant
field" - The Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate read ספדו siphdu, mourn ye,
imperative; twelve MSS., (five ancient), two editions, the Septuagint,
Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion, Syriac, and Vulgate, all read שדה sadeh,
a field; not שדי shedey, breasts.

[Isaiah 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 32:13</span></span>

Shall come up thorns and briers "The thorn and the brier shall come up"
- All the ancient Versions read ושמיר veshamir, with the conjunction.
And an ancient MS. has תעלה בו taaleh bo, "shall come up in it, "which
seems to be right; or rather בה bah: and there is a rasure in the place
of בו bo in another ancient MS.

Yea, upon all the houses of joy - For כי ki, the ancient Versions,
except the Vulgate, seem to have read ו ve. כי ki may perhaps be a
mistake for בו bo, or בה bah, in it, above mentioned. It is not
necessary in this place.

The description of impending distress which begins at [Isa
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#013) belongs to other times than that
of Sennacherib's invasion, from which they were so soon delivered. It
must at least extend to the ruin of the country and city by the
Chaldeans. And the promise of blessings which follows was not fulfilled
under the Mosaic dispensation; they belong to the Kingdom of Messiah.
Compare [Isa 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#015) with [Isa
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#017) (note), and see the note there.

[Isaiah 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 32:14</span></span>

The palaces shall be forsaken - The house of the sanctuary (the temple)
shall be destroyed. - Targum.

The forts "Ophel" - It was a part of Mount Zion, rising higher than the
rest, at the eastern extremity, near to the temple, a little to the
south of it; called by Micah, [Mic
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#008), "Ophel of the daughter of Zion.
"It was naturally strong by its situation; and had a wall of its own, by
which it was separated from the rest of Zion.

[Isaiah 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 32:15</span></span>

And the fruitful field - והכרמל vehaccarmel. So fifteen MSS., six
ancient, and two editions; which seems to make the noun an appellative.

[Isaiah 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 32:17</span></span>

The work of righteousness - Righteousness works and produces peace.

The effect of righteousness - עבדת abodath, the culture. Righteousness,
cultivated by peace, produces tranquillity of mind and permanent
security. Reader, hast thou the principle? If so, dost thou cultivate
it? If thou dost, thou hast peace of conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost,
and a sure and certain hope of everlasting life.

[Isaiah 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 32:19</span></span>

The city shalt be low all a low place. "The city shall be laid level
with the plain" - For ובשפלה ubashephelah, the Syriac reads וכשפלה
ukeshephelah. The city - probably Nineveh or Babylon: but this verse is
very obscure. Saltus; Assyriorum regnum: civitas; magnifica Assyriorum
castra. Ephrem Syr. ire loc. For וברד ubarad, a MS. has וירד vaiyered;
and so conjectured Abp. Secker, referring to [Zac
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002).

[Isaiah 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 32:20</span></span>

That sow beside all waters "Who sow your seed in every well-watered
place" - Sir John Chardin's note on this place is: "This exactly answers
the manner of planting rice; for they sow it upon the water, and before
sowing, while the earth is covered with water, they cause the ground to
be trodden by oxen, horses, and asses, who go mid-leg deep; and this is
the way of preparing the ground for sowing. As they sow the rice on the
water, they transplant it in the water. "Harmer's Observ. vol. 1 p. 280.
"Rice is the food of two-thirds of mankind." Dr. Arbuthnot. "It is
cultivated in most of the eastern countries." Miller. "It is good for
all, and at all times." Sir J. Chardin, ib. "Le ris, qui est leur
principal aliment et leur froment (i.e., des Siamois), n'est jamais
assez arrose; il croit au milieu de l'eau, et les campagnes ou on le
cultive ressemblent plutot a de marets que non pas a des terres qu'on
laboure aver la charue. Le ris a bien cette force, que quoy qu'il y ait
six ou sept pieds d'eau sur lui, il pousse toujours sa tige au dessus;
et le tuyau qui le porte s'eleve et croit a proportion de la hauteur de
l'eau qui noye son champ. Voyage de l'Eveque de Beryte, p. 144. Paris,
1666. - L. "Rice, which is the principal grain and aliment of the
Siamese, can never be too much watered. It grows in the water, and the
fields where it is sown resemble marshes rather than fields cultivated
by ploughing. Rice has that property that although it be covered with
water six or seven feet deep, yet it raises its stalk above it; and this
grows long in proportion to the depth of the water by which the field is
inundated."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 33](isa033)

</div>
