<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa011)  [Next](isa013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 12:0</span></span>

Prophetic hymn of praise for the great mercies vouchsafed to the
children of Israel in their deliverance from the great Babylonish
captivity, and for redemption by the Messiah, [Isa
12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001).

This hymn seems, by its whole tenor, and by many expressions in it, much
better calculated for the use of the Christian Church than for the
Jewish, in any circumstances, or at any time that can be assigned. The
Jews themselves seem to have applied it to the times of Messiah. On the
last day of the feast of tabernacles they fetched water in a golden
pitcher from the fountain of Shiloah, springing at the foot of Mount
Sion without the city: they brought it through the water-gate into the
temple, and poured it, mixed with wine, on the sacrifice as it lay upon
the altar, with great rejoicing. They seem to have taken up this custom,
for it is not ordained in the law of Moses, as an emblem of future
blessings, in allusion to this passage of Isaiah, "Ye shall draw waters
with joy from the fountains of salvation," expressions that can hardly
be understood of any benefits afforded by the Mosaic dispensation. Our
Savior applied the ceremony, and the intention of it, to himself, and
the effusion of the Holy Spirit, promised, and to be given, by him. The
sense of the Jews in this matter is plainly shown by the following
passage of the Jerusalem Talmud: "Why is it called the place or house of
drawing?" (for that was the term for this ceremony, or for the place
where the water was taken up) "Because from thence they draw the Holy
Spirit; as it is written, And ye shall draw water with joy from the
fountains of salvation." See Wolf. Curae Philol. in N.T. on [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037), [Joh
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039). - L. The water is Divine
knowledge, says Kimchi, and the wells the teachers of righteousness. The
Targum renders this in a very remarkable manner: "Ye shall receive with
joy (אולפן חדת ulephan chadath) a new doctrine from the chosen among the
righteous." Does not this mean the Gospel, the new covenant? And did not
the Targumist speak as a prophet?

[Isaiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 12:1</span></span>

Though thou wast angry "For though thou hast been angry" - The Hebrew
phrase, to which the Septuagint and Vulgate have too closely adhered, is
exactly the same with that of St. Paul, [Rom
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017) : "But thanks be to God, that ye
were the slaves of sin; but have obeyed from the heart;" that is, "that
whereas, or though, ye were the slaves of sin, yet ye have now obeyed
from the heart the doctrine on the model of which ye were formed."

[Isaiah 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 12:2</span></span>

The Lord Jehovah - The word יה Yah read here is probably a mistake; and
arose originally from the custom of the Jewish scribes, who, when they
found a line too short for the word, wrote as many letters as filled it,
and then began the next line with the whole word. In writing the word
יהוה Jehovah, the line might terminate with יה Yah, the two first
letters; and then at the beginning of the next line the whole word יהוה
Yehovah would be written. This might give rise to יה יהוה Yah Yehovah.
The Yah is wanting here in two of Dr. Kennicott's MSS., in one ancient
MS. of my own, and in the Septuagint, Vulgate, Syriac, and Arabic. See
Houbigant and De Rossi.

My song - The pronoun is here necessary; and it is added by the
Septuagint, Vulgate, and Syriac, who read זמרתי zimrathi, as it is in a
MS. Two MSS. omit יה Yah, see Houbigant, not. in loc. Another MS. has it
in one word, זמרתיה zimrathyah. Seven others omit יהוה Yehovah. See [Exo
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#002), with Var. Lect. Kennicott.

[Isaiah 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 12:4</span></span>

Call upon his name - קראו בשמו kiru bishmo, invoke his name. Make him
your Mediator, or call the people in his name. Preach him who is the
Root of Jesse, and who stands as an ensign for the nations. Call on the
people to believe in him; as in him alone salvation is to be found.

[Isaiah 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 12:6</span></span>

Thou inhabitant of Zion - Not only the Jewish people, to whom his word
of salvation was to be sent first; but also all members of the Church of
Christ: as in them, and in his Church, the Holy One of Israel dwells.
St. Paul, speaking of the mystery which had been proclaimed among the
Gentiles, sums it up in these words:" which is Christ in You, the hope
of glory; whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in
all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus;" [Col
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#027), [Col
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#028). Well, therefore, may the
inhabitant of Zion cry oat and shout, and proclaim the greatness of her
Redeemer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 13](isa013)

</div>
