<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa043)  [Next](isa045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 44:0</span></span>

This chapter, besides promises of redemption, of the effusion of the
Spirit, and success of the Gospel, [Isa
44:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001), sets forth, in a very sublime
manner, the supreme power and foreknowledge, and absolute eternity, of
the one true God; and exposes the folly and absurdity of idolatry with
admirable force and elegance, [Isa
44:6-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006). And to show that the
knowledge of future events belongs only to Jehovah, whom all creation is
again called to adore for the deliverance and reconciliation granted to
his people, [Isa 44:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#021), the prophet
concludes with setting in a very strong point of view the absolute
impotence of every thing considered great and insurmountable in the
sight of men, when standing in the way of the Divine counsel; and
mentions the future deliverer of the Jewish nation expressly by name,
nearly two hundred years before his birth, [Isa
44:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024).

[Isaiah 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 44:20</span></span>

He feedeth on ashes - He feedeth on that which affordeth no nourishment;
a proverbial expression for using ineffectual means, and bestowing labor
to no purpose. In the same sense Hosea says, "Ephraim feedeth on wind."
[Hos 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#001).

[Isaiah 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 44:22</span></span>

I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a
cloud, thy sins "I have made thy transgressions vanish away like a
cloud, and thy sins like a vapor" - Longinus admired the sublimity of
the sentiment, as well as the harmony of the numbers, in the following
sentence of Demosthenes: Τουτο το ψηφισμα τον τοτε τῃ πολει τερισταντα
κινδυνον παρελθειν εποιησεν ὡσπερ νεφος. "This decree made the danger
then hanging over the city pass away like a cloud." Probably Isaiah
alludes here to the smoke rising up from the sin-offering, dispersed
speedily by the wind. and rendered invisible. He who offered his
sacriflce aright was as sure that the sin for which he offered it was
blotted out, as that the smoke of the sacrifice was dispersed by the
wind, and was no longer discernible.

[Isaiah 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 44:24</span></span>

By myself - Thirteen MSS., six ancient, confirm the reading of the Keri,
מאתי meittai.

[Isaiah 44:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 44:27</span></span>

That saith to the deep, Be dry "Who saith to the deep, Be thou wasted" -
Cyrus took Babylon by laying the bed of the Euphrates dry, and leading
his army into the city by night through the empty channel of the river.
This remarkable circumstance, in which the event so exactly corresponded
with the prophecy, was also noted by Jeremiah, [Jer
50:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#038); [Jer
51:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#036).

"A drought shall be upon her waters,

and they shall be dried up: -

I will lay her sea dry

And I will scorch up her springs."

It is proper here to give some account of the means and method lay which
the stratagem of Cyrus was effected.

The Euphrates in the middle of the summer, from the melting of the snows
on the mountains of Armenia, like the Nile, overflows the country. In
order to diminish the inundation, and to carry off the waters, two
canals were made by Nebuchadnezzar a hundred miles above the city; the
first on the eastern side called Naharmalca, or the Royal River, by
which the Euphrates was let into the Tigris; the other on the western
side, called Pallacopas, or Naharaga, (נהר אגם nahar agam, The river of
the pool), by which the redundant waters were carried into a vast lake,
forty miles square, contrived, not only to lessen the inundation, but
for a reservoir, with sluices, to water the barren country on the
Arabian side. Cyrus, by turning the whole river into the lake by the
Pallacopas, laid the channel, where it ran through the city, almost dry;
so that his army entered it, both above and below, by the bed of the
river, the water not reaching above the middle of the thigh. By the
great quantity-of water let into the lake, the sluices and dams were
destroyed; and being never repaired afterwards, the waters spread over
the whole country below, and reduced it to a morass, in which the river
is lost. Ingens modo et navigabilis, inde tenuis rivus, despectus
emoritur; et nusquam manifesto exitit effluit, ut alii omnes, sed
deficit. "And thus a navigable river has been totally lost, it having no
exit from this morass. No wonder then that the geographical face of this
country is completely changed;" Mela [Jer
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#008); Herod. 1:186, 190; Xenophon,
Cyrop. vii.; Arrian vii.

[Isaiah 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 44:28</span></span>

That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd "Who saith to Cyrus, Thou art my
shepherd" - Pastor meus es; Vulg. The true reading seems to be רעי אתה
roi attah; the word אתה attah, has probably been dropped out of the
text. The same word is lost out of the text, [Psa
119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057). It is supplied in the
Septuagint by the word ει, thou art.

Saying to Jerusalem - For ולאמר velemor, the Septuagint and Vulgate read
האומר haomer.

And to the temple - ולהיכל uleheychal, as לירושלם lirushalayim, before;
the preposition is necessary, and the Vulgate seems to read so. -
Houbigant.

That saith of Cyrus, He is, or thou art, my shepherd - Saying to
Jerusalem, "Thou shalt be built;" and to the Temple, "Thy foundation
shall be laid." - There is a remarkable beauty and propriety in this
verse.

1\. Cyrus is called God's shepherd. Shepherd was an epithet which Cyrus
took to himself; and what he gave to all good kings.

2\. This Cyrus should say to the temple: "Thy foundation shall be laid."
Not - thou shalt be built. The fact is, only the foundation was laid in
the days of Cyrus, the Ammonites having prevented the building; nor was
it resumed till the second year of Darius, one of his successors. There
is often a precision in the expressions of the prophets which is as
honorable to truth, as it is unnoticed by careless readers.

[Isaiah 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 44:2</span></span>

Jesurun - Jeshurun means Israel. This name was given to that people by
Moses, [Deu 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015); [Deu
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005), [Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026). The most probable account of it
seems to be that in which the Jewish commentators agree; namely, that it
is derived from ישר yashar, and signifies upright. In the same manner,
Israel, as a people, is called משלם meshullam, perfect, [Isa
42:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#019), They were taught of God, and
abundantly furnished with the means of rectitude and perfection in his
service and worship. Grotius thinks that ישרון yeshurun is a diminutive
of ישראל yishrael, Israel; expressing peculiar fondness and affection;
Ισραηλιδιον, O little Israel.

[Isaiah 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 44:4</span></span>

They shall spring up as among the grass "They shall spring up as the
grass among the waters" - בבין חציר bebeyn chatsir, "They shall spring
up to the midst of, or rather, in among, the grass. "This cannot be
right: eleven MSS., and thirteen editions, have כבין kebeyn, or כבן
keben. Twenty-four MSS. read it without the י yod, בבן beben, in the son
of the grass; and so reads the Chaldee; בבן beben, in the son of the
grass.

Twenty-four MSS. of Dr. Kennicott's, thirty-three of De Rossi's, and one
of my own, with six editions, have this reading. The Syriac, מבין
mibbeyn. The true reading is in all probability כבין kebeyn; and the
word מים mayim, which should have followed it, is lost out of the text:
but it is happily supplied by the Septuagint, ὡς ανα μεσον ὑδατος, as
among the water "In every place where there is water, there is always
grass; for water makes every thing grow in the east." Sir John Chardin's
note on [Kg1 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#005). Harmer's
Observations 1:64.

[Isaiah 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 44:5</span></span>

Shall call himself "Shall be called" - Passive, יקרא yikkare;
κληθησεται, Symmachus.

Another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord "This shall inscribe
his hand to Jehovah" - Και ἑτερος επιγραψει χειρι (χειρα, Ag., Sym.)
αυτου, Του Θεου ειμι· "And another shall write upon his hand, I belong
to God." - Sept. They seem to have read here, as before, ליהוה אני
laihovah ani, I belong to Jehovah. But the repetition of the same phrase
without any variation is not elegant. However, they seem to have
understood it rightly, as an allusion to the marks, which were made by
punctures rendered indelible, by fire or by staining, upon the hand or
some other part of the body, signifying the state or character of the
person, and to whom he belonged. The slave was marked with the name of
his master, the soldier, of his commander; the idolater, with the name
or ensign of his god: Στιγματα επιγραφομενα δια των στρατευομενων εν
ταις χερσιν· "Punctural inscriptions made by the soldiers on their
hands." Aetius apud Turnebum Advers. [Isa
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#012). Victuris in cute punctis
milites scripti et matriculis inserti jurare solent. "The soldiers
having indelible inscriptions on their skin, and inserted in the
muster-rolls, are accustomed to make oath." Vigetius, [Isa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#006). And the Christians seem to have
imitated this practice, by what Procopius says on this place of Isaiah:
Το δε ΤΗ ΧΕΙΡΙ, δια το στιζειν ισως πολλους επι καρπων, η βραχιονων, η
του σταυρου σημειον, η την Χριστου προσηγοριαν. "Because many marked
their wrists, or their arms, with the sign of the cross, or with the
name of Christ." See [Rev 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004);
Spencer, De Leg. Hebr. lib. ii., cap. 20.

[Isaiah 44:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 44:7</span></span>

Let them show unto them "Let them declare unto us" - For למו lamo, unto
them, the Chaldee reads לנו lanu, unto us The Septuagint read לכם
lachem, unto you; which is preferable to the reading of the text. But
למו lamo, and לנו lanu, are frequently mistaken one for the other, see
[Isa 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#029); [Psa
80:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#007); [Psa
64:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#006).

[Isaiah 44:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 44:8</span></span>

Fear ye not - תרהו - to tirehu never occurs. Perhaps it should be תיראו
tireu, fear ye. Two MSS. read תירהו tirehu, and one of mine תהרו taharu.

[Isaiah 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 44:9</span></span>

That they may be ashamed. Who hath formed a god "That every one may be
ashamed, that he hath formed a god" - The Bodleian MS., one of the first
extant for its antiquity and authority, instead of מי mi, at the
beginning of the tenth verse, has כי ki, which greatly clears up the
construction of a very obscure passage. Doederlein approves of this
reading. The Septuagint likewise closely connect in construction the end
of [Isa 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009) with the beginning of
[Isa 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#010); and wholly omit the
interrogative מי mi, which embarrasses the sentence: Αισχυνθησονται οἱ
πλασσοντες Θεον, και γλυφοντες παντες ανωφελη· "But they shall be
confounded that make a god; and they who engrave unprofitable things;"
agreeably to the reading of the MS. above mentioned.

[Isaiah 44:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 44:11</span></span>

His fellows - חבריו chaberaiv: but עבדיו abadaiv, his servants or
worshippers, is the reading of one of De Rossi's MSS., and of the
Chaldee.

And the workmen, they are of men "Even the workmen themselves shall
blush" - I do not know that any one has ever yet interpreted these words
to any tolerably good sense: וחרשים המה מאדם vecharashim hemmah meadam.
The Vulgate and our translators, have rendered them very fairly, as they
are written and pointed in the text: Fabri enim sunt ex hominibus. "And
the workmen they are of men." Out of which the commentators have not
been able to extract any thing worthy of the prophet. I have given
another explanation of the place; agreeable enough to the context, if it
can be deduced from the words themselves. I presume that אדם adam,
rubuit, may signify erubuit, to be red through shame, as well as from
any other cause; though I cannot produce any example of it in that
particular sense; and the word in the text I would point מאדם meoddam;
or if any one should object to the irregularity of the number, I would
read מאדמים meoddamim. But I rather think that the irregularity of the
construction has been the cause of the obscurity, and has given occasion
to the mistaken punctuation. The singular is sometimes put for the
plural. See [Psa 68:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031); and the
participle for the future tense, see [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011). - L.

[Isaiah 44:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 44:12</span></span>

The smith with the tongs, etc. "The smith cutteth off a portion of iron"
- מעצד meatstsed, Participium Pihel of עצד atsad, to cut; still used in
that sense in the Arabic. See Simonis Lex. Hebrews The Septuagint and
Syriac take the word in this form: but they render it sharpeneth the
iron. See Castell. Lex. in voce.

The sacred writers are generally large and eloquent upon the subject of
idolatry; they treat it with great severity, and set forth the absurdity
of it in the strongest light. But this passage of Isaiah, [Isa
44:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#012), far exceeds any thing that
ever was written upon the subject, in force of argument, energy of
expression, and elegance of composition. One or two of the apocryphal
writers have attempted to imitate the prophet, but with very ill
success; Wisd. 13:11-19; 15:7, etc.; Baruch 6, NAB (editor's note: some
translations treat this as Letter to Jeremiah), especially the latter,
who, injudiciously dilating his matter, and introducing a number of
minute circumstances, has very much weakened the force and effect of his
invective. On the contrary a heathen author, in the ludicrous way, has,
in a line or two, given idolatry one of the severest strokes it ever
received: -

Olim truncus eram ficulnus, inutile lignum,

Cum faber incertus, scamnum faceretne

Priapum, Maluit esse Deum. Deus inde ego.

Horat. Satyr, lib. 1. sat. viii.

"Formerly I was the stump of a fig tree, a useless log; when the
carpenter, after hesitating whether to make me a god or a stool, at last
determined to make me a god. Thus I became a god!"

From the tenth to the seventeenth verse, a most beautiful strain of
irony is carried on against idolatry. And we may naturally think that
every idolater, who either read or heard it, must have been for ever
ashamed of his own devices. - L.

[Isaiah 44:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 44:14</span></span>

He heweth him down "He heweth down" - For לכרת lichroth, the Septuagint
and Vulgate read כרת carath or יכרת yichroth.

[Isaiah 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 44:16</span></span>

With part "And with part" - Twenty-three MSS., the Septuagint, and
Vulgate add the conjunction ו vau, and ועל veal.

[Isaiah 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 44:17</span></span>

He falleth down unto it - There were four forms of adoration used among
the Hebrews:

1\. השתחוה Hishtachavah, The prostration of the whole body.

2\. קדד Kadad, The bowing of the head.

3\. כרע Cara, The bending of the upper part of the body down to the
knees.

4\. ברך Barach, Bowing the knee, or kneeling. See on [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023) (note).

[Isaiah 44:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 44:18</span></span>

He hath shut their eyes "Their eyes are closed up" - The Septuagint,
Chaldee, and Vulyate, for טח tach, read טחו tachu. See note on [Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 45](isa045)

</div>
