<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa050)  [Next](isa052) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 51](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 51:0</span></span>

The prophet exhorts the children of Abraham to trust in the Lord; and
briefly, but beautifully, describes the great blessedness which should
be the consequence, [Isa 51:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001). Then,
turning to the Gentiles, encourages them to look for a portion in the
same salvation, [Isa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#004), [Isa
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#005); the everlasting duration of
which is majestically described, [Isa
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006). And as it is everlasting, so is
it sure to the righteous, notwithstanding all the machinations of their
enemies, [Isa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#007), [Isa
51:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#008). The faithful, then, with
exultation and joy, lift their voices, reminding God of his wondrous
works of old, which encourage them to look now for the like glorious
accomplishment of these promises, [Isa
51:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009). In answer to this the
Divinity is introduced comforting them under their trials, and telling
them that the deliverer was already on his way to save and to establish
them, [Isa 51:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#012). On this the
prophet turns to Jerusalem to comfort and congratulate her on so joyful
a prospect. She is represented, by a bold image, as a person lying in
the streets, under the intoxicating effects of the cup of the Divine
wrath, without a single person from among her own people appointed to
give her consolation, and trodden under the feet of her enemies; but, in
the time allotted by the Divine providence, the cup of trembling shall
be taken out of her hand, and put into that of her oppressors; and she
shall drink it no more again for ever, [Isa
51:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017).

[Isaiah 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 51:1</span></span>

Ye that follow after righteousness - The people who, feeling the want of
salvation, seek the Lord in order to be justified.

The rock - Abraham.

The hole of the pit - Sarah; as explained in [Isa
51:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#002).

[Isaiah 51:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 51:2</span></span>

I called him alone - As I have made out of one a great nation; so,
although ye are brought low and minished, yet I can restore you to
happiness, and greatly multiply your number.

[Isaiah 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 51:4</span></span>

By people - O my nation "O ye peoples - O ye nations" - For עמי ammi, my
people, the Bodleian MS. and another read עמים ammim, ye peoples; and
for לאומי leumi, my nation, the Bodleian MS. and eight others, (two of
them ancient), and four of De Rossi's, read לאמים leummim, ye nations;
and so the Syriac in both words. The difference is very material; for in
this case the address is made not to the Jews, but to the Gentiles, as
in all reason it ought to be; for this and the two following verses
express the call of the Gentiles, the islands, or the distant lands on
the coasts of the Mediterranean and other seas. It is also to be
observed that God in no other place calls his people לאמי leummi, my
nation. It has been before remarked that transcribers frequently omitted
the final מ mem of nouns plural, and supplied it, for brevity's sake,
and sometimes for want of room at the end of a line, by a small stroke
thus /עמי; which mark, being effaced or overlooked, has been the
occasion of many mistakes of this kind.

A law shall proceed from me - The new law, the Gospel of our Lord Jesus.
Kimchi says, "After the war with Gog and Magog the King Messiah will
teach the people to walk in the ways of the Lord."

[Isaiah 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 51:5</span></span>

My righteousness is near - The word צדק tsedek, righteousness, is used
in such a great latitude of signification, for justice, truth,
faithfulness, goodness, mercy, deliverance, salvation, etc., that it is
not easy sometimes to give the precise meaning of it without much
circumlocution; it means here the faithful completion of God's promises
to deliver his people.

[Isaiah 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 51:6</span></span>

My salvation shall be for ever - Aben Ezra says, From this verse divines
have learnt the immortality of the soul. Men shall perish as the earth
does, because they are formed from it; but they who are filled with the
salvation of God shall remain for ever. See Kimchi.

[Isaiah 51:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 51:11</span></span>

They shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and mourning shall flee
away - Nineteen MSS. and the two oldest editions have ישגו yasigu; and
forty-six MSS. of Kennicott's and ten of De Rossi's, and the same two
editions, and agreeably to them the Chaldee and Syriac, have ונסו
venasu; and so both words are expressed, [Isa
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010), of which place this is a
repetition. And from comparing both together it appears that the ו vau
in this place is become by mistake in the present text final, nun of the
preceding word.

[Isaiah 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 51:13</span></span>

Of the oppressor, as if he, etc. - "The כ caph in כאשר keasher seems
clearly to have changed its situation from the end of the preceding word
to the beginning of this; or rather, to have been omitted by mistake
there, because it was here. That it was there the Septuagint show by
rendering המציקך hammetsikech θλιβοντος σε, of him, that oppressed thee.
And so they render this word in both its places in this verse. The
Vulgate also has the pronoun in the first instance; furoris ejus qui te
tribulabat." Dr. Jubb. The correction seems well founded; I have not
conformed the translation to it, because it makes little difference in
the sense.

[Isaiah 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 51:14</span></span>

The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed "He marcheth on with
speed, who cometh to set free the captive" - Cyrus, if understood of the
temporal redemption from the captivity of Babylon; in the spiritual
sense, the Messiah, who comes to open the prison to them that are bound.

[Isaiah 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 51:16</span></span>

That I may plant the heavens "To stretch out the heavens" - In the
present text it is לנתע lintoa, "to plant the heavens:" the phrase is
certainly very obscure, and in all probability is a mistake for לנטות
lintoth. This latter is the word used in [Isa
51:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#013) just before, in the very same
sentence; and this phrase occurs very frequently in Isaiah, [Isa
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022), [Isa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005), [Isa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024), [Isa
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#012); the former in no other place.
It is also very remarkable, that in the Samaritan text, [Num
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#006), these two words are twice
changed by mistake, one for the other, in the same verse.

[Isaiah 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 51:17</span></span>

The cup of trembling - כוס התרעלה cos hattarelah, "the cup of mortal
poison," veneni mortiferi. - Montan. This may also allude to the ancient
custom of taking off criminals by a cup of poison. Socrates is well
known to have been sentenced by the Areopagus to drink a cup of the
juice of hemlock, which occasioned his death. See the note on [Heb
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009), and see also Bishop Lowth's note
on [Isa 51:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#021).

[Isaiah 51:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 51:19</span></span>

These two things - desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the
sword - That is, desolation by famine, and destruction by the sword,
taking the terms alternately: of which form of construction see other
examples. De S. Poesi, Hebrews Prael. xix., and Prelim. Dissert. p. 30.
The Chaldee paraphrast, not rightly understanding this, has had recourse
to the following expedient: "Two afflictions are come upon thee, and
when four shall come upon thee, depredation, and destruction, and the
famine, and the sword" Five MSS. הרעב haraab, without the conjunction ו
vau; and so the Septuagint and Syriac.

By whom shall I comfort thee "Who shall comfort thee" - A MS., the
Septuagint, Syriac, Chaldee, and Vulgate have it in the third person,
ינחמך yenachamech, which is evidently right.

[Isaiah 51:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 51:20</span></span>

As a wild bull in a net: they are full, etc. "Like the oryx taken in the
toils; drenched to the full" - "Perhaps מכמרה מלאים michmerah meleim."
Secker. The demonstrative ה he, prefixed to מלאים meleim, full, seems
improper in this place.

[Isaiah 51:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 51:21</span></span>

Drunken, but not with wine - Aeschylus has the same expression: -

Αοινοις εμμανεις θυμωμασι·

Eumen. 863.

Intoxicated with passion, not with wine.

Schultens thinks that this circumlocution, as he calls it, gradum adfert
incomparabiliter majorem; and that it means, not simply without wine,
but much more than with wine. Gram. Hebrews p. 182. See his note on Job
30:38.

The bold image of the cup of God's wrath, often employed by the sacred
writers, (see note on [Isa 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)), is
nowhere handled with greater force and sublimity than in this passage of
Isaiah, [Isa 51:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017). Jerusalem is
represented in person as staggering under the effects of it, destitute
of that assistance which she might expect from her children; not one of
them being able to support or to lead her. They, abject and amazed, lie
at the head of every street, overwhelmed with the greatness of their
distress; like the oryx entangled in a net, in vain struggling to rend
it, and extricate himself. This is poetry of the first order, sublimity
of the highest character.

Plato had an idea something like this: "Suppose," says he, "God had
given to men a medicating potion inducing fear, so that the more any one
should drink of it, so much the more miserable he should find himself at
every draught, and become fearful of every thing both present and
future; and at last, though the most courageous of men, should be
totally possessed by fear: and afterwards, having slept off the effects
of it, should become himself again." De Leg. i., near the end. He
pursues at large this hypothesis, applying it to his own purpose, which
has no relation to the present subject. Homer places two vessels at the
disposal of Jupiter, one of good, the other of evil. He gives to some a
potion mixed of both; to others from the evil vessel only: these are
completely miserable. Iliad 24:527-533.

Δοιοι γαρ τε πιθοι κατακειαται εν Διος ουδει

Δωρων, οἱα διδωσι, κακων, ἑτερος δε εαων,

Ὡ μεν καμμιξας δῳη Ζευς τερπικεραυνος,

Αλλοτε μεν τε κακῳ ὁγε κυρεται, αλλοτε δ' εσθλῳ·

Ὡ δε κε των λυγρων δῳη, λωβητον εθηκε.

Και ἑ κακη βουβρωστις επι χθονα διαν ελαυνει·

Φοιτᾳ δ' ουτε θεοισι τετιμενος, ουτι βροτοισιν.

"Two urns by Jove's high throne have ever stood,

The source of evil one, and one of good;

From thence the cup of mortal man he fills,

Blessings to these, to those distributes ills;

To most he mingles both: the wretch decreed

To taste the bad unmixed, is cursed indeed:

Pursued by wrongs, by meagre famine driven,

He wanders outcast both of earth and heaven."

Pope

[Isaiah 51:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 51:23</span></span>

Them that afflict thee "Them who oppress thee" - The Septuagint,
Chaldee, Syriac, and Vulgate appear to have read מוניך monayich, as in
[Isa 40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026)." - Secker.

Which have said to thy soul, Bow down "Who say to thee, Bow down thy
body" - A very strong and most expressive description of the insolent
pride of eastern conquerors; which, though it may seem greatly
exaggerated, yet hardly exceeds the strict truth. An example has already
been given of it in the note to [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023). I will here add one or two
more. "Joshua called for all the men of Israel; and said unto the
captains of the men of war that went with him, Come near, put your feet
upon the necks of these kings," [Jos
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#024). "Adonibezek said, Threescore
and ten kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut off,
gathered their meat under my table: As I have done, so hath God requited
me," [Jdg 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#007). The Emperor Valerianus,
being through treachery taken prisoner by Sapor king of Persia, was
treated by him as the basest and most abject slave: for the Persian
monarch commanded the unhappy Roman to bow himself down, and offer him
his back, on which he set his foot, in order to mount his chariot or
horse whenever he had occasion. - Lactantius, De Mort. Persec. cap. 5.
Aurel. Victor. Epitome, cap. xxxii. - L.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 52](isa052)

</div>
