<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa064)  [Next](isa066) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 65](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 65:0</span></span>

We have here a vindication of God's dealings with the Jews, [Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001), [Isa
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002). To this end the prophet points
out their great hypocrisy, and gives a particular enumeration of their
dreadful abominations, many of which were committed under the specious
guise of sanctity, [Isa 65:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003). For
their horrid impieties, (recorded in writing before Jehovah), the wrath
of God shall certainly come upon them to the uttermost; a prediction
which was exactly fulfilled in the first and second centuries in the
reigns of the Roman emperors Vespasian, Titus, and Hadrian, when the
whole Jewish polity was dissolved, and the people dispersed all over the
world, [Isa 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#006), [Isa
65:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#007). Though God had rejected the
Jews, and called the Gentiles, who sought him not, ([Rom
9:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024)), yet a remnant from among the
former shall be preserved, to whom he will in due time make good all his
promises, [Isa 65:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008). Denunciation
of Divine vengeance against those idolaters who set in order a table for
Gad, and fill out a libation to Meni, ancient idolatries, which, from
the context, and from the chronological order of the events predicted,
have a plain reference to the idolatries practiced by Antichrist under
the guise of Christianity, [Isa 65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011),
[Isa 65:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#012). Dreadful fate which awaits
these gross idolaters beautifully contrasted with the great blessedness
reserved for the righteous, [Isa
65:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#013). Future restoration of the
posterity of Jacob, and the happy state of the world in general from
that most glorious epoch, represented by the strong figure of the
creation of new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness,
and into which no distress shall be permitted to enter, [Isa
65:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017). In this new state of things
the term of human life shall be greatly protracted, and shall possess
none of that uncertainty which attaches to it in "the heavens and the
earth which are now." This is elegantly illustrated by the longevity of
a tree; manifestly alluding to the oak or cedar of Lebanon, some
individuals of which are known to have lived from seven to ten
centuries, [Isa 65:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020). Beautiful
figures shadowing forth the profound peace and harmony of the Church of
Jesus Christ, which shall immediately follow the total overthrow of
Antichrist; with a most gracious promise that the great chain of
Omnipotence shall be put upon every adversary, so that none will be able
any longer to hurt and destroy in all God's holy mountain, [Isa
65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024), [Isa
65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025).

This chapter contains a defense of God's proceedings in regard to the
Jews, with reference to their complaint in the chapter preceding. God is
introduced declaring that he had called the Gentiles, though they had
not sought him; and had rejected his own people for their refusal to
attend to his repeated call; for their obstinate disobedience, their
idolatrous practices, and detestable hypocrisy. That nevertheless he
would not destroy them all; but would preserve a remnant, to whom he
would make good his ancient promises. Severe punishments are threatened
to the apostates; and great rewards are promised to the obedient in a
future flourishing state of the Church. - L.

[Isaiah 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 65:1</span></span>

I am sought of them that asked not for me "I am made known to those that
asked not for me" - נדרשתי nidrashti, εμφανης εγενομην, the Septuagint,
Alexandrian, and St. Paul, [Rom 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020);
who has however inverted the order of the phrases, εμφανης εγενομην, "I
was made manifest, "and ευρεδην, "I was found, "from that which they
have in the Septuagint. נדרשתי nidrashti means, "I am sought so as to be
found." Vitringa. If this be the true meaning of the word, then שאלו
shaalu, "that asked," which follows, should seem defective, the verb
wanting its object: but two MSS., one of them ancient, have שאלוני
shealuni, "asked me;" and another MS. שאלו לי shealu li, "asked for me;"
one or other of which seems to be right. But Cocceius in Lex., and
Vitringa in his translation, render נדרשתי nidrashti, by "I have
answered;" and so the verb is rendered by all the ancient Versions in
[Eze 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#003), [Eze
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#031). If this be right, the
translation will be, "I have answered those that asked not." I leave
this to the reader's judgment; but have followed in my translation the
Septuagint and St. Paul, and the MSS. above mentioned. בקשני bikeshuni
is written regularly and fully in above a hundred MSS. and in the oldest
edition, בקשוני bikeshuni. - L.

[Isaiah 65:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 65:3</span></span>

That sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth incense upon altars of brick
"Sacrificing in the gardens, and burning incense on the tiles" - These
are instances of heathenish superstition, and idolatrous practices, to
which the Jews were immoderately addicted before the Babylonish
captivity. The heathen worshipped their idols in groves; whereas God, in
opposition to this species of idolatry, commanded his people, when they
should come into the promised land, to destroy all the places wherein
the Canaanites had served their gods, and in particular to burn their
groves with fire, [Deu 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#002), [Deu
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#003). These apostate Jews sacrificed
upon altars built of bricks; in opposition to the command of God in
regard to his altar, which was to be of unhewn stone, [Exo
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#026). Et pro uno altari, quod
impolitis lapidibus Dei erat lege constructum, coctos lateres et agrorum
cespites hostiarum sanguine cruentabant. "And instead of one altar
which, according to the law of God, was, to be constructed of unhewn
stones, they stained the bricks and turfs of the fields with the blood
of their victims." Hieron. in loc. Or it means, perhaps, that they
sacrificed upon the roofs of their houses, which were always flat, and
paved with brick, or tile, or plaster of terrace. An instance of this
idolatrous practice we find in [Kg2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012), where it is said that Josiah
"beat down the altars that were on the top of the upper chamber of Ahaz,
which the kings of Judah had made." See also [Zep
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005). Sir John Chardin's MS. note on
this place of Isaiah is as follows: "Ainsi font tous les Gentiles, sur
les lieux eleves, et sur les terrasses, appellez latcres, pareeque sont
faits de briq." "Who dwell in the sepulchres, and lodge in the caverns,"
for the purposes of necromancy and divination; to obtain dreams and
revelations. Another instance of heathenish superstition: so Virgil: -

Huc dona sacerdos

Cum tulit, et caesarum ovium sub nocte silenti

Pellibus incubuit stratis, somnosque petivit:

Multa modis simulacra videt volitantia miris,

Et varias audit voces, fruiturque deorum

Colloquio, atque imis Acheronta affatur Avernis.

Aen. 7:86. - L.

"Here in distress the Italian nations come,

Anxious, to clear their doubts, and learn their doom.

First, on the fleeces of the slaughtered sheep,

By night the sacred priest dissolves in sleep:

When in a train, before his slumbering eye,

Thin airy forms and wondrous visions fly.

He calls the powers who guard the infernal floods,

And talks inspired, familiar with the gods."

Pitt.

There was a practice exactly like this which prevailed among the
Highlanders of Scotland; an authentic account of this is given by Sir
Walter Scott, in a note on his poem called The Lady of the Lake. It is
as follows: -

"The Highlanders, like all rude people, had various superstitious modes
of inquiring into futurity. One of the most noted was the Taghairm,
mentioned in the text. A person was wrapped up in the skin of a
newly-slain bullock, and deposited beside a waterfall, or at the bottom
of a precipice, or in some other strange, wild, and unusual situation,
where the scenery around him suggested nothing but objects of horror. In
this situation he revolved in his mind the question proposed; and
whatever was impressed upon him by his exalted imagination passed for
the inspiration of the disembodied spirits who haunt these desolate
recesses. In some of the Hebrides, they attributed the same oracular
power to a large black stone by the sea-shore, which they approached
with certain solemnities; and considered the first fancy which came into
their own minds after they did so, to be the undoubted dictate of the
tutelar deity of the stone; and as such to be, if possible, punctually
complied with. Martin has recorded the following curious modes of
Highland augury, in which the Taghairm, and its effects upon the person
who was subjected to it, may serve to illustrate the text.

"It was an ordinary thing among the over-curious to consult an invisible
oracle concerning the fate of families and battles, etc. This was
performed three different ways; the first was by a company of men, one
of whom, being detached by lot, was afterwards carried to a river, which
was the boundary between two villages. Four of the company laid hold on
him; and, having shut his eyes, they took him by the legs and arms, and
then, tossing him to and again, struck his hips with force against the
bank. One of them cried out, What is it you have got here? Another
answers, A log of birch-wood. The other cries again, Let his invisible
friends appear from all quarters, and let them relieve him by giving an
answer to our present demands; and in a few minutes after, a number of
little creatures came from the sea, who answered the question, and
disappeared suddenly. The man was then set at liberty; and they all
returned home, to take their measures according to the prediction of
their false prophets; but the poor deluded fools were abused, for the
answer was still ambiguous. This was always practiced in the night, and
may literally be called the works of darkness.

"I had an account from the most intelligent and judicious men in the
Isle of Skie, that, about sixty-two years ago, the oracle was thus
consulted only once, and that was in the parish of Kilmartin, on the
east side, by a wicked and mischievous race of people, who are now
extinguished, both root and branch.

"The second way of consulting the oracle was by a party of men, who
first retired to solitary places, remote from any house; and there they
singled out one of their number, and wrapt him in a big cow's hide,
which they folded about him. His whole body was covered with it, except
his head, and so left in this posture all night, until his invisible
friends relieved him, by giving a proper answer to the question in hand;
which he received, as he fancied, from several persons that he found
about him all that time. His consorts returned to him at the break of
day, and then he communicated his news to them; which often proved fatal
to those concerned in such unwarrantable inquiries.

"There was a third way of consulting, which was a confirmation of the
second above mentioned. The same company who put the man into the hide
took a live cat, and put him on a spit. One of the number was employed
to turn the spit, and one of his consorts inquired of him, What are you
doing? He answered, I roast this cat until his friends answer the
question; which must be the same that was proposed by the man shut up in
the hide. And afterwards, a very big cat (in allusion to the story of
'the King of the Cats,' in Lord Lyttleton's Letters, and well known in
the Highlands as a nursery tale) comes, attended by a number of lesser
cats, desiring to relieve the cat turned upon the spit, and then answers
the question. If this answer proved the same that was given to the man
in the hide, then it was taken as a confirmation of the other, which, in
this case, was believed infallible.

"Mr. Alexander Cooper, present minister of North-Vist, told me that one
John Erach, in the Isle of Lewis, assured him it was his fate to have
been led by his curiosity with some who consulted this oracle, and that
he was a night within the hide, as above-mentioned; during which time he
felt and heard such terrible things, that he could not express them. The
impression it made on him was such as could never go off; and he said
for a thousand worlds he would never again be concerned in the like
performance, for this had disordered him to a high degree. He confessed
it ingenuously, and with an air of great remorse; and seemed to be very
penitent under a just sense of so great a crime. He declared this about
five years since, and is still living in the Lewis for any thing I
know." - Description of the Western Isles p. 110. See also Pennant's
Scottish Tour, vol. 2 p. 361.

[Isaiah 65:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 65:4</span></span>

Which remain among the graves - "For the purpose of evoking the dead.
They lodged in desert places that demons might appear to them; for
demons do appear in such places, to those who do believe in them." -
Kimchi.

In the monuments "In the caverns" - בנצורים bannetsurim, a word of
doubtful signification. An ancient MS. has בצורים batstsurim, another
בצרים batstsurim, "in the rocks;" and Le Clec thinks the Septuagint had
it so in their copy. They render it by εν τοις στηλαιοις, "in the
caves."

Which eat swine's flesh - This was expressly forbidden by the law, [Lev
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#007), but among the heathen was in
principal request in their sacrifices and feasts. Antiochus Epiphanes
compelled the Jews to eat swine's flesh, as a full proof of their
renouncing their religion, 2 Maccabees 6:18 and 7:1. "And the broth of
abominable meats," for lustrations, magical arts, and other
superstitious and abominable practices.

In their vessels - For כליהם keleyhem, a MS. had at first בכליהם
bichleyhem. So the Vulgate and Chaldee, (and the preposition seems
necessary to the sense), "in their vessels."

[Isaiah 65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 65:5</span></span>

For I am holier than thou - So the Chaldee renders it.

קדשתיך kedashticha is the same with קדשתי ממך kadashti mimmecha. In the
same manner חזקתני chazaktani, [Jer
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007), is used for חזקת ממני chazacta
mimmenni, "thou art stronger than I." - L.

[Isaiah 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 65:6</span></span>

Behold, it is written before me - Their sin is registered in heaven,
calling aloud for the punishment due to it.

I will - recompense into their bosom - The bosom is the place where the
Asiatics have their pockets, and not in their skirts like the
inhabitants of the west. Their loose flowing garments have scarcely any
thing analogous to skirts.

Into their bosom - For על al, ten MSS. and five editions have אל el. So
again at the end of this verse, seventeen MSS. and four editions have אל
al. - L.

[Isaiah 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 65:7</span></span>

Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers "Their iniquities,
and the iniquities of their fathers" - For the pronoun affixed of the
second person חם chem, your, twice, read הם hem, their, in the third
person; with the Septuagint and Houbigant. - L.

[Isaiah 65:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 65:8</span></span>

A blessing is in it - The Hebrews call all things which serve for food
ברכה berachah, "a blessing." On this verse Kimchi remarks: "As the
cluster of grapes contains, besides the juice, the bark, and the
kernels, so the Israelites have, besides the just, sinners among them.
Now as the cluster must not be destroyed because there is a blessing, a
nutritive part in it; so Israel shall not be destroyed, because there
are righteous persons in it. But as the bark and kernels are thrown
away, when the wine is pressed out, so shall the sinners be purged away
from among the just, and on their return from exile, shall not be
permitted to enter into the land of Israel;" [Eze
20:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#038).

For my servant's sakes "For the sake of my servant" - It is to be
observed that one of the Koningsburg MSS. collated by Lilienthal points
the word עבדי abdi, singular; that is, "my servant," meaning the
Messiah; and so read the Septuagint, which gives a very good sense. In
two of my old MSS. it is pointed עבדי abadai, and עבדי abdi, "my
servant, "this confirms the above reading.

[Isaiah 65:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 65:9</span></span>

An inheritor of my mountains "An inheritor of my mountain" - הרי hari,
in the singular number; so the Septuagint and Syriac; that is, of Mount
Sion. See [Isa 65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011) and [Isa
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007), to which Sion, the pronoun
feminine singular, added to the verb in the next line, refers; ירשוה
yereshuah, "shall inherit her." - L.

[Isaiah 65:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 65:10</span></span>

Sharon - and the valley of Achor - Two of the most fertile parts of
Judea; famous for their rich pastures; the former to the west, not far
from Joppa; the latter north of Jericho, near Gilgal.

[Isaiah 65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 65:11</span></span>

That prepare a table for that troop "Who set in order a table for Gad" -
The disquisitions and conjectures of the learned concerning Gad and Meni
are infinite and uncertain: perhaps the most probable may be, that Gad
means good fortune, and Meni the moon. "But why should we be solicitous
about it?" says Schmidius. "It appears sufficiently, from the
circumstances, that they were false gods; either stars, or some natural
objects; or a mere fiction. The Holy Scriptures did not deign to explain
more clearly what these objects of idolatrous worship were; but chose
rather, that the memory of the knowledge of them should be utterly
abolished. And God be praised, that they are so totally abolished, that
we are now quite at a loss to know what and what sort of things they
were." Schmidius on the place, and on [Jdg
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013), Bibl. Hallensia.

Jerome, on the place, gives an account of this idolatrous practice of
the apostate Jews, of making a feast, or a lectisternium, as the Romans
called it, for these pretended deities. Est in cunctis urbibus, et
maxime in Aegypto, et in Alexandria, idololatriae vetus consuetudo, ut
ultimo die anni, et mensis ejus qui extremus est, ponant mensam refertam
varii generis epulis, et poculum mulso mixtum; vel praeteriti anni vel
futuri fertilitatem auspicantes. Hoc autem faciebant et Israelitae,
omnium simulachrorum portenta venerantes; et nequaquam altari victimas,
sed hujusmodi mensae liba fundebant. "In all cities, and especially in
Egypt and Alexandria, it was an ancient idolatrous custom on the last
day of the year, to spread a table covered with various kinds of viands,
and a goblet mixed with new wine, referring to the fertility either of
the past or coming year. The Israelites did the same, worshipping all
kinds of images, and pouring out libations on such tables," etc. See
also Le Clerc on the place; and on [Isa
66:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#017), and Dav. Millii Dissert. v.

The allusion to Meni, which signifies number, is obvious. If there had
been the like allusion to Gad, which might have been expected, it might
perhaps have helped to let us into the meaning of that word. It appears
from Jerome's version of this place, that the words τῳ δαιμονιω, to a
demon, (or δαιμονι, as some copies have it), and τῃ τυχῃ, to fortune,
stood in his time in the Greek version in an inverted order from that
which they have in the present copies; the latter then answering to גד
gad, the former to מני meni: by which some difficulty would be avoided;
for it is commonly supposed that גד gad signifies τυχη, Fortune. See
[Gen 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#011), apud Sept. This matter is
so far well cleared up by MSS. Pachom. and 1. D. II., which agree in
placing these two words in that order, which Jerome's version supposes.
- L.

My Old MS. Bible translates: That putten the borde of fortune; and
offreden licours upon it; and so the Vulgate.

Ἑτοιμαζοντες τῳ δαιμονιῳ τραπεζαν, και πληρουντες τῃ τυχῃ κερασμα.
Preparing a table for the demon, and filling up, or pouring out, a
libation to fortune."

Septuagint.

Ye have set up an aulter unto fortune

And geven rich drink offeringes unto treasure.

Coverdale.

[Isaiah 65:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 65:12</span></span>

Therefore will I number you - Referring to Meni, which signifies number
"Rabbi Eliezar said to his disciples, Turn to God one day before you
die. His disciples said, How call a man know the day of his death? He
answered, Therefore it is necessary that you should turn to God to-day,
for possibly ye may die to-morrow."

[Isaiah 65:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 65:13</span></span>

My servants shalt eat, but ye shall be hungry - Rabbi Joachan ben Zachai
said in a parable: There was a king who invited his servants, but set
them no time to come to the feast. The prudent and wary who were among
them adorned themselves; and, standing at the gate of the king's house,
said, Is there any thing lacking in the king's house? i.e., Is there any
work to be done in it? But the foolish which were among them went, and
mocking said, When shall the feast be, in which there is no labor?
Suddenly, the king sought out his servants: they who were adorned
entered in, and they who were still polluted entered in also. The king
was glad when he met the prudent, but he was angry when he met the
foolish. Therefore he said, Let those sit down, and let them eat; but
let these stand and look on.

This parable is very like that of the wise and foolish virgins, Matthew
25, and that of the marriage of the king's son, Matthew 22.

[Isaiah 65:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 65:15</span></span>

Shall slay thee "Shall slay you" - For והמיתך vehemithecha, shall slay
thee, the Septuagint and Chaldee read והמיתכם vehemithechem, shall slay
you, plural.

[Isaiah 65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 65:17</span></span>

I create new heavens and a new earth - This has been variously
understood. Some Jews and some Christians understand it literally. God
shall change the state of the atmosphere, and render the earth more
fruitful. Some refer it to what they call the Millennium; others, to a
glorious state of religion; others, to the re-creation of the earth
after it shall have been destroyed by fire. I think it refers to the
full conversion of the Jews ultimately; and primarily to the deliverance
from the Babylonish captivity.

[Isaiah 65:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 65:18</span></span>

Rejoice for ever in that which I create "Exult in the age to come which
I create" - So in [Isa 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005) אבי עד abi
ad, πατηρ του μελλοντος αιωνος, "the father of the age to come," Sept.
See Bishop Chandler, Defence of Christianity, p. 136.

[Isaiah 65:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 65:19</span></span>

The voice of weeping, etc. - "Because of untimely deaths shall no more
be heard in thee; for natural death shall not happen till men be full of
days; as it is written, [Isa 65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020) :
There shall be no more thence an infant of days, i.e., the people shall
live to three or five hundred years of age, as in the days of the
patriarchs; and if one die at one hundred years, it is because of his
sin; and even at that age he shall be reputed an infant; and they shall
say of him, An infant is dead. These things shall happen to Israel in
the days of the Messiah." - Kimchi.

[Isaiah 65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 65:20</span></span>

Thence "There" - For משם mishsham, thence, the Septuagint, Syriac, and
Vulgate, read שם sham, there.

[Isaiah 65:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 65:22</span></span>

They shall not build, and another inhabit - The reverse of the curse
denounced on the disobedient, [Deu
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030) : "Thou shalt build a house, and
thou shalt not dwell therein; thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not
gather the grapes thereof."

For as the days of a tree - It is commonly supposed that the oak, one of
the most longlived of the trees, lasts about a thousand years; being
five hundred years growing to full perfection, and as many decaying:
which seems to be a moderate and probable computation. See Evelyn,
Sylva, B. 3 chap. 3. The present emperor of China, in his very ingenious
and sensible poem entitled Eloge de Moukden, a translation of which in
French was published at Paris, 1770, speaks of a tree in his country
which lives more than a hundred ages: and another, which after fourscore
ages is only in its prime, pp. 37, 38. But his imperial majesty's
commentators, in their note on the place, carry the matter much farther;
and quote authority, which affirms, that the tree last mentioned by the
emperor, the immortal tree, after having lived ten thousand years, is
still only in its prime. I suspect that the Chinese enlarge somewhat in
their national chronology, as well as in that of their trees. See Chou
King. Preface, by Mons. de Guignes. The prophet's idea seems to be, that
they shall live to the age of the antediluvians; which seems to be very
justly expressed by the days of a tree, according to our notions. The
rabbins have said that this refers to the tree of life, which endures
five hundred years. - L.

[Isaiah 65:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 65:23</span></span>

They shall not labor in vain "My chosen shall not labor in vain" - I
remove בחירי bechirai, my elect, from the end of the twenty-second to
the beginning of the twenty-third verse, on the authority of the
Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate, and a MS.; contrary to the division in
the Masoretic text. - L. The Septuagint is beautiful: My chosen shall
not labor in vain, neither shall they beget children for the curse; for
the seed is blessed of the Lord, and their posterity with them."

Nor bring forth for trouble "Neither shall they generate a short-lived
race" - לבהלה labbehalah, in festinationem, "what shall soon hasten
away." Εις καταραν for a curse, Sept. They seem to have read לאלה
lealah. - Grotius. But [Psa 78:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#033) both
justifies and explains the word here: -

ימיהם בהבל ויכל yemeyhem bahebel vayechal בבהלה ושנותם babbehalah
ushenotham

"And he consumed their days in vanity;

And their years in haste."

μετα σπουδης, say the Septuagint. Jerome on this place of Isaiah
explains it to the same purpose: "εις ανυπαρξιαν, hoc est, ut esse
desistant."

[Isaiah 65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 65:24</span></span>

Before they call, I will answer - I will give them all they crave for,
and more than they can desire.

[Isaiah 65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 65:25</span></span>

The wolf and the lamb, etc. - The glorious salvation which Jesus Christ
procures is for men, and for men only: fallen spirits must still abide
under the curse: "He took not on him the nature of angels, but the seed
of Abraham."

Shall feed together - For כאחד keechad, as one, an ancient MS. has יחדו
yachdav, together; the usual word, to the same sense, but very different
in the letters. The Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate seem to agree with
the MSS. - L.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 66](isa066)

</div>
