<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa017)  [Next](isa019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 18:0</span></span>

This chapter contains a very obscure prophecy; possibly designed to give
the Jews, and perhaps the Egyptians, whose country is supposed to be
meant, [Isa 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001), [Isa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#002), and with whom many Jews resided,
an indignation of God's interposition in favor of Sion, [Isa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#003), [Isa
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004); and of his counsels in regard to
the destruction of their common enemy, Sennacherib, whose vast army,
just as he thought his projects ripe, and ready to be crowned with
success, [Isa 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#005), should become a
prey to the beasts of the field, and to the fowls of heaven, [Isa
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#006); and that Egypt should be
grateful to God for the deliverance vouchsafed her, [Isa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#007).

This is one of the most obscure prophecies in the whole Book of Isaiah.
The subject of it, the end and design of it, the people to whom it is
addressed, the history to which it belongs, the person who sends the
messengers, and the nation to whom the messengers are sent, are all
obscure and doubtful. - L.

[Isaiah 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 18:1</span></span>

Wo to the land - הוי ארץ hoi arets! This interjection should be
translated ho! for it is properly a particle of calling: Ho, land!
Attend! Give ear!

Shadowing with wings "The winged cymbal" - צלצל כנפים tsiltsal
kenaphayim. I adopt this as the most probable of the many
interpretations that have been given of these words. It is Bochart's:
see Phaleg, 4:2. The Egyptian sistrum is expressed by a periphrasis; the
Hebrews had no name for it in their language, not having in use the
instrument itself. The cymbal they had was an instrument in its use and
sound not much unlike the sistrum; and to distinguish it from the
sistrum, they called it the cymbal with wings. The cymbal was a round
hollow piece of metal, which, being struck against another, gave a
ringing sound: the sistrum was a round instrument, consisting of a broad
rim of metal, through which from side to side ran several loose laminae
or small rods of metal, which being shaken, gave a like sound. These,
projecting on each side, had somewhat the appearance of wings; or might
be very properly expressed by the same word which the Hebrews used for
wings, or for the extremity, or a part of any thing projecting. The
sistrum is given in a medal of Adrian, as the proper attribute of Egypt.
See Addison on Medals, Series 3. No. 4; where the figure of it may be
seen. The frame of the sistrum was in shape rather like the ancient
lyre; it was not round.

If we translate shadowing with wings, it may allude to the multitude of
its vessels, whose sails may be represented under the notion of wings.
The second verse seems to support this interpretation. Vessels of
bulrushes, גמא gome, or rather the flag papyrus, so much celebrated as
the substance on which people wrote in ancient times, and from which our
paper is denominated. The sails might have been made of this flag: but
whole canoes were constructed from it. Mat sails are used to the present
day in China. The Vulgate fully understood the meaning of the word, and
has accordingly translated, in vasis papyri, "in vessels of papyrus."
Reshi vesselis. - Old MS. Bib. This interpretation does not please Bp.
Lowth, and for his dissent he gives the following reasons: -

In opposition to other interpretations of these words which have
prevailed, it may be briefly observed that צלצל tsiltsel is never used
to signify shadow, nor is כנף canaph applied to the sails of ships. If,
therefore, the words are rightly interpreted the winged cymbal, meaning
the sistrum, Egypt must be the country to which the prophecy is
addressed. And upon this hypothesis the version and explanation must
proceed. I farther suppose, that the prophecy was delivered before
Sennacherib's return from his Egyptian expedition, which took up three
years; and that it was designed to give to the Jews, and perhaps
likewise to the Egyptians, an intimation of God's counsels in regard to
the destruction of their great and powerful enemy.

Which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia "Which borders on the rivers of
Cush" - What are the rivers of Cush? whether the eastern branches of the
lower Nile, the boundary of Egypt towards Arabia, or the parts of the
upper Nile towards Ethiopia, it is not easy to determine. The word מעבר
meeber signifies either on this side or on the farther side: I have made
use of the same kind of ambiguous expression in the translation.

[Isaiah 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 18:2</span></span>

In vessels of bulrushes "In vessels of papyrus" - This circumstance
agrees perfectly well with Egypt. It is well known that the Egyptians
commonly used on the Nile a light sort of ships, or boats, made of the
reed papyrus. Ex ipso quidem papyro navigia texunt. Pliny, 42:11.

Conseritur bibula Memphitis cymba papyro.

Lucan, 4:136.

Go, ye swift messengers - To this nation before mentioned, who, by the
Nile, and by their numerous canals, have the means of spreading the
report in the most expeditious manner through the whole country: go, ye
swift messengers, and carry this notice of God's designs in regard to
them. By the swift messengers are meant, not any particular persons
specially appointed to this office, but any of the usual conveyers of
news whatsoever, travelers, merchants, and the like, the instruments and
agents of common fame. These are ordered to publish this declaration
made by the prophet throughout Egypt, and to all the world; and to
excite their attention to the promised visible interposition of God.

Scattered "Stretched out in length" - Egypt, that is, the fruitful part,
exclusive of the deserts on each side, is one long vale, through the
middle of which runs the Nile, bounded on each side to the east and west
by a chain of mountains seven hundred and fifty miles in length; in
breadth from one to two or three days' journey: even at the widest part
of the Delta, from Pelusium to Alexandria, not above two hundred and
fifty miles broad. Egmont and Hayman, and Pococke.

Peeled "Smoothed" - Either relating to the practice of the Egyptian
priests, who made their bodies smooth by shaving off their hair, (see
Herod. 2:37); or rather to their country's being made smooth, perfectly
plain and level, by the overflowing of the Nile.

Meted out "Meted out by line" - It is generally referred to the frequent
necessity of having recourse to mensuration in Egypt, in order to
determine the boundaries after the inundations of the Nile; to which
even the origin of the science of geometry is by some ascribed. Strabo,
lib. 17 sub init.

Trodden down - Supposed to allude to a peculiar method of tillage in use
among the Egyptians. Both Herodotus, (lib. ii.), and Diodorus, (lib.
i.), say that when the Nile had retired within its banks, and the ground
became somewhat dry, they sowed their land, and then sent in their
cattle, (their hogs, says the former), to tread in the seed; and without
any farther care expected the harvest.

The rivers have spoiled "The rivers have nourished" - The word בזאו
bazeu is generally taken to be an irregular form for בזזו bazezu, "have
spoiled," as four MSS. have it in this place; and so most of the
Versions, both ancient and modern, understand it. On which Schultens,
Gram. Hebrews p. 491, has the following re; mark:"Ne minimam quidem
speciem veri habet בזאו bazau, Esai. [Isa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#002), elatum pro בזזו bazazu,
deripiunt. Haec esset anomalia, cui nihil simile in toto linguae ambitu.
In talibus nil finire, vel fateri ex mera agi conjectura, tutius
justiusque. Radicem בזא baza olim extare potuisse, quis neget? Si
cognatum quid sectandum erat, ad בזה bazah, contemsit, potius
decurrendum fuisset; ut בזאו bazeu, pro בזו bazu, sit enuntiatum, vel
בזיו baziv. Digna phrasis, flumina contemmunt terram, i.e., inundant."
"בזא baza, Arab. extulit se superbius, item subjecit sibi: unde praet.
pl. בזאו bazeu, subjecerunt sibi, i.e., inundarunt." - Simonis' Lexic.
Heb.

A learned friend has suggested to me another explanation of the word.
בזא baza, Syr., and ביזא beiza, Chald., signifies uber, "a dug," mamma,
"a breast;" agreeably to which the verb signifies to nourish. This would
perfectly well suit with the Nile: whereas nothing can be more
discordant than the idea of spoiling and plundering; for to the
inundation of the Nile Egypt owed every thing; the fertility of the
soil, and the very soil itself. Besides, the overflowing of the Nile
came on by gentle degrees, covering with out laying waste the country:
"Mira aeque natura fluminis, quod cum caeteri omnes abluant terras et
eviscerent, Nilus tanto caeteris major adeo nihil exedit, nec abradit,
ut contra adjiciat vires; minimumque in eo sit, quod solum temperet.
Illato enim limo arenas saturat ac jungit; debetque illi Aegyptus non
tantum fertilitatem terrarum, sed ipsas." - Seneca, Nat. Quaest., 4:2. I
take the liberty, therefore, which Schultens seems to think allowable in
this place, of hazarding a conjectural interpretation. It is a fact that
the Ganges changes its course, and overruns and lays barren whole
districts, from which it was a few years back several miles distant.
Such changes do not nourish but spoil the ground.

[Isaiah 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 18:3</span></span>

When he lifteth up an ensign "When the standard is lifted up" - I take
God to be the Agent in this verse; and that by the standard and the
trumpet are meant the meteors, the thunder, the lightning, the storm,
earthquake, and tempest, by which Sennacherib's army shall be destroyed,
or by which at least the destruction of it shall be accompanied; as it
is described in [Isa 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#016), [Isa
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#017); [Isa
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#006), and [Isa
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030), [Isa
30:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#031). See also [Psa
76:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001) (note), and the title of it,
according to the Septuagint, Vulgate and Aethiopic. They are called, by
a bold metaphor, the standard lifted up, and the trumpet sounded. The
latter is used by Homer, I think with great force, in his introduction
to the battle of the gods; though I find it has disgusted some of the
minor critics: -

Βραχε δ' ευρεια χθων,

Αμφι δε σαλπιγζεν μεγας ουρανος.

Il. 21:388.

"Heaven in loud thunders bids the trumpet sound,

And wide beneath them groans the rending ground."

Pope

[Isaiah 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 18:4</span></span>

For so the Lord said unto me "For thus hath Jehovah said unto me" - The
subject of the remaining part of this chapter is, that God would comfort
and support his own people, though threatened with immediate destruction
by the Assyrians; that Sennacherib's great designs and mighty efforts
against them should be frustrated; and that his vast expectations should
be rendered abortive, when he thought them mature, and just ready to be
crowned with success; that the chief part of his army should be made a
prey for the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, (for this is
the meaning of the allegory continued through the fifth and sixth
verses); and that Egypt, being delivered from his oppression, and
avenged by the hand of God of the wrongs which she had suffered, should
return thanks for the wonderful deliverance, both of herself and of the
Jews, from this most powerful adversary.

Like a clear heat "Like the clear heat" - The same images are employed
by an Arabian poet: -

Solis more fervens, dum frigus; quumque ardet

Sirius, tum vero frigus ipse et umbra.

Which is illustrated in the note by a like passage from another Arabian
poet: -

Calor est hyeme, refrigerium aestate.

Excerpta ex Hamasa; published by Schultens, at the end of Erpenius's
Arabic Grammar, p. 425.

Upon herbs "After rain" - "אור aur here signifies rain, according to
what is said [Job 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#011) : 'The cloud
scatters his rain.'" - Kimchi. In which place of Job the Chaldee
paraphrast does indeed explain אורו auro by מטריה matereyh; and so again
[Job 36:21](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#021) and [Job
36:30](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#030). This meaning of the word seems
to make the best sense in this place; it is to be wished that it were
better supported.

In the heat of harvest "In the day of harvest" - For בחם bechom, in the
heat, fourteen MSS., (several ancient), the Septuagint, Syriac, Arabic,
and Vulgate read ביום beyom, in the day. The mistake seems to have
arisen from כחם kechom in the line above.

[Isaiah 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 18:5</span></span>

The flower "The blossom" - Hebrews her blossom; נצה nitstsah, that is,
the blossom of the vine, גפן gephen, vine, understood, which is of the
common gender. See [Gen 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#010). Note,
that by the defective punctuation of this word, many interpreters, and
our translators among the rest, have been led into a grievous mistake,
(for how can the swelling grape become a blossom?) taking the word נצה
nitstsah for the predicate; whereas it is the subject of the
proposition, or the nominative case to the verb.

[Isaiah 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 18:7</span></span>

The present "A gift" - The Egyptians were in alliance with the kingdom
of Judah, and were fellow-sufferers with the Jews under the invasion of
their common enemy Sennacherib; and so were very nearly interested in
the great and miraculous deliverance of that kingdom, by the destruction
of the Assyrian army. Upon which wonderful event it is said, [Ch2
32:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#023), that "many brought gifts unto
Jehovah to Jerusalem, and presents to Hezekiah king of Judah; so that he
was magnified of all nations from henceforth." It is not to be doubted,
that among these the Egyptians distinguished themselves in their
acknowledgments on this occasion.

Of a people "From a people" - Instead of עם am, a people, the Septuagint
and Vulgate read מעם meam, from a people, which is confirmed by the
repetition of it in the next line. The difference is of importance; for
if this be the true reading, the prediction of the admission of Egypt
into the true Church of God is not so explicit as it might otherwise
seem to be. However, that event is clearly foretold at the end of the
next chapter. - L.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 19](isa019)

</div>
