<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa022)  [Next](isa024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 23:0</span></span>

Prophecy denouncing the destruction of Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar, delivered
upwards of one hundred and twenty years before its accomplishment, at a
period when the Tyrians were in great prosperity, and the Babylonians in
abject subjection to the Assyrian empire; and, consequently, when an
event of so great magnitude was improbable in the highest degree, [Isa
23:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001). Tyre shall recover its
splendor at the termination of seventy years, the days of One king, or
kingdom, by which must be meant the time allotted for the duration of
the Babylonish empire, as otherwise the prophecy cannot be accommodated
to the event, [Isa 23:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#015). Supposed
reference to the early conversion of Tyre to Christianity, [Isa
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#018).

[Isaiah 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 23:1</span></span>

The burden of Tyre - Tyre, a city on the coast of Syria, about lat. 32
N. was built two thousand seven hundred and sixty years before Christ.
There were two cities of this name; one on the continent, and the other
on an island, about half a mile from the shore; the city on the island
was about four miles in circumference. Old Tyre resisted Nebuchadnezzar
for thirteen years; then the inhabitants carried, so to speak, the city
to the forementioned island, [Isa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#004). This new city held out against
Alexander the Great for seven months; who, in order to take it, was
obliged to fill up the channel which separated it from the main land. In
a.d. 1289 it was totally destroyed by the sultan of Egypt; and now
contains only a few huts, in which about fifty or sixty wretched
families exist. This desolation was foretold by this prophet and by
Ezekiel, one thousand nine hundred years before it took place!

Howl, ye ships of Tarshish - This prophecy denounces the destruction of
Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar. It opens with an address to the Tyrian
negotiators and sailors at Tarshish, (Tartessus, in Spain), a place
which, in the course of their trade, they greatly frequented. The news
of the destruction of Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar is said to be brought to
them from Chittim, the islands and coasts of the Mediterranean; "for the
Tyrians," says Jerome on [Isa 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#006),
"when they saw they had no other means of escaping, fled in their ships,
and took refuge in Carthage and in the islands of the Ionian and Aegean
sea." From whence the news would spread and reach Tarshish; so also
Jarchi on the same place. This seems to be the most probable
interpretation of this verse.

[Isaiah 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 23:2</span></span>

Be still "Be silent" - Silence is a mark of grief and consternation. See
[Isa 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#005). Jeremiah has finely
expressed this image: -

"The elders of the daughter of Zion sit on the ground, they are silent:

They have cast up dust on their heads, they have girded themselves with
sackcloth.

The virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground."

[Lam 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#010).

[Isaiah 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 23:3</span></span>

The seed of Sihor "The seed of the Nile" - The Nile is called here
Shichor, as it is [Jer 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#018), and [Ch1
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#005). It had this name from the
blackness of its waters, charged with the mud which it brings down from
Ethiopia when it overflows, Et viridem Aegyptum nigra fecundat arena; as
it was called by the Greeks Melas, and by the Latins Melo, for the same
reason. See Servius on the above line of Virgil, Georg. 4:291. It was
called Siris by the Ethiopians, by some supposed to be the same with
Shichor. Egypt by its extraordinary fertility, caused by the overflowing
of the Nile supplied the neighboring nations with corn, by which branch
of trade the Tyrians gained great wealth.

[Isaiah 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 23:4</span></span>

Be thou ashamed, O Zidon - Tyre is called [Isa
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#012), the daughter of Sidon. "The
Sidonians," says Justin, 18:3, "when their city was taken by the king of
Ascalon, betook themselves to their ships, and landed, and built by
Tyre." Sidon, as the mother city is supposed to be deeply affected with
the calamity of her daughter.

Nor bring up virgins "Nor educated virgins" - ורוממתי veromamti; so an
ancient MS. Of Dr. Kennicott's prefixing the ו vau, which refers to the
negative preceding, and is equivalent to ולא velo. See [Deu
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#006); [Pro
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#003). Two of my own MSS. have ו vau in
the margin.

[Isaiah 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 23:7</span></span>

Whose antiquity is of ancient days "Whose antiquity is of the earliest
date" - Justin, in the passage above quoted, had dated the building of
Tyre at a certain number of years before the taking of Troy; but the
number is lost in the present copies. Tyre, though not so old as Sidon,
was yet of very high antiquity: it was a strong city even in the time of
Joshua. It is called עיר מבצר צר ir mibtsar tsor, "the city of the
fortress of Sor," [Jos 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#029).
Interpreters raise difficulties in regard to this passage, and will not
allow it to have been so ancient; with what good reason I do not see,
for it is called by the same name, "the fortress of Sor," in the history
of David, [Sa2 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#007), and the
circumstances of the history determine the place to be the very same.
See on [Isa 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001) (note).

Whose antiquity is of ancient days, may refer to Palaetyrus, or Old
Tyre.

Her own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn - This may belong to
the new or insular Tyre; her own feet, that is, her own inhabitants,
shall carry her - shall transport the city, from the continent to the
island. "But the text says it shall be carried far off, and the new city
was founded only half a mile distant from the other." I answer, מרחוק
merachok does not always signify a great distance, but distance or
interval in general; for in [Jos 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#004)
רחוק rachok is used to express the space between the camp and the ark,
which we know to have been only two thousand cubits. Some refer the
sojourning afar off to the extent of the commercial voyages undertaken
by the Tyrians and their foreign connections.

[Isaiah 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 23:10</span></span>

O daughter of Tarshish - Tyre is called the daughter of Tarshish;
perhaps because, Tyre being ruined, Tarshish was become the superior
city, and might be considered as the metropolis of the Tyrian people; or
rather because of the close connection and perpetual intercourse between
them, according to that latitude of signification in which the Hebrews
use the words son and daughter to express any sort of conjunction and
dependence whatever. מזח mezach, a girdle, which collects, binds, and
keeps together the loose raiment, when applied to a river, may mean a
mound, mole, or artificial dam, which contains the waters and prevents
them from spreading abroad. A city taken by siege and destroyed, whose
walls are demolished, whose policy is dissolved, whose wealth is
dissipated, whose people is scattered over the wide country, is compared
to a river whose banks are broken down, and whose waters, let loose and
overflowing all the neighboring plains, are wasted and lost. This may
possibly be the meaning of this very obscure verse, of which I can find
no other interpretation that is at all satisfactory. - L.

[Isaiah 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 23:13</span></span>

Behold the land of the Chaldeans - This verse is extremely obscure; the
obscurity arises from the ambiguity of the agents, which belong to the
verbs, and of the objects expressed by the pronouns; from the change of
number of the verbs, and of gender in the pronouns. The MSS. give us no
assistance, and the ancient Versions very little. The Chaldee and
Vulgate read שמוה samoah, in the plural number. I have followed the
interpretation which, among many different ones, seemed to be most
probable, that of Perizonius and Vitringa.

The Chaldeans, Chasdim, are supposed to have had their origin, and to
have taken their name, from Chesed, the son of Nachor, the brother of
Abraham. They were known by that name in the time of Moses, who calls Ur
in Mesopotamia, from whence Abraham came, to distinguish it from other
places of the same name, Ur of the Chaldeans. And Jeremiah calls them an
ancient nation. This is not inconsistent with what Isaiah here says of
them: "This people was not," that is, they were of no account, (see [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)); they were not reckoned among
the great and potent nations of the world till of later times; they were
a rude, uncivilized, barbarous people, without laws, without settled
habitations; wandering in a wide desert country (ציים tsiyim) and
addicted to rapine like the wild Arabians. Such they are represented to
have been in the time of Job, [Job
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#017), and such they continued to be
till Assur, some powerful king of Assyria, gathered them together, and
settled them in Babylon in the neighboring country. This probably was
Ninus, whom I suppose to have lived in the time of the Judges. In this,
with many eminent chronologers, I follow the authority of Herodotus, who
says that the Assyrian monarchy lasted but five hundred and twenty
years. Ninus got possession of Babylon from the Cuthean Arabians; the
successors of Nimrod in that empire collected the Chaldeans, and settled
a colony of them there to secure the possession of the city, which he
and his successors greatly enlarged and ornamented. They had perhaps
been useful to him in his wars, and might be likely to be farther useful
in keeping under the old inhabitants of that city, and of the country
belonging to it; according to the policy of the Assyrian kings, who
generally brought new people into the conquered countries; see [Isa
36:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#017); [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006), [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024). The testimony of Dicaearchus, a
Greek historian contemporary with Alexander, (apud. Steph. de Urbibus,
in voc. Χαλδαιος), in regard to the fact is remarkable, though he is
mistaken in the name of the king he speaks of. He says that "a certain
king of Assyria, the fourteenth in succession from Ninus, (as he might
be, if Ninus is placed, as in the common chronology, eight hundred years
higher than we have above set him), named, as it is said, Chaldaeus,
having gathered together and united all the people called Chaldeans,
built the famous city, Babylon, upon the Euphrates." - L.

[Isaiah 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 23:14</span></span>

Howl, ye shops - The Prophet Ezekiel hath enlarged upon this part of the
same subject with great force and elegance: -

"Thus saith the Lord Jehovah concerning Tyre: -

At the sound of thy fall, at the cry of the wounded,

At the great slaughter in the midst of thee, shall not the islands
tremble?

And shall not all the princes of the sea descend from their thrones,

And lay aside their robes, and strip off their embroidered garments?

They shall clothe themselves with trembling, they shall sit on the
ground;

They shall tremble every moment, they shall be astonished at thee.

And they shall utter a lamentation over thee, and shall say unto thee:

How art thou lost, thou that wast inhabited from the seas!

The renowned city, that was strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants!

That struck with terror all her neighbors!

Now shall the coasts tremble in the day of thy fall,

And the isles that are in the sea shall be troubled at thy departure."

[Eze 26:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#015).

[Isaiah 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 23:15</span></span>

According to the days of one king - What is, of one kingdom; see [Dan
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#017), [Dan
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020). Nebuchadnezzar began his
conquests in the first year of his reign; from thence to the taking of
Babylon by Cyrus are seventy years, at which time the nations subdued by
Nebuchadnezzar were to be restored to liberty. These seventy years limit
the duration of the Babylonish monarchy. Tyre was taken by him towards
the middle of that period; so did not serve the king of Babylon during
the whole period, but only for the remaining part of it. This seems to
be the meaning of Isaiah; the days allotted to the one king or kingdom,
are seventy years; Tyre, with the rest of the conquered nations, shall
continue in a state of subjection and desolation to the end of that
period. Not from the beginning and through the whole of the period; for,
by being one of the latest conquests, the duration of that state of
subjection in regard to her, was not much more than half of it. "All
these nations," saith Jeremiah, [Jer
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011), "shall serve the king of
Babylon seventy years." Some of them were conquered sooner, some later;
but the end of this period was the common term for the deliverance of
them all.

There is another way of computing the seventy years, from the year in
which Tyre was actually taken to the nineteenth of Darius Hystaspis;
whom the Phoenicians, or Tyrians, assisted against the Ionians, and
probably on that account might then be restored to their former
liberties and privileges. But I think the former the more probable
interpretation. - L.

Sing as a harlot - Fidicinam esse meretricum est. says Donatus in
Terent. Eunuch. 3:2, 4.

Nec meretrix tibicina, cujus Ad strepitum salias.

Hor. 1:Epist. 14:25.

"Nor harlot minstrel sings, when the rude sound

Tempts you with heavy heels to thump the ground."

Francis.

Sir John Chardin, in his MS. note on this place, says: -

C'est que les vielles prostituees, -

ne font que chanter quand les jeunes dancent, et les animer par
l'instrument et par la voix.

"The old prostitutes do nothing but sing, while the young ones dance;
and animate them both by vocal and instrumental music."

[Isaiah 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 23:17</span></span>

After the end of seventy years - Tyre, after its destruction by
Nebuchadnezzar, recovered, as it is here foretold, its ancient trade,
wealth, and grandeur; as it did likewise after a second destruction by
Alexander. It became Christian early with the rest of the neighboring
countries. St. Paul himself found many Christians there, [Act
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#004). It suffered much in the
Diocletian persecution. It was an archbishopric under the patriarchate
of Jerusalem, with fourteen bishoprics under its jurisdiction. It
continued Christian till it was taken by the Saracens in 639; was
recovered by the Christians in 1124; but in 1280 was conquered by the
Mamelukes, and afterwards taken from them by the Turks in 1517. Since
that time it has sunk into utter decay; is now a mere ruin, a bare rock,
"a place to spread nets upon," as the Prophet Ezekiel foretold it should
be, [Eze 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#014). See Sandy's Travels;
Vitringa on the place; Bp. Newton on the Prophecies, Dissert. xi.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 24](isa024)

</div>
