<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa052)  [Next](isa054) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 53](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 53:0</span></span>

This chapter foretells the sufferings of the Messiah, the end for which
he was to die, and the advantages resulting to mankind from that
illustrious event. It begins with a complaint of the infidelity of the
Jews, [Isa 53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001); the offense they took
at his mean and humble appearance, [Isa
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002); and the contempt with which they
treated him, [Isa 53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003). The prophet
then shows that the Messiah was to suffer for sins not his own; but that
our iniquities were laid on him, and the punishment of them exacted of
him, which is the meritorious cause of our obtaining pardon and
salvation, [Isa 53:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004). He shows the
meekness and placid submission with which he suffered a violent and
unjust death, with the circumstances of his dying with the wicked, and
being buried with the great, [Isa
53:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007); and that, in consequence of
his atonement, death, resurrection, and intercession, he should procure
pardon and salvation to the multitudes, insure increasing prosperity to
his Church, and ultimately triumph over all his foes, [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010), [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011). This chapter contains a
beautiful summary of the most peculiar and distinguishing doctrines of
Christianity.

That this chapter speaks of none but Jesus must be evident to every
unprejudiced reader who has ever heard the history of his sufferings and
death. The Jews have endeavored to apply it to their sufferings in
captivity; but, alas for their cause! they can make nothing out in this
way. Allowing that it belongs to our blessed Lord, (and the best men and
the best scholars agree in this), then who can read [Isa
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004), [Isa
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005), [Isa
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006), [Isa
53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008), [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010), without being convinced that
his death was a vicarious sacrifice for the sins of mankind? On the
first and second verses of this chapter I have received the following
remarks from an unknown hand.

[Isaiah 53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 53:1</span></span>

Who hath believed our report? - The report of the prophets, of John the
Baptist, and Christ's own report of himself. The Jews did not receive
the report, and for this reason he was not manifested to them as the
promised Messiah. 'He came unto his own, but his own received him not.'
Before the Father he grew up as a tender plant: but to the Jews he was
as a root out of a dry ground. 'He hath no form nor comeliness; and when
we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.'

[Isaiah 53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 53:2</span></span>

For he shall grow up - Supposes something to have preceded; as it might
be asked, what or who shall 'grow up before him,' etc. As the
translation now stands, no correct answer can be given to this question.
The translation then is wrong, the connection broken, and the sense
obscured. זרוע zeroa, translated the arm, from the root zara.

1\. To sow, or plant; also seed, etc.

2\. The limb which reaches from the shoulder to the hand, called the
arm; or more properly beginning at the shoulder and ending at the elbow.

The translator has given the wrong sense of the word. It would be very
improper to say, the arm of the Lord should grow up before him; but by
taking the word in its former sense, the connection and metaphor would
be restored, and the true sense given to the text. זרע zera signifies,
not only the seed of herbs, but children, offspring, or posterity. The
same word we find [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015), where
Christ is the Seed promised. See also [Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017), [Gen
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018); [Gen
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#004); [Gen
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#014). Hence the Seed of the woman,
the Seed promised to the patriarchs is, according to Isaiah, the Seed of
the Lord, the Child born, and the Son given; and according to St. John,
'the Son of God, the only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth.' זרע then, in this place, should be understood to mean Jesus
Christ, and him alone. To speak here of the manifestation of the arm or
power of God would be irregular; but to suppose the text to speak of the
manifestation of Jesus Christ would be very proper, as the whole of the
chapter is written concerning him, particularly his humiliation and
sufferings, and the reception he should meet with from the Jewish
nation.

"The first verse of this chapter is quoted [Joh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#038), and the former part of the same
verse [Rom 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016). But no objection of
importance can be brought forward from either of these quotations
against the above explanation, as they are quoted to show the unbelief
of the Jews in not receiving Christ as the promised Messiah."

He hath no form nor comeliness "He hath no form nor any beauty" -

Ουκ ειδος αυτῳ, ουδε αξιωμα, ἱνα ειδωμεν αυτον· ουδε θεωρια, ἱνα
επιθυμωμεν αυτον.

"He hath no form, nor any beauty, that we should regard him; nor is his
countenance such that we should desire him."

Symmachus; the only one of the ancients that has translated it rightly.

[Isaiah 53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 53:3</span></span>

Acquainted with grief - For וידוע vidua, familiar with grief, eight MSS.
and one edition have וירע veyada, and knowing grief; the Septuagint,
Syriac, and Vulgate read it ויודע veyodea.

We hid as it were our faces from him "As one that hideth his face from
us" - For וכמסתר uchemaster, four MSS. (two ancient) have וכמסתיר
uchemastir, one MS. ומסתיר umastir. For פנים panim, two MSS. have פניו
panaiu; so likewise the Septuagint and Vulgate. Mourners covered up the
lower part of their faces, and their heads, [Sa2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030); [Eze
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#017); and lepers were commanded by
the law, [Lev 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045), to cover their
upper lip. From which circumstance it seems that the Vulgate, Aquila,
Symmachus, and the Jewish commentators have taken the word נגוע nagua,
stricken, in the next verse, as meaning stricken with the leprosy: εν
αφῃ οντα, Sym.; αφημενον, Aq.; leprosum, Vulg. So my old MS. Bible. I
will insert the whole passage as curious: -

There is not schap to him, ne fairnesse,

And we seegen him, and he was not of sigte,

And we desiriden him dispisid; and the last of men:

Man of souaris and witing infirmitie;

And he hid his cheer and despisid;

Wherfor ne we settiden bi him:

Verili our seeknesse he toke and our sorewis he bair,

And we helden him as leprous and smyten of God, and meekid;

He forsoth wounded is for our wickednesse,

Defoulid is for our hidous giltis

The discipline of our pese upon him,

And with his wanne wound we ben helid.

[Isaiah 53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 53:4</span></span>

Surely he Bath borne our griefs "Surely our infirmities he hath borne" -
Seven MSS. (two ancient) and three editions have חליינו cholayeynu in
the plural number.

And carried our sorrows "And our sorrows, he hath carried them" -
Seventeen MSS. (two ancient) of Dr. Kennicott's, two of De Rossi's, and
two editions have the word הוא hu, he, before סבלם sebalam, "carrieth
them, "in the text; four other MSS. have it in the margin. This adds
force to the sense, and elegance to the construction.

[Isaiah 53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 53:5</span></span>

The chastisement of our peace "The chastisement by which our peace is
effected" - Twenty-one MSS. and six editions have the word fully and
regularly expressed, שלמינו shelomeynu; pacificationum nostrarum, "our
pacification;" that by which we are brought into a state of peace and
favor with God. Ar. Montan.

[Isaiah 53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 53:6</span></span>

The Iniquity of us all - For עון avon, "iniquity," the ancient
interpreters read עונות avonoth, "iniquities," plural; and so the
Vulgate in MS. Blanchini. And the Lord hath הפגיע בו hiphgia bo, caused
to meet in him the iniquities of us all. He was the subject on which all
the rays collected on the focal point fell. These fiery rays, which
should have fallen on all mankind, diverged from Divine justice to the
east, west, north, and south, were deflected from them, and converged in
him. So the Lord hath caused to meet in him the punishment due to the
iniquities of All.

[Isaiah 53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 53:8</span></span>

And who shall declare his generation "And his manner of life who would
declare" - A learned friend has communicated to me the following
passages from the Mishna, and the Gemara of Babylon, as leading to a
satisfactory explication of this difficult place. It is said in the
former, that before any one was punished for a capital crime,
proclamation was made before the prisoner by the public crier, in these
words: כל מי שיודע לו זכות יבא וילמד עליו col mi shioda lo zachoth yabo
vayilmad alaiv, "whosoever knows any thing of this man's innocence, let
him come and declare it. "Tract. Sandhedrim. Surenhus. Part 4 p. 233. On
which passage the Gemara of Babylon adds, that "before the death of
Jesus this proclamation was made for forty days; but no defense could be
found." On which words Lardner observes: "It is truly surprising to see
such falsities, contrary to well-known facts." Testimonies, Vol. 1 p.
198. The report is certainly false; but this false report is founded on
the supposition that there was such a custom, and so far confirms the
account given from the Mishna. The Mishna was composed in the middle of
the second century according to Prideaux; Lardner ascribes it to the
year of Christ 180.

Casaubon has a quotation from Maimonides which farther confirms this
account: - Exercitat. in Baronii Annales, Art. lxxvi. Ann. 34. Numbers
119. Auctor est Maimonides in Perek 13 ejus libri ex opere Jad, solitum
fieri, ut cum reus, sententiam mortis passus, a loco judicii exibat
ducendus ad supplicium, praecedoret ipsum חכרוז κηρυξ, praeco; et haec
verba diceret: Ille exit occidendus morte illa, quia transgressus est
transgressione illa, in loco illo, tempore illo, et sunt ejus ret testes
ille et ille. Qui noverit aliquid ad ejus innoeentiam probandam, veniat,
et loquatur pro eo. "It was customary when sentence of death was passed
upon a criminal, and he was led out from the seat of judgment to the
place of punishment, a crier went before, and spoke as follows: - 'This
man is going out to suffer death by - because he has transgressed by -
such a transgression, in such a place, in such a time; and the witnesses
against him are - . He who may know any thing relative to his innocence
let him come and speak in his behalf.'"

Now it is plain from the history of the four Evangelists, that in the
trlal and condemnation of Jesus no such rule was observed; though,
according to the account of the Mishna, it must have been in practice at
that time, no proclamation was made for any person to bear witness to
the innocence and character of Jesus; nor did any one voluntarily step
forth to give his attestation to it. And our Savior seems to refer to
such a custom, and to claim the benefit of it, by his answer to the high
priest, when he asked him of his disciples and of his doctrine: "I spoke
openly to the world; I ever taught in the synagogue and in the temple,
whither the Jews always resort; and in secret have I said nothing. Why
askest thou me? ask them who heard me, what I have said unto them:
behold, they know what I said," [Joh
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#020), [Joh
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#021). This, therefore, was one
remarkable instance of hardship and injustice, among others predicted by
the prophet, which our Savior underwent in his trial and sufferings.

St. Paul likewise, in similar circumstances, standing before the
judgment seat of Festus, seems to complain of the same unjust treatment;
that no one was called, or would appear, to vindicate his character. "My
manner of life (την βιωσιν μου, דורי dori, 'my generation') from my
youth, which was at the first among my own nation at Jerusalem, know all
the Jews, who knew me from the beginning, if they would testify; that
after the straitest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee;" [Act
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#004), [Act
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#005).

דור dor signifies age, duration, the time which one man or many together
pass in this world, in this place; the course, tenor, or manner of life.
The verb דור dor signifies, according to Castell, ordinatam vitam sive
aetatem egit, ordinavit, ordine constituit. "He passed a certain course
of life, he ordained," etc. In Arabic, curavit, administravit, "he took
care of, administered to."

Was he stricken "He was smitten to death" - The Septuagint read למות
lemaveth, εις θανατον, "to death." And so the Coptic and Saidic
Versions, from the Septuagint; MSS. St. Germain de Prez.

"Origen, "(Contra Celsum, lib. 1 p. 370, edit. 1733), after having
quoted at large this prophecy concerning the Messiah, "tells us, that
having once made use of this passage in a dispute against some that were
accounted wise among the Jews, one of them replied, that the words did
not mean one man, but one people, the Jews, who were smitten of God and
dispersed among the Gentiles for their conversion; that he then urged
many parts of this prophecy to show the absurdity of this
interpretation, and that he seemed to press them the hardest by this
sentence, απο των ανομιων του λαου μον ηχθη εις θανατον, 'for the
iniquity of my people was he smitten to death.'" Now as Origen, the
author of the Hexapla, must have understood Hebrew, we cannot suppose
that he would have urged this last quotation as so decisive if the Greek
Version had not agreed here with the Hebrew text; nor that these wise
Jews would have been at all distressed by this quotation, unless their
Hebrew text had read agreeably to εις θανατον, "to death," on which the
argument principally depended; for, by quoting it immediately, they
would have triumphed over him, and reprobated his Greek version. This,
whenever they could do it, was their constant practice in their disputes
with the Christians. Jerome, in his Preface to the Psalms, says, Nuper
cum Hebraeo disputans, quaedam pro Domino Salvatore de Psalmis
testimonia protulisti: volensque ille te illudere, per sermones fere
singulos asserebat, non ita haberi in Hebraeo, ut tu de lxx. opponebas.
"Lately disputing with a Hebrew, - thou advancedst certain passages out
of the Psalms which bear testimony to the Lord the Savior; but he, to
elude thy reasoning, asserted that almost all thy quotations have an
import in the Hebrew text different from what they had in the Greek."
And Origen himself, who laboriously compared the Hebrew text with the
Septuagint, has recorded the necessity of arguing with the Jews from
such passages only as were in the Septuagint agreeable to the Hebrew:
ἱνα προς Ιουδαιοις διαλεγομενοι μη προφερωμεν αυτοι τα μη κειμενα εν
τοις αντιγραφοις αυτων, και ἱνα συγχρησωμεθα τοις φερομενοις παρ'
εκεινοις. See Epist. ad African. p. 15, 17. Wherefore as Origen had
carefully compared the Greek version of the Septuagint with the Hebrew
text, and speaks of the contempt with which the Jews treated all appeals
to the Greek version where it differed from their Hebrew text; and as he
puzzled and confounded the learned Jews by urging upon them the reading
εις θανατον, "unto death," in this place; it seems almost impossible not
to conclude, both from Origen's argument and the silence of his Jewish
adversaries, that the Hebrew text at that time actually had למות
lemaveth, "to death," agreeably to the version of the Septuagint. - Dr.
Kennicott.

[Isaiah 53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 53:9</span></span>

With the rich in his death "With the rich man was his tomb" - It may be
necessary to introduce Bishop Lowth's translation of this verse before
we come to his very satisfactory criticisms: -

And his grave was appointed with the wicked;

But with the rich man was his tomb:

Although he had done no wrong,

Neither was there any guile in his mouth.

Among the various opinions which have been given on this passage, I have
no doubt in giving my assent to that which makes the ב beth in במותיו
bemothaiv radical, and renders it excelsa sua. This is mentioned by Aben
Ezra as received by some in his time; and has been long since approved
by Schindler, Drusius, and many other learned Christian interpreters.

The most simple tombs or monuments of old consisted of hillocks of earth
heaped up over the grave; of which we have numerous examples in our own
country, generally allowed to be of very high antiquity. The Romans
called a monument of this sort very properly tumulus; and the Hebrews as
properly במות bamoth, "high place," for that is the form of' the noun in
the singular number; and sixteen MSS. and the two oldest editions
express the word fully in this place, במותיו bamothaiv. Tumulus et
collem et sepulchrum fuisse significat. Potest enim tumulus sine
sepulchro interpretatione collis interdum accipi. Nam et terrae
congestio super ossa tumulus dicitur. "Tumulus signifies a sepulcher
with a hillock of earth raised over it. The word is sometimes restrained
to the bank of earth; for the heaping up of the earth over the bones is
named the tumulus." - Servius, Aen. 3:22. And to make the tumulus still
more elevated and conspicuous, a pillar or some other ornament was often
erected upon it: -

Τυμβον χευαντες, και επι στηλην ερυσαντες,

Πηξαμεν ακροτατῳ τυμβῳ ευηρες ερετμον.

Odyss. sii. 14.

"A rising tomb, the silent dead to grace,

Fast by the roarings of the main we place;

The rising tomb a lofty column bore,

And high above it rose the tapering oar."

Pope

The tomb therefore might with great propriety be called the high place.
The Hebrews might also call such a tomb במות bamoth, from the situation,
for they generally chose to erect them on eminences. The sepulcher of
Joseph of Arimathea, in which the body of Christ was laid, was upon a
hill, Mount Calvary. See [Isa 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#016)
(note), and the note there.

"It should be observed that the word במותיו bamothaiv is not formed from
במות bamoth, the plural of במה bamah, the feminine noun, but from במותים
bamothim, the plural of a masculine noun, במות bamoth. This is noted
because these two nouns have been negligently confounded with one
another, and absurdly reduced to one by very learned men. So Buxtorf,
lex. in voc. במה bamah, represents במותי bamotey, though plainly without
any pronoun suffixed, as it governs the word ארץ arets following it, as
only another form of במות bamoth; whereas the truth is, that במות bamoth
and במותים bamothim are different words, and have through the whole
Bible very different significations; במה bamah, whether occurring in the
singular or plural number, always signifying a place or places of
worship; and במותים bamothim always signifying heights. Thus in [Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013); [Isa
58:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014); [Amo
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#013); and [Mic
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#003), במותי ארץ bamothey arets
signifies 'the heights of the earth;' [Isa
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014), במותי עב bamothey ab, 'the
heights of the clouds;' and in [Job
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008), במותי ים bamothey yam, 'the
heights of the sea,' i.e., the high waves of the sea, as Virgil calls a
wave praeruptus aqua mons, 'a broken mountain of water.' These being all
the places where this word occurs without a suffix, the sense of it
seems nearly determined by them. It occurs in other instances with a
pronoun suffixed, which confirm this signification. Unluckily, our
English Bible has not distinguished the feminine noun במה bamah from the
masculine singular noun במות bamoth; and has consequently always given
the signification of the latter to the former, always rendering it a
high place; whereas the true sense of the word appears plainly to be, in
the very numerous passages in which it occurs, 'a place of worship,' or
'a sacred court,' or 'a sacred inclosure;' whether appropriated to the
worship of idols or to that of the true God, for it is used of both,
passive. Now as the Jewish graves are shown, from [Ch2
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#033), and [Isa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#016), to have been in high
situations, to which may be added the custom of another eastern nation
from Osbeck's Travels, who says, vol. 1 p. 339, 'the Chinese graves are
made on the side of hills;' 'his heights' becomes a very easy metaphor
to express 'his sepulcher.'" - Jubb.

The exact completion of this prophecy will be fully shown by adding here
the several circumstances of the burial of Jesus, collected from the
accounts of the evangelists: -

"There was a rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph, a member of the
sanhedrin, and of a respectable character, who had not consented to
their counsel and act; he went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus:
and he laid it in his own new tomb, which had been hewn out of the rock,
near to the place where Jesus was crucified; having first wound it in
fine linen with spices, as the manner of the Jews was to bury the rich
and great."

It has been supposed that קברו kibro, his grave, and במתיו bemothaiv, in
his death, may have been transposed, as also the prefix ב be originally
placed before רשעים reshaim, the wicked. Thus: -

מתיו את ברשעים ויתן mothaiv eth bireshayim vaiyitten קברו עשיר ואת kibro
ashir veeth

Yea, his death was appointed among the wicked,

And with a rich man, his tomb.

By these alterations it is supposed the text would be freed from all
embarrassment. But see the preceding notes of Bishop Lowth, and the
various readings of De Rossi, in loc.

[Isaiah 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 53:10</span></span>

To grief "With affliction" - For החלי hecheli, the verb, the
construction of which seems to be hard and inelegant in this place, the
Vulgate reads בחלי bocholi, in infirmitate, "with infirmity."

When thou shalt make his soul "If his soul shall make" - For תשים tasim,
a MS. has תשם tasem, which may be taken passively, "If his soul shall be
made" agreeably to some copies of the Septuagint, which have δωται See
likewise the Syriac.

When thou shalt make his soul an offering - The word נפש dro nephesh,
soul, is frequently used in Hebrew to signify life. Throughout the New
Testament the salvation of men is uniformly attributed to the death of
Christ.

He shall see his seed - True converts, genuine Christians.

He shall prolong his days - Or this spiritual progeny shall prolong
their days, i.e., Christianity shall endure to the end of time.

And the pleasure of the Lord - To have all men saved and brought to the
knowledge of the truth.

Shall prosper in his hand - Shall go on in a state of progressive
prosperity; and so completely has this been thus far accomplished, that
every succeeding century has witnessed more Christianity in the world
than the preceding, or any former one.

[Isaiah 53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 53:11</span></span>

Shall be satisfied "And be satisfied" - The Septuagint, Vulgate, Sryiac,
and a MS. add the conjunction to the verb, וישבע vaigisba.

Shall my righteous servant justify "Shall my servant justify" - Three
MSS., (two of them ancient), omit the word צדיק tsaddik; it seems to be
only an imperfect repetition, by mistake, of the preceding word. It
makes a solecism in this place; for according to the constant usage of
the Hebrew language, the adjective, in a phrase of this kind, ought to
follow the substantive; and צדיק עבדי tsaddik abdi, in Hebrew, would be
as absurd as "shall my servant righteous justify," in English. Add to
this, that it makes the hemistich too long.

[Isaiah 53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 53:12</span></span>

He bare the sin of many - רבים rabbim, the multitudes, the many that
were made sinners by the offenses of one; i.e., the whole human race;
for all have sinned - all have fallen; and for all that have sinned, and
for all that have fallen, Jesus Christ died. The רבים rabbim of the
prophet answers to the οἱ πολλοι, of the apostle, [Rom
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015), [Rom
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019). As the πολλοι of the apostle
means all that have sinned; so the רבים rabbim of the prophet means
those for whom Christ died; i.e., all that have sinned.

And made intercession for the transgressors - For יפגיע yaphgia, in the
future, a MS. has הפגיע hiphgia, preterite, rather better, as agreeable
with the other verbs immediately preceding in the sentence.

He made intercession for the transgressors. - This was literally
fulfilled at his death, "Father, forgive them; they know not what they
do!" [Luk 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034). And to make
intercession for transgressors is one part of his mediatorial offlce.
[Heb 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025), and [Heb
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024).

In this chapter the incarnation, preaching, humiliation, rejection,
sufferings, death, atonement, resurrection, and mediation of Jesus
Christ are all predicted, together with the prevalence of his Gospel,
and the extension of his kingdom through all ages.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 54](isa054)

</div>
