<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa012)  [Next](isa014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 13:0</span></span>

God mustereth the armies of his wrath against the inhabitants of
Babylon, [Isa 13:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001). The dreadful
consequences of this visitation, and the terror and dismay of those who
are the objects of it, [Isa 13:7-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#007).
The horrid cruelties that shall be indicted upon the Babylonians by the
Medes, [Isa 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017), [Isa
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#018). Total and irrecoverable
desolation of Babylon, [Isa 13:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#019).

This and the following chapter, - striking off the five last verses of
the latter, which belong to a quite different subject, - contain one
entire prophecy, foretelling the destruction of Babylon by the Medes and
Persians; delivered probably in the reign of Ahaz, (see Vitrinya,
1:380), about two hundred years before its accomplishment. The captivity
itself of the Jews at Babylon, which the prophet does not expressly
foretell, but supposes, in the spirit of prophecy, as what was actually
to be effected, did not fully take place till about one hundred and
thirty years after the delivery of this prophecy: and the Medes, who are
expressly mentioned [Isa 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017), as the
principal agents in the overthrow of the Babylonian monarchy, by which
the Jews were released from that captivity, were at this time an
inconsiderable people; having been in a state of anarchy ever since the
fall of the great Assyrian empire, of which they had made a part, under
Sardanapalus; and did not become a kingdom under Deioces till about the
seventeenth of Hezekiah.

The former part of this prophecy is one of the most beautiful examples
that can be given of elegance of composition, variety of imagery, and
sublimity of sentiment and diction, in the prophetic style; and the
latter part consists of an ode of supreme and singular excellence.

The prophecy opens with the command of God to gather together the forces
which he had destined to this service, [Isa
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#002), [Isa
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003). Upon which the prophet
immediately hears the tumultuous noise of the different nations crowding
together to his standard; he sees them advancing, prepared to execute
the Divine wrath, [Isa 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#004), [Isa
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#005). He proceeds to describe the
dreadful consequences of this visitation, the consternation which will
seize those who are the objects of it; and, transferring unawares the
speech from himself to God, [Isa
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#011), sets forth, under a variety of
the most striking images, the dreadful destruction of the inhabitants of
Babylon which will follow, [Isa
13:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#011), and the everlasting
desolation to which that great city is doomed, [Isa
13:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017).

The deliverance of Judah from captivity, the immediate consequence of
this great revolution, is then set forth, without being much enlarged
upon, or greatly amplified, [Isa 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001),
[Isa 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#002). This introduces, with the
greatest ease and the utmost propriety, the triumphant song on that
subject, verses 4-28. The beauties of which, the various images, scenes,
persons introduced, and the elegant transitions from one to another, I
shall here endeavor to point out in their order, leaving a few remarks
upon particular passages of these two chapters to be given after these
general observations on the whole.

A chorus of Jews is introduced, expressing their surprise and
astonishment at the sudden downfall of Babylon; and the great reverse of
fortune that had befallen the tyrant, who, like his predecessors, had
oppressed his own and harassed the neighboring kingdoms. These oppressed
kingdoms, or their rulers, are represented under the image of the fir
trees and the cedars of Libanus, frequently used to express any thing in
the political or religious world that is super-eminently great and
majestic: the whole earth shouteth for joy; the cedars of Libanus utter
a severe taunt over the fallen tyrant, and boast their security now he
is no more.

The scene is immediately changed, and a new set of persons is
introduced. The regions of the dead are laid open, and Hades is
represented as rousing up the shades of the departed monarchs: they rise
from their thrones to meet the king of Babylon at his coming; and insult
him on his being reduced to the same low estate of impotence and
dissolution with themselves. This is one of the boldest prosopopoeias
that ever was attempted in poetry; and is executed with astonishing
brevity and perspicuity, and with that peculiar force which in a great
subject naturally results from both. The image of the state of the dead,
or the infernum poeticum of the Hebrews, is taken from their custom of
burying, those at least of the higher rank, in large sepulchral vaults
hewn in the rock. Of this kind of sepulchres there are remains at
Jerusalem now extant; and some that are said to be the sepulchres of the
kings of Judah. See Maundrell, p. 76. You are to form to yourself an
idea of an immense subterranean vault, a vast gloomy cavern, all round
the sides of which there are cells to receive the dead bodies; here the
deceased monarchs lie in a distinguished sort of state, suitable to
their former rank, each on his own couch, with his arms beside him, his
sword at his head, and the bodies of his chiefs and companions round
about him. See [Eze 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#027). On which
place Sir John Chardin's MS. note is as follows: "En Mingrelie ils
dorment tous leurs epees sous leurs tetes, et leurs autres armes a leur
cote; et on les enterre de mesme, leurs armes poseess de cette facon."
In Mingrelia they always sleep with their swords under their heads, and
their other arms by their sides; and they bury their dead with their
arms placed in the same manner. These illustrious shades rise at once
from their couches, as from their thrones; and advance to the entrance
of the cavern to meet the king of Babylon, and to receive him with
insults on his fall.

The Jews now resume the speech; they address the king of Babylon as the
morning-star fallen from heaven, as the first in splendor and dignity in
the political world, fallen from his high state; they introduce him as
uttering the most extravagant vaunts of his power and ambitious designs
in his former glory. These are strongly contrasted in the close with his
present low and abject condition.

Immediately follows a different scene, and a most happy image, to
diversify the same subject, to give it a new turn, and an additional
force. Certain persons are introduced who light upon the corpse of the
king of Babylon, cast out and lying naked on the bare ground, among the
common slain, just after the taking of the city; covered with wounds,
and so disfigured, that it is some time before they know him. They
accost him with the severest taunts; and bitterly reproach him with his
destructive ambition, and his cruel usage of the conquered; which have
deservedly brought him this ignominious treatment, so different from
that which those of his rank usually meet with, and which shall cover
his posterity with disgrace.

To complete the whole, God is introduced, declaring the fate of Babylon,
the utter extirpation of the royal family, and the total desolation of
the city; the deliverance of his people, and the destruction of their
enemies; confirming the irreversible decree by the awful sanction of his
oath.

I believe it may with truth be affirmed, that there is no poem of its
kind extant in any language, in which the subject is so well laid out,
and 60 happily conducted, with such a richness of invention, with such
variety of images, persons, and distinct actions, with such rapidity and
ease of transition, in so small a compass, as in this ode of Isaiah. For
beauty of disposition, strength of colouring, greatness of sentiment,
brevity, perspicuity, and force of expression, it stands, among all the
monuments of antiquity, unrivalled. - L.

[Isaiah 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 13:1</span></span>

The burden of Babylon - The prophecy that foretells its destruction by
the Medes and Persians: see the preceding observations.

[Isaiah 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 13:2</span></span>

Exalt the voice - The word להם lahem, "to them," which is of no use, and
rather weakens the sentence, is omitted by an ancient MS., and the
Vulgate.

[Isaiah 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 13:3</span></span>

I have commanded my sanctified ones - מקדשי mekuddashai, the persons
consecrated to this very purpose. Nothing can be plainer than that the
verb כדש kadash, "to make holy," signifies also to consecrate or appoint
to a particular purpose. Bishop Lowth translates, "my enrolled
warriors." This is the sense.

[Isaiah 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 13:4</span></span>

Of the battle "For the battle" - The Bodleian MS. has למלחמה
lemilchamah. Cyrus's army was made up of many different nations.
Jeremiah calls it an "assembly of great nations from the north country,"
[Jer 50:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#009). And afterwards mentions the
kingdoms of "Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz, (i.e. Armenia, Corduene,
Pontus or Phrygia, Vitring.), with the kings of the Medes," [Jer
51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027), [Jer
51:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#028). See Xenophon. Cyrop.

[Isaiah 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 13:5</span></span>

They come from a far country - The word מארץ meerets is wanting in one
MS. and in the Syriac: "They come from afar."

From the end of heaven - Kimchi says, Media, "the end of heaven," in
Scripture phrase, means, the East.

[Isaiah 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 13:8</span></span>

And they shall be afraid "And they shall be terrified" - I join this
verb, ונבהלו venibhalu, to the preceding verse, with the Syriac and
Vulgate.

Pangs and sorrows shall take hold on them "Pangs shall seize them" - The
Septuagint, Syriac, and Chaldee read יאחזום yochezum, instead of יאחזון
yochezun, which does not express the pronoun then, necessary to the
sense.

[Isaiah 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 13:10</span></span>

For the stars of heaven "Yea, the stars of heaven" - The Hebrew poets,
to express happiness, prosperity, the instauration and advancement of
states, kingdoms, and potentates, make use of images taken from the most
striking parts of nature, from the heavenly bodies, from the sun, moon,
and stars: which they describe as shining with increased splendor, and
never setting. The moon becomes like the meridian sun, and the sun's
light is augmented sevenfold; (see [Isa
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026)); new heavens and a new earth
are created, and a brighter age commences. On the contrary, the overflow
and destruction of kingdoms is represented by opposite images. The stars
are obscured, the moon withdraws her light, and the sun shines no more!
The earth quakes, and the heavens tremble; and all things seem tending
to their original chaos, See [Joe
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#010); [Joe
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#015), [Joe
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#016); [Amo
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#009); [Mat
24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029); and De S. Poes. Herb. Prael. 6
et IX.

And the moon shall not cause her light to shine - This in its farther
reference may belong to the Jewish polity, both in Church and state,
which should be totally eclipsed, and perhaps shine no more in its
distinct state for ever.

[Isaiah 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 13:11</span></span>

I will punish the world "I will visit the world" - That is, the
Babylonish empire; as η οικουμενη, for the Roman empire, or for Judea,
[Luk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001); [Act
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028). So the universus orbis Romanus,
for the Roman empire; Salvian. lib. 5 Minos calls Crete his world:
"Creten, quae meus est orbis," Ovid. Metamorph. 8:9.

[Isaiah 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 13:12</span></span>

I will make a man more precious than fine gold-wedge of Ophir - The
Medes and Persians will not be satisfied with the spoils of the
Babylonians. They seek either to destroy or enslave them; and they will
accept no ransom for any man - either for אנוש enosh, the poor man, or
for אדם adam, the more honorable person. All must fall by the sword, or
go into captivity together; for the Medes, ([Isa
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017)), regard not silver, and delight
not in gold.

[Isaiah 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 13:14</span></span>

"And the remnant" - Here is plainly a defect in this sentence, as it
stands in the Hebrew text; the subject of the proposition is lost. What
is it that shall be like a roe chased? The Septuagint happily supply it,
οἱ καταλελειμμενοι, שאר shear, the remnant. A MS. here supplies the word
יושב yosheb, the inhabitant; which makes a tolerably good sense; but I
much prefer the reading of the Septuagint.

They shall - turn "They shall look" - That is, the forces of the king of
Babylon, destitute of their leader, and all his auxiliaries, collected
from Asia Minor, and other distant countries, shall disperse and flee to
their respective homes.

[Isaiah 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 13:15</span></span>

Every one that is found "Every one that is overtaken" - That is, none
shall escape from the slaughter; neither they who flee singly, dispersed
and in confusion; nor they who endeavor to make their retreat in a more
regular manner, by forming compact bodies: they shall all be equally cut
off by the sword of the enemy. The Septuagint have understood it in this
sense, which they have well expressed: -

Ὁς γαρ αν ἁλῳ ἡττηθησεται,

Και οἱτινες συνηγμενοι εισι πεσουνται μαχαιρα.

"Whosoever is caught shall be overthrown,

And all that are collected together shall fall by the sword."

Where, for ἡττηθησεται, MS. Pachom has εκκενθησεται, et οἱ Γ Cod.
Marchal. in margine, et MS. 1. D. 2: εκκεντηθησεται, which seems to be
right, being properly expressive of the Hebrew.

[Isaiah 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 13:17</span></span>

Which shall not regard silver "Who shall hold silver of no account" -
That is, who shall not be induced, by large offers of gold and silver
for ransom, to spare the lives of those whom they have subdued in
battle; their rage and cruelty will get the better of all such motives.
We have many examples in the Iliad and in the Aeneid of addresses of the
vanquished to the pity and avarice of the vanquishers, to induce them to
spare their lives.

Est domus alta: jacent penitus defossa talenta

Caelati argenti: sunt auri ponders facti

Infectique mihi: non hic victoria Teucrum

Vertitur; aut anima una dalbit discrimina tanta.

Dixerat: Aeneas contra cui talia reddit:

Argenti atque auri memoras quae multa talenta

Gnatis parce tuis.

Aen. 10:526.

"High in my dome are silver talents rolled,

With piles of labored and unlaboured gold.

These, to procure my ransom, I resign;

The war depends not on a life like mine:

One, one poor life can no such difference yield,

Nor turn the mighty balance of the field.

Thy talents, (cried the prince), thy treasured store

Keep for thy sons."

Pitt.

It is remarkable that Xenophon makes Cyrus open a speech to his army,
and in particular to the Medes, who made the principal part of it, with
praising them for their disregard of riches. Ανδρες Μηδοι, και παντες οἱ
παροντες, εγω ὑμας οιδα σαφως, ὁτι ουτε χρηματων δεομενοι συν εμοι
εξελθετε· "Ye Medes, and others who now hear me, I well know that you
have not accompanied me in this expedition with a view of acquiring
wealth." - Cyrop. lib. v.

[Isaiah 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 13:18</span></span>

Their bows also shall dash "Their bows shall dash" - Both Herodotus,
1:61, and Xenophon, Anab. iii., mention, that the Persians used large
bows τοξα μεγαλα: and the latter says particularly that their bows were
three cubits long, Anab. 4. They were celebrated for their archers, see
[Isa 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006); [Jer
49:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#035). Probably their neighbours and
allies, the Medes, dealt much in the same sort of arms. In [Psa
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#034), and [Job
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#024), mention is made of a bow of
steel; if the Persian bows were of metal, we may easily conceive that
with a metalline bow of three cubits' length, and proportionably strong,
the soldiers might dash and slay the young men, the weaker and
unresisting of the inhabitants (for they are joined with the fruit of
the womb and the children) in the general carnage on taking the city.
תרתשנה terattashnah, shall be broken or shivered to pieces. This seems
to refer, not to נערים nearim, young men, but to קשתות keshathoth, their
bows. The bows of the young men shall be broken to pieces.

On the fruit, etc. "And on the fruit," etc. - A MS. of Dr. Kennicott's
reads ועל פרי veal peri and on the fruit. And nine MSS. (three ancient)
and two editions, with the Septuagint, Vulgate, and Syriac, add likewise
the conjunction ו vau, and, to על al, upon, afterwards.

[Isaiah 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 13:19</span></span>

And Babylon - The great city of Babylon was at this time rising to its
height of glory, while the Prophet Isaiah was repeatedly denouncing its
utter destruction. From the first of Hezekiah to the first of
Nebuchadnezzar, under whom it was brought to the highest degree of
strength and splendor, are about one hundred and twenty years. I will
here very briefly mention some particulars of the greatness of the
place, and note the several steps by which this remarkable prophecy was
at length accomplished in the total ruin of it.

It was, according to the lowest account given of it by ancient
historians, a regular square, forty-five miles in compass, inclosed by a
wall two hundred feet high and fifty broad; in which there were a
hundred gates of brass. Its principal ornaments were the temple of
Belus, in the middle of which was a tower of eight stories of building,
upon a base of a quarter of a mile square, a most magnificent palace,
and the famous hanging gardens, which were an artificial mountain,
raised upon arches, and planted with trees of the largest as well as the
most beautiful sorts.

Cyrus took the city by diverting the waters of the Euphrates which ran
through the midst of it, and entering the place at night by the dry
channel. The river being never restored afterward to its proper course,
overflowed the whole country, and made it little better than a great
morass; this and the great slaughter of the inhabitants, with other bad
consequences of the taking of the city, was the first step to the ruin
of the place. The Persian monarchs ever regarded it with a jealous eye;
they kept it under, and took care to prevent its recovering its former
greatness. Darius Hystaspes not long afterward most severely punished it
for a revolt, greatly depopulated the place, lowered the walls, and
demolished the gates. Xerxes destroyed the temples, and with the rest
the great temple of Belus, Herod. 3:159, Arrian Exp. Alexandri, lib. 7.
The building of Seleucia on the Tigris exhausted Babylon by its
neighborhood, as well as by the immediate loss of inhabitants taken away
by Seleucus to people his new city, Strabo, lib. 16. A king of the
Parthians soon after carried away into slavery a great number of the
inhabitants, and burned and destroyed the most beautiful parts of the
city, Valesii Excerpt. Diodori, p. 377. Strabo (ibid.) says that in his
time great part of it was a mere desert; that the Persians had partly
destroyed it; and that time and the neglect of the Macedonians, while
they were masters of it, had nearly completed its destruction. Jerome
(in loc.) says that in his time it was quite in ruins, and that the
walls served only for the inclosure for a park or forest for the king's
hunting. Modern travelers, who have endeavored to find the remains of
it, have given but a very unsatisfactory account of their success. What
Benjamin of Tudela and Pietro della Valle supposed to have been some of
its ruins, Tavernier thinks are the remains of some late Arabian
building. Upon the whole, Babylon is so utterly annihilated, that even
the place where this wonder of the world stood cannot now be determined
with any certainty! See also note on [Isa
43:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#014) (note).

We are astonished at the accounts which ancient historians of the best
credit give of the immense extent, height, and thickness of the walls of
Nineveh and Babylon; nor are we less astonished when we are assured, by
the concurrent testimony of modern travelers, that no remains, not the
least traces, of these prodigious works are now to be found. Scattered
fragments of its tiles and bricks are yet to be found. Proud Babylon
reduced now to a few brick-bats! Our wonder will, I think, be moderated
in both respects, if we consider the fabric of these celebrated walls,
and the nature of the materials of which they consisted. Buildings in
the east have always been, and are to this day, made of earth or clay,
mixed or beat up with straw to make the parts cohere, and dried only in
the sun. This is their method of making bricks; see on [Isa
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#009) (note). The walls of the city were
built of the earth digged out on the spot, and dried upon the place, by
which means both the ditch and the wall were at once formed, the former
furnishing materials for the latter. That the walls of Babylon were of
this kind is well known; and Berosus expressly says, (apud Joseph.
Antiq. 10:11), that Nebuchadnezzar added three new walls both to the old
and new city, partly of brick and bitumen, and partly of brick alone. A
wall of this sort must have a great thickness in proportion to its
height, otherwise it cannot stand. The thickness of the walls of Babylon
is said to have been one-fourth of their height, which seems to have
been no more than was absolutely necessary. Maundrell, speaking of the
garden walls of Damascus, says, "They are of a very singular structure.
They are built of great pieces of earth, made in the fashion of brick,
and hardened in the sun. In their dimensions they are two yards long
each, and somewhat more than one broad, and half a yard thick." And
afterward, speaking of the walls of the houses, he says, "From this
dirty way of building they have this amongst other inconveniences, that
upon any violent rain the whole city becomes, by the washing of the
houses, as it were a quagmire," p. 124. And see note on [Isa
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#013). When a wall of this sort comes
to be out of repair, and is neglected, it is easy to conceive the
necessary consequences, namely, that in no long course of ages it must
be totally destroyed by the heavy rains, and at length washed away, and
reduced to its original earth. - L.

[Isaiah 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 13:21</span></span>

Satyrs - A kind of beast like to man, which is called מרמוטש marmots, a
monkey. - Rabbi Parchon.

[Isaiah 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 13:22</span></span>

In their pleasant palaces "In their palaces" - באלמנותיו bealmenothaiv;
a plain mistake, I presume, for בארמנתיו bearmenothaiv. It is so
corrected in two MSS., the Syriac, Chaldee, and Vulgate.

Πουλυποδες δ' εν εμοι θαλαμας φωκαι τε μελαιναι

Οικα ποιησονται ακηδεα, χητεΐ λαων.

Hom. Hymn. in Apol. 77.

Of which the following passage of Milton may be taken for a translation,
though not so designed: -

"And in their palaces,

Where luxury late reigned, sea monsters whelped,

And stabled."

Par. Lost, 11:750.

This image of desolation is handled with great propriety and force by
some of the Persian poets: -

"The spider holds the veil in the palace of Caesar;

The owl stands centinel on the watch-tower of Afrasiab."

On this quotation Sir W. Jones observes, noubet is an Arabic word,
signifying a turn, a change, a watch; hence noubet zudun in Persian
signifies to relieve the guards by the sounds of drums and trumpets.
Their office is given by the poet to the owl; as that of purdeh dar, or
chamberlain, is elegantly assigned to the spider.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 14](isa014)

</div>
