<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa024)  [Next](isa026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 25:0</span></span>

The short glance which the prophet gave at the promised restoration of
the people of God and the Messiah's kingdom, in the close of the
preceding chapter, makes him break out into a rapturous song of praise
in this, where although he alludes to temporal mercies, such as the
destruction of the cities which had been at war with Zion, the ruin of
Moab, and other signal interpositions of Divine Providence in behalf of
the Jews; yet he is evidently impressed with a more lively sense of
future and much higher blessings under the Gospel dispensation, in the
plenitude of its revelation, of which the temporal deliverances
vouchsafed at various tines to the primitive kingdoms of Israel and
Judah were the prototypes, [Isa
25:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001). These blessings are described
under the figure of a feast made for all nations, [Isa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006); the removing of a veil from
their faces, [Isa 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#007); the total
extinction of the empire of death by the resurrection from the dead, the
exclusion of all sorrow, and the final overthrow of all the enemies of
the people of God, [Isa 25:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008).

It does not appear to me that this chapter has any close and particular
connection with the chapter immediately preceding, taken separately, and
by itself. The subject of that was the desolation of the land of Israel
and Judah, by the just judgment of God, for the wickedness and
disobedience of the people: which, taken by itself, seems not with any
propriety to introduce a hymn of thanksgiving to God for his mercies to
his people in delivering them from their enemies. But taking the whole
course of prophecies, from the thirteenth to the twenty-fourth chapter
inclusive, in which the prophet foretells the destruction of several
cities and nations, enemies to the Jews, and of the land of Judah
itself, yet with intimations of a remnant to be saved, and a restoration
to be at length effected by a glorious establishment of the kingdom of
God: with a view to this extensive scene of God's providence in all its
parts, and in all its consequences, the prophet may well be supposed to
break out into this song of praise; in which his mind seems to be more
possessed with the prospect of future mercies than with the recollection
of the past. - L.

[Isaiah 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 25:1</span></span>

Thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth - That is, All thy past
declarations by the prophets shall be fulfilled in their proper time.

[Isaiah 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 25:2</span></span>

A city "The city" - Nineveh, Babylon, Ar, Moab, or any other strong
fortress possessed by the enemies of the people of God.

For the first מעיר meir, of a city, the Syriac and Vulgate read העיר
hair, the city; the Septuagint and Chaldee read ערים arim, cities, in
the plural, transposing the letters. After the second מעיר meir, a MS.
adds לגל lagol, for a heap.

A palace of strangers "The palace of the proud ones" - For זרים zarim,
strangers, MS. Bodl. and another read זדים zedim, the proud: so likewise
the Septuagint; for they render it ασεβων here, and in [Isa
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#005), as they do in some other places:
see [Deu 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#020), [Deu
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#022). Another MS. reads צרים tsarim,
adversaries; which also makes a good sense. But זרים zarim, strangers,
and זדים zedim, the proud, are often confounded by the great similitude
of the letters ד daleth and ר resh. See [Mal
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#015); [Mal
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001); [Psa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#014), in the Septuagint; and [Psa
54:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#005), where the Chaldee reads זדים
zedim, compared with [Psa 86:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016).

[Isaiah 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 25:4</span></span>

As a storm against the wall "Like a winter-storm" - For קיר kir, read
קור kor: or, as עיר ir from ערר arar, so קיר kir from קרר karar. -
Capellus.

[Isaiah 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 25:5</span></span>

Of strangers "Of the proud" - The same mistake here as in [Isa
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#002) (note): see the note there. Here
זדים zedim, the proud, is parallel to עריצים aritsim, the formidable: as
in [Psa 54:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#005), and [Psa
86:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#014).

The heat with the shadow of a cloud "As the heat by a thick cloud" - For
חרב choreb, the Syriac, Chaldee, Vulgate, and two MSS. read כחרב
kechoreb, which is a repetition of the beginning of the foregoing
parallel line; and the verse taken out of the parallel form, and more
fully expressed, would run thus: "As a thick cloud interposing tempers
the heat of the sun on the burnt soil; so shalt thou, by the
interposition of thy power, bring low and abate the tumult of the proud,
and the triumph of the formidable."

[Isaiah 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 25:6</span></span>

In this mountain - Zion, at Jerusalem. In his Church.

Shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast - Salvation by
Jesus Christ. A feast is a proper and usual expression of joy in
consequence of victory, or any other great success. The feast here
spoken of is to be celebrated on Mount Sion; and all people, without
distinction, are to be invited to it. This can be no other than the
celebration of the establishment of Christ's kingdom, which is
frequently represented in the Gospel under the image of a feast; "where
many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down at table with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven;" [Mat
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011). See also [Luk
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#016); [Luk
24:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#029), [Luk
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#030). This sense is fully confirmed
by the concomitants of this feast expressed in the next verse, the
removing of the veil from the face of the nations, and the abolition of
death: the first of which is obviously and clearly explained of the
preaching of the Gospel; and the second must mean the blessing of
immortality procured for us by Christ, "who hath abolished death, and
through death hath destroyed him that had the power of death."

Of wines on the lees "Of old wines" - Hebrews lees; that is, of wines
kept long on the lees. The word used to express the lees in the original
signifies the preservers; because they preserve the strength and flavor
of the wine. "All recent wines, after the fermentation has ceased, ought
to be kept on their lees for a certain time, which greatly contributes
to increase their strength and flavor. Whenever this first fermentation
has been deficient, they will retain a more rich and sweet taste than is
natural to them in a recent true vinous state; and unless farther
fermentation is promoted by their lying longer on their own lees, they
will never attain their genuine strength and flavor, but run into
repeated and ineffectual fermentations, and soon degenerate into a
liquor of an acetous kind. All wines of a light and austere kind, by a
fermentation too great, or too long continued, certainly degenerate into
a weak sort of vinegar; while the stronger not only require, but will
safely bear a stronger and often-repeated fermentation; and are more apt
to degenerate from a defect than excess of fermentation into a vapid,
ropy, and at length into a putrescent state." Sir Edward Barry,
Observations on the Wines of the Ancients, p. 9, 10.

Thevenot observes particularly of the Shiras wine, that, after it is
refined from the lees, it is apt to grow sour.

"Il a beaucoup de lie; c'est pourquoi il donne puissemment dans la
teste; et pour le rendre plus traitable on le passe par un chausse
d'hypocras; apres quoi il est fort clair, et moins fumeux. Ils mettent
ce vin dans des grandes jarres de terres qui tiennent dix ou douze
jusqu'a quatorze carabas: mais quand l'on a entame une jarre, il faut la
vuider au plutost, et mettre le vin qu'on en tire dans des bouteilles ou
carabas; car si l'on y manque en le laissant quelque tems apres que la
jarre est entamee il se gate et s'aigrit." Voyages, Tom. 2 p. 245.

"It has much sediment, and therefore is intoxicating. In order to make
it more mellow, they strain it through a hypocrates' sleeve, after which
it is very clear and less heady. They lay up this wine in great earthen
jars, which hold from ten to fourteen carabas: but when a jar is
unstopped, it is necessary to empty it immediately, and put the wine
into bottles, or carabas; for if it be left thus in the jar, it will
spoil and become acid."

The caraba, or girba, is a goat's skin drawn off from the animal, having
no apertures but those occasioned by the tail, the feet, and the neck.
One opening is left, to pour in and draw off the liquor. This skin goes
through a sort of tanning process, and is often beautifully ornamented,
as is the case with one of these girbas now lying before me.

This clearly explains the very elegant comparison, or rather allegory,
of Jeremiah, [Jer 48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011); where the
reader will find a remarkable example of the mixture of the proper with
the allegorical, not uncommon with the Hebrew poets: -

"Moab hath been at ease from his youth,

And he hath settled upon his lees;

Nor hath he been drawn off from vessel to vessel,

Neither hath he gone into captivity:

Wherefore his taste remaineth in him,

And his flavor is not changed."

Sir John Chardin's MS. note on this place of Jeremiah is as follows:

"On change ainsi le vin de coupe en coupe en Orient; et quand on en
entame une, il faut la vuider en petites coupes ou bouteilles, sans quoy
il s'aigrit."

"They change the wine from vessel to vessel in the east; and when they
unstop a large one, it is necessary to empty it into small vessels, as
otherwise it will grow sour."

[Isaiah 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 25:7</span></span>

The face of the covering cast over all people "The covering that covered
the face of all the peoples" - MS. Bodl. reads על פני כל al peney chol.
The word פני peney, face, has been removed from its right place into the
line above, where it makes no sense; as Houbigant conjectured. "The face
of the covering," etc. He will unveil all the Mosaic ritual, and show by
his apostles that it referred to, and was accomplished in, the
sacrificial offering of Jesus Christ.

[Isaiah 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 25:8</span></span>

He will swallow up death - He, by the grace of God, will taste death for
every man. [Heb 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009). Probably, swallow
up death, and taste death, in both these verses, refer to the same
thing: Jesus dying instead of a guilty world. These forms of speech may
refer to the punishment of certain criminals; they were obliged to drink
a cup of poison. That cup which every criminal in the world must have
drunk, Jesus Christ drank for them; and thus he swallowed up death: but
as he rose again from the dead, complete victory was gained.

From these three verses we learn: -

I. That the Gospel is a plenteous provision: "I will make a feast for
all people."

II\. That it is a source of light and salvation: "I will destroy the
veil. I will abolish death. and bring life and immortality to light."

III\. That it is a source of comfort and happiness: "I will wipe away
all tears from off all faces."

As in the Arabic countries a covering was put over the face of him who
was condemned to suffer death, it is probable that the words in [Isa
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#007) may refer to this. The whole
world was condemned to death, and about to be led out to execution, when
the gracious Lord interposed, and, by a glorious sacrifice, procured a
general pardon.

[Isaiah 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 25:9</span></span>

It shall be said "Shall they say" - So the Septuagint and Vulgate, in
the plural number. They read ואמרו veameru, the Syriac reads ואמרת
veamarta, thou shalt say. They shall say, i.e., the Jews and the
Gentiles - Lo, this \[Jesus Christ\] is our God: we have waited for him,
according to the predictions of the prophets. We have expected him, and
we have not been disappointed; therefore will we be glad, and rejoice in
his salvation.

[Isaiah 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 25:10</span></span>

Shall the hand of the Lord rest "The hand of Jehovah shall give rest" -
Hebrews תנוח tenuach, quiescet. Annon תניח taniach, quietem dabit, shall
rest; shall give rest, ut Graeci, αναπαυσιν δωσει, et Copt.? - Mr.
Woide. That is, "shall give peace and quiet to Sion, by destroying the
enemy; "as it follows."

As straw is trodden down "As the straw is threshed" - Hoc junta ritum
loquitur Palastinae et multarum Orientis provinciarum, quae ob pratorum
et foeni penuriam paleas preparant esui animantium. Sunt autem carpenta
ferrata rotis per medium in serrarum modum se volventibus, quae stipulam
conterunt; et comminuunt in paleas. Quomodo igitur plaustris ferratis
paleae conteruntur, sic conteretur Moab sub eo; sive sub Dei potentia,
sive in semetipso, ut nihil in eo integri remaneat. "This is spoken in
reference to the mode of threshing in Palestine, and various other
Asiatic provinces. Because of the scarcity of meadow land and hay they
make chopped straw for the cattle. They have large wheels studded over
with iron teeth or nails, by which, on the out-of-door threshing-floors,
they pound and reduce the straw into chaff. As, therefore, the straw is
reduced to chaff by bringing the iron-shod wheel over it; so shall Moab
be bruised by the power of God, that nothing whole shall remain." -
Hieron. in loc. See the note on [Isa
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#027) (note).

For the dunghill "Under the wheels of the car" - For מדמנה madmenah, the
Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate read מרכבה mercabah, which I have
followed. See [Jos 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#031), compared
with [Jos 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#005), where there is a
mistake very nearly the same. The keri, במי bemi, is confirmed by
twenty-eight MSS., seven ancient, and three editions.

[Isaiah 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 25:11</span></span>

As he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim "As he that
sinketh stretcheth out his hands to swim" - There is great obscurity in
this place: some understand God as the agent; others, Moab. I have
chosen the latter sense, as I cannot conceive that the stretching out of
the hands of a swimmer in swimming can be any illustration of the action
of God stretching out his hands over Moab to destroy it. I take השחה
hashshocheh, altering the point on the ש sin. on the authority of the
Septuagint, to be the participle of שחה shachah, the same with שוח
shuach, and שחח shachach, to bow down, to be depressed; and that the
prophet designed a paronomasia here, a figure which he frequently uses
between the similar words שהח shachah, and שחות shechoth. As תחתיו
tachtaiv, in his place, or on the spot, as we say in the preceding
verse, gives us an idea of the sudden and complete destruction of Moab;
so בקרבו bekirbo, in the midst of him, means that this destruction shall
be open, and exposed to the view of all: the neighboring nations shall
plainly see him struggling against it, as a man in the midst of the deep
waters exerts all his efforts by swimming, to save himself from
drowning. - L.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 26](isa026)

</div>
