<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa003)  [Next](isa005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 4:0</span></span>

The havoc occasioned by war, and those other calamities which the
prophet had been describing in the preceding chapter, are represented as
so terribly great that seven women should be left to one man, [Isa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001). Great blessedness of the remnant
that shall be accounted worthy to escape these judgments, [Isa
4:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002). The privileges of the Gospel
set forth by allusions to the glory and pomp of the Mosaic dispensation,
[Isa 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005), [Isa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006).

[Isaiah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 4:1</span></span>

And seven women - The division of the chapters has interrupted the
prophet's discourse, and broken it off almost in the midst of the
sentence. "The numbers slain in battle shall be so great, that seven
women shall be left to one man." The prophet has described the greatness
of this distress by images and adjuncts the most expressive and
forcible. The young women, contrary to their natural modesty, shall
become suitors to the men: they will take hold of them, and use the most
pressing importunity to be married. In spite of the natural suggestions
of jealousy, they will be content with a share only of the rights of
marriage in common with several others; and that on hard conditions,
renouncing the legal demands of the wife on the husband, (see [Exo
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#010)), and begging only the name and
credit of wedlock, and to be freed from the reproach of celibacy. See
[Isa 54:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#004), [Isa
54:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005). Like Marcia, on a different
occasion, and in other circumstances: -

Da tantum nomen inane

Connubii: liceat tumulo scripsisse, Catonis Marcia.

Lucan, 2:342.

"This happened," says Kimchi, "in the days of Ahaz, when Pekah the son
of Remaliah slew in Judea one hundred and twenty thousand men in one
day; see [Ch2 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2018.htm#006). The widows which
were left were so numerous that the prophet said, 'They are multiplied
beyond the sand of the sea,'" [Jer
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#008).

In that day - These words are omitted in the Septuagint, and MSS.

[Isaiah 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 4:2</span></span>

The branch of the Lord "the branch of Jehovah" - The Messiah of Jehovah,
says the Chaldee. And Kimchi says, The Messiah, the Son of David. The
branch is an appropriate title of the Messiah; and the fruit of the land
means the great Person to spring from the house of Judah, and is only a
parallel expression signifying the same; or perhaps the blessings
consequent upon the redemption procured by him. Compare [Isa
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#008) (note), where the same great
event is set forth under similar images, and see the note there.

Them that are escaped of Israel "the escaped of the house of Israel" - A
MS. has בית ישראל beith yisrael, the house of Israel.

[Isaiah 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 4:3</span></span>

Written among the living - That is, whose name stands in the enrolment
or register of the people; or every man living, who is a citizen of
Jerusalem. See [Eze 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009), where, "they
shall not be written in the writing of the house of Israel," is the same
with what immediately goes before, "they shall not be in the assembly of
my people." Compare [Psa 69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028); [Psa
87:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#006); [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032). To number and register the
people was agreeable to the law of Moses, and probably was always
practiced; being, in sound policy, useful, and even necessary. David's
design of numbering the people was of another kind; it was to enroll
them for his army. Michaelis Mosaisches Recht, Part iii., p. 227. See
also his Dissert. de Censibus Hebraeorum.

[Isaiah 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 4:4</span></span>

The spirit of burning - Means the fire of God's wrath, by which he will
prove and purify his people; gathering them into his furnace, in order
to separate the dross from the silver, the bad from the good. The
severity of God's judgments, the fiery trial of his servants, Ezekiel
([Eze 22:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#018)) has set forth at
large, after his manner, with great boldness of imagery and force of
expression. God threatens to gather them into the midst of Jerusalem, as
into the furnace; to blow the fire upon them, and to melt them. Malachi,
[Mal 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#002), [Mal
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#003), treats the same subject, and
represents the same event, under the like images: -

"But who may abide the day of his coming?

And who shall stand when he appeareth?

For he is like the fire of the refiner,

And like the soap of the fullers.

And he shall sit refining and purifying the silver;

And he shall purify the sons of Levi;

And cleanse them like gold, and like silver;

That they may be Jehovah's ministers,

Presenting unto him an offering in righteousness."

This is an allusion to a chemist purifying metals. He first judges of
the state of the ore or adulterated metal. Secondly, he kindles the
proper degree of fire, and applies the requisite test; and thus
separates the precious from the vile.

[Isaiah 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 4:5</span></span>

And the Lord will create - One MS., the Septuagint, and the Arabic, have
יביא yabi, He shall bring: the cloud already exists; the Lord will bring
it over. This is a blessed promise of the presence of God in all the
assemblies of his people.

Every dwelling place "the station" - The Hebrew text has, every station:
but four MSS. (one ancient) omit כל col, all; very rightly, as it should
seem: for the station was Mount Zion itself, and no other. See [Exo
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017). And the Septuagint, Arabic, and
MSS., add the same word כל col, before מקראה mikraeha, probably right:
the word has only changed its place by mistake. מקראיה mikrayeh, "the
place where they were gathered together in their holy assemblies," says
Sal ben Melech. But twenty-five of Kennicott's MSS., and twenty-two of
De Rossi's fifty-three editions, besides the Septuagint, Syriac, and
Arabic, have the word in the plural number.

A cloud and smoke by day - This is a manifest allusion to the pillar of
a cloud and of fire which attended the Israelites in their passage out
of Egypt, and to the glory that rested on the tabernacle, [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021); [Exo
40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038). The prophet Zechariah, [Zac
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005), applies the same image to the
same purpose: -

"And I will be unto her a wall of fire round about;

And a glory will I be in the midst of her."

That is, the visible presence of God shall protect her. Which explains
the conclusion of this verse of Isaiah; where the makkaph between כל
col, and כבוד cabod, connecting the two words in construction, which
ought not to be connected, has thrown an obscurity upon the sentence,
and misled most of the translators.

For upon all the glory shall be a defense - Whatever God creates, he
must uphold, or it will fail, Every degree of grace brings with it a
degree of power to maintain itself in the soul.

[Isaiah 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 4:6</span></span>

A tabernacle - In countries subject to violent tempests, as well as to
intolerable heat, a portable tent is a necessary part of a traveller's
baggage, for defense and shelter. And to such tents the words of the
text make evident allusion. They are to be met with in every part of
Arabia and Egypt, and in various other places in the East.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 5](isa005)

</div>
