<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa002)  [Next](isa004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 3:0</span></span>

The whole of this chapter, with the first verse of the next, is a
prophecy of those calamities that should be occasioned by the Babylonish
invasion and captivity. These calamities are represented as so great and
so general, that even royal honors, in such a state, are so far from
being desirable, that hardly any can be got to accept them, [Isa
3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001). This visitation is declared to
be the consequence of their profanity and guilt; for which the prophet
farther reproves and threatens them, [Isa
3:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#008). Particular amplification of
the distress of the delicate and luxurious daughters of Zion; whose
deplorable situation is finely contrasted with their former prosperity
and ease, [Isa 3:16-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016).

[Isaiah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 3:1</span></span>

The stay and the staff "Every stay and support" - Hebrew, "the support
masculine, and the support feminine:" that is, every kind of support,
whether great or small, strong or weak. "Al Kanitz, wal-kanitzah; the
wild beasts, male and female. Proverbially applied both to fishing and
hunting: i.e., I seized the prey, great or little, good or bad. From
hence, as Schultens observes, is explained [Isa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001), literally, the male and female
stay: i.e., the strong and weak, the great and small." - Chappelow, note
on Hariri, Assembly 1. Compare [Ecc
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#008).

The Hebrew words משען ומשענה mashen umashenah come from the same root
שען shaan, to lean against, to incline, to support; and here, being
masculine and feminine, they may signify all things necessary for the
support both of man and woman. My old MS. understands the staff and stay
as meaning particular persons, and translates the verse thus: - Lo
forsoth, the Lordschip Lord of Hoostis schal don awey fro Jerusalem and
fro Juda the stalworth and the stronge.

The two following verses, [Isa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#002),
[Isa 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#003), are very clearly explained
by the sacred historian's account of the event, the captivity of
Jehoiachin by Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon: "And he carried away all
Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the mighty men of valor, even
ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and smiths; none remained
save the poorest sort of the people of the land," [Kg2
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014). Which is supplied by our
version.

[Isaiah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 3:4</span></span>

I will give children to be their princes "I will make boys their
princes" - This also was fully accomplished in the succession of weak
and wicked princes, from the death of Josiah to the destruction of the
city and temple, and the taking of Zedekiah, the last of them, by
Nebuchadnezzar.

Babes shall rule over them - Dymennysche men schul lordschopen to hem. -
Old MS. Bible.

[Isaiah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 3:6</span></span>

Of the house of his father "Of his father's house" - For בית beith, the
house, the ancient interpreters seem to have read מבית mibbeith, from
the house; του οικειου του πατρος αυτου, Septuagint; domesticum patris
sui, Vulgate; which gives no good sense. But the Septuagint MS. 1. D. 2:
for οικειου has οικου. And, his brother, of his father's house, is
little better than a tautology. The case seems to require that the man
should apply to a person of some sort of rank and eminence; one that was
the head of his father's house, (see [Jos
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#014)), whether of the house of him
who applies to him, or of any other; ראש בית אביו rosh beith abaiu, the
chief, or head of his father's house. I cannot help suspecting,
therefore, that the word ראש rosh, head, chief, has been lost out of the
text.

Saying - Before שמלה simlah, garment, two MSS., one ancient, and the
Babylonish Talmud have the word לאמר lemor, saying; and so the
Steptuagint, Vulgate, Syriac, and Chaldee. I place it with Houbigant,
after שמלה simlah.

Thou hast clothing "Take by the garment" - That is, shall entreat him in
an humble and supplicating manner. "Ten men shall take hold of the skirt
of him that is a Jew, saying, Let us go with you; for we have heard that
God is with you," [Zac 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023). And so in
[Isa 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001), the same gesture is used to
express earnest and humble entreaty. The behavior of Saul towards Samuel
was of the same kind, when he laid hold on the skirt of his raiment,
[Sa1 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#027). The preceding and
following verses show, that his whole deportment, in regard to the
prophet, was full of submission and humility.

And let this ruin be under thy hand "And let thy hand support" - Before
תחת ידך tachath yadecha, a MS. adds תהיה tihyeh, "let it be;" another
MS. adds in the same place, תקח בידך takach beyadecha, which latter
seems to be a various reading of the two preceding words, making a very
good sense: "Take into thy hand our ruinous state." Twenty-one MSS. of
Kennicott's, thirteen of De Rossi's, one of my own, ancient, and three
editions of the Babylonish Talmud have ידיך yadeycha, plural, "thy
hands."

[Isaiah 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 3:7</span></span>

In that day shall he swear "Then shall he openly declare" - The
Septuagint, Syriac, and Jerome, read וישא veyissa, adding the
conjunction, which seems necessary in this place.

I will not be a healer - I am noy a leche. - Old MS. Bible. Leech was
the ancient English word for a physician.

For in my house is neither bread nor clothing "For in my house is
neither bread nor raiment" - "It is customary through all the East,"
says Sir J. Chardin, "to gather together an immense quantity of
furniture and clothes; for their fashions never alter." Princes and
great men are obliged to have a great stock of such things in readiness
for presents upon all occasions. "The kings of Persia," says the same
author, "have great wardrobes, where there are always many hundreds of
habits ready, designed for presents, and sorted," Harmer, Observ., 2:11
and 88. A great quantity of provision for the table was equally
necessary. The daily provision for Solomon's household, whose attendants
were exceedingly numerous, was proportionately great, [Kg1
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#022), [Kg1
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#023). Even Nehemiah, in his strait
circumstances, had a large supply daily for his table; at which he
received a hundred and fifty of the Jews and rulers, besides those that
came from among the neighboring heathen, [Neh
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#017), [Neh
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#018).

This explains the meaning of the excuse made by him that is desired to
undertake the government. He alleges that he has not wherewithal to
support the dignity of the station, by such acts of liberality and
hospitality as the law of custom required of persons of superior rank.
See Harmer's Observations, 1:340, 2:88.

[Isaiah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 3:8</span></span>

The eyes "The cloud" - This word appears to be of very doubtful form,
from the printed editions, the MSS., and the ancient versions. The first
yod in עיני eyney, which is necessary according to the common
interpretation, is in many of them omitted; the two last letters are
upon a rasure in two MSS. I think it should be ענן anan, "a cloud," as
the Syriac reads; and the allusion is to the cloud in in which the glory
of the Lord appeared above the tabernacle; see [Exo
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#009), [Exo
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#010); [Exo
40:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034); [Num
16:41](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#041), [Num
16:42](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#042).

Either of the readings gives a very good sense. The allusion may be to
the cloud of the Divine presence in the wilderness: or the eyes of the
Lord may be meant, as they are in every place beholding the evil and the
good. And he cannot look upon iniquity but with abhorrence; therefore,
the eyes of his glory might be well provoked by their crimes.

[Isaiah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 3:9</span></span>

The show of their countenance - Bishop Lowth has it the steadfastness of
their countenance - they appear to be bent on iniquity, their eyes tell
the wickedness of their hearts. The eye is the index of the mind. Envy,
hatred, malice, malevolence, concupiscence, and murder, when in the
heart, look most intelligently out at the eye. They tell the innocent to
be on their guard; and serve the same purpose as the sonorous rings in
the tail of the rattlesnake - they announce the presence of the
destroyer.

They declare their sin as Sodom - Impure propensities are particularly
legible in the eyes: whoever has beheld the face of a debauchee or a
prostitute knows this; of these it may be said, they wish to appear what
they really are. They glory in their iniquity. This is the highest pitch
of ungodliness.

They have rewarded evil unto themselves - Every man's sin is against his
own soul. Evil awaiteth sinners - and he that offends his God injures
himself.

[Isaiah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 3:10</span></span>

Say ye to the righteous - לצדיק letsaddik, the ל lamed is added here by
one MS. and the Chaldee. The righteous is the person,

1\. Who fears God.

2\. Departs from evil.

3\. Walks according to the testimony of God.

4\. And expects and prepares for a glorious immortality.

"Pronounce ye." - The reading of this verse is very dubious. The
Septuagint for אמרו imru read נאסר neasor, or both, אמרו נאסר imru
neasor, and כי לא טוב לנו ki lo tob lanu. Δησωμεν τον δικαιον, ὁτι
δυσχρηστος ἡμιν εστι. Perhaps, for אמרו imru, the true reading may be
אשרו ashsheru, "bless you;" or אמרו אשרי imru ashrey, "say ye, blessed
is." The Vulgate and an ancient MS. read in the singular number, יאכל
yochel, comedat, "he shall eat."

"It shall be well with him:" - כי טוב ki tob, "that good." Say nothing
to such but good. He is a good man, he does nothing but good, and has a
good God to deal with, from whom he expects nothing but goodness. It
shall be well with such in all circumstances of life.

1\. In prosperity.

2\. In adversity.

3\. In sickness.

4\. In health.

5\. In death.

6\. In judgment. And,

7\. Through eternity

In every case, occurrence, and circumstance, he shall eat the fruit of
his doings - he shall derive benefit from being a righteous man, and
walking in a righteous way.

[Isaiah 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 3:11</span></span>

Wo unto the wicked - לרשע lerasha, the man who is,

1\. Evil in his heart.

2\. Evil in his purposes.

3\. Evil in his life.

As he is wicked, he does that which is wicked; and is influenced by the
wicked one, of whom he is the servant and the son. It shall be ill with
him, רע ra; in a single word say to him - evil! Of him you can speak no
good; and to him you can speak no good - all is evil, in him - before
him - after him - round about him - above him - below him. Evil in time
- evil through eternity!

The reward of his hands - What he has deserved he shall get. He shall be
paid that for which he has labored, and his reward shall be in
proportion to his work. O, what a lot is that of the wicked! Cursed in
time, and accursed through eternity!

[Isaiah 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 3:12</span></span>

Err "Pervert" - בלעו billeu, "swallow." Among many unsatisfactory
methods of accounting for the unusual meaning of this word in this
place, I choose Jarchi's explication, as making the best sense. "Read
בללו billalu, 'confound.' Syriac." - Dr. Judd. "Read בהלו beholu,
'disturb or trouble.'" - Secker. So Septuagint. This verse might be
read, "The collectors of grapes shall be their oppressors; and usurers
(noshim, instead of nashim, women) shall rule over them."

[Isaiah 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 3:13</span></span>

The people "His people" - עמו ammo, Septuagint.

[Isaiah 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 3:14</span></span>

The vineyard. "My vineyard" - כרמי - "dr carmi, Septuagint, Chaldee,
Jerome.

[Isaiah 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 3:15</span></span>

And grind the faces - The expression and the image is strong, to denote
grievous oppression but is exceeded by the prophet Micah, [Mic
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001) : -

"Hear, I pray you, ye chiefs of Jacob,

And ye princes of the house of Israel:

Is it not yours to know what is right?

Ye that hate good and love evil:

Who tear their skins from off them,

And their flesh from off their bones;

Who devour the flesh of my people;

And flay from off them their skin;

And their bones they dash in pieces;

And chop them asunder, as morsels for the pot:

And as flesh thrown into the midst of the caldron."

In the last line but one, for כאשר keasher, read, by the transposition
of a letter, כשאר kisher, with the Septuagint and Chaldee.

[Isaiah 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 3:16</span></span>

And wanton eyes "And falsely setting off their eyes with paint" -
Hebrew, falsifying their eyes. I take this to be the true meaning and
literal rendering of the word; from שקר shakar. The Masoretes have
pointed it, as if it were from שקר sakar, a different word. This arose,
as I imagine, from their supposing that the word was the same with סקר
sakar, Chaldee, "intueri, innuere oculis;" or that it had an affinity
with the noun סיקרא sikra, which the Chaldeans, or the rabbins at least,
use for stibium, the mineral which was commonly used in colouring the
eyes. See Jarchi's comment on the place. Though the colouring of the
eyes with stibium be not particularly here expressed, yet I suppose it
to be implied; and so the Chaldee paraphrase explains it; stibio linitis
oculis, "with eyes dressed with stibium." This fashion seems to have
prevailed very generally among the Eastern people in ancient times; and
they retain the very same to this day.

Pietro delta Valle, giving a description of his wife, an Assyrian lady
born in Mesopotamia, and educated at Baghdad, whom he married in that
country, (Viaggi, Tom. I., Lettera 17), says, "Her eyelashes, which are
long, and, according to the custom of the East, dressed with stibium,
(as we often read in the Holy Scriptures of the Hebrew women of old,
[Jer 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#030); [Eze
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040); and in Xenophon, of Astyages
the grandfather of Cyrus, and of the Medes of that time, Cyropaed. lib.
i.), give a dark, and at the same time a majestic, shade to the eyes."
"Great eyes," says Sandys, Travels, p. 67, speaking of the Turkish
women, "they have in principal repute; and of those the blacker they be
the more amiable; insomuch that they put between the eyelids and the eye
a certain black powder with a fine long pencil, made of a mineral,
brought from the kingdom of Fez, and called Alcohole; which by the not
disagreeable staining of the lids doth better set forth the whiteness of
the eye; and though it be troublesome for a time, yet it comforteth the
sight, and repelleth ill humours." Vis ejus (stibii) astringe ac
refrigerare, principalis autem circa oculos; namque ideo etiam plerique
Platyophthalmon id appellavere, quoniam in calliblepharis mulierum
dilatat oculos; et fluxiones inhibet oculorum exulcerationesque. "It is
astringent in its virtue, and refrigerant, and to be chiefly employed
about the eyes, and it is called Platyophthalmon, for being put into
those ointments with which women beautify their eyes, it dilates them,
removes defluxions, and heals any ulcerations that may be about the
eyelids." - Pliny, Nat. Hist. 33:6.

Ille supercilium madida fuligine tactum

Obliqua producit acu, pingitque trementes

Attollens oculos

Juv. Sat. 2:93.

One his eyebrows, tinged with black soot,

Lengthens with an oblique bodkin, and paints,

Lifting up his winking eyes.

"But none of those \[Moorish\] ladies," says Dr. Shaw, Travels, p. 294,
fol., "take themselves to be completely dressed, till they have tinged
the hair and edges of their eyelids with alkahol, the powder of lead
ore. This operation is performed by dipping first into the powder a
small wooden bodkin of the thickness of a quill; and then drawing it
afterwards through the eyelids, over the ball of the eye." Ezekiel, [Eze
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040), uses the same word in the form
of a verb, כחלת עניך cachalt eynayik, "thou didst dress thine eyes with
alcahol;" which the Septuagint render εστιβιζου τους, οφθαλμους σου,
"thou didst dress thine eyes with stibium;" just as they do when the
word פוך phuch is employed: compare [Kg2
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030); [Jer
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#030). They supposed, therefore, that
פוך phuch and כחל cachal, or in the Arabic form, alcahol, meant the same
thing; and probably the mineral used of old for this purpose was the
same that is used now; which Dr. Shaw (ibid. note) says is "a rich lead
ore, pounded into an impalpable powder." Alcoholados; the word משקרות
meshakkeroth in this place is thus rendered in an old Spanish
translation. - Sanctius. See also Russell's Nat. Hist. of Aleppo, p.
102.

The following inventory, as one may call it, of the wardrobe of a Hebrew
lady, must, from its antiquity, and the nature of the subject, have been
very obscure even to the most ancient interpreters which we have of it;
and from its obscurity must have been also peculiarly liable to the
mistakes of transcribers. However, it is rather matter of curiosity than
of importance; and is indeed, upon the whole, more intelligible and less
corrupted than one might have reasonably expected. Clemens Alexandrinus,
Paedag. lib. ii., c. 12, and Julius Pollux, lib. vii., c. 22, have each
of them preserved from a comedy of Aristophanes, now lost, a similar
catalogue of the several parts of the dress and ornaments of a Grecian
lady; which, though much more capable of illustration from other
writers, though of later date, and quoted and transmitted down to us by
two different authors, yet seems to be much less intelligible, and
considerably more corrupted, than this passage of Isaiah. Salmasius has
endeavored, by comparing the two quotations, and by much critical
conjecture and learned disquisition, to restore the true reading, and to
explain the particulars; with what success, I leave to the determination
of the learned reader, whose curiosity shall lead him to compare the
passage of the comedian with this of the prophet, and to examine the
critic's learned labors upon it. Exercit. Plinian, p. 1148; or see Clem.
Ales. as cited above, edit. Potter, where the passage, as corrected by
Salmasius, is given.

Nich. Guel. Schroederus, professor of oriental languages in the
University of Marpurg, has published a very learned and judicious
treatise upon this passage of Isaiah. The title of it is, "Commentarius
Philologico-Criti cus de Vestitu Mulierum Hebraearum ad Iesai 3 ver.
16-24. Lugd. Bat. 1745." As I think no one has handled this subject with
so much judgment and ability as this author, I have for the most part
followed him, in giving the explanation of the several terms denoting
the different parts of dress, of which this passage consists; signifying
the reasons of my dissent, where he does not give me full satisfaction.

Bishop Lowth's translation of these verses is the following: -

18\. In that day will the Lord take from them the ornaments,Of the
feet-rings, and the net-works, and the crescents;

19\. The pendants, and the bracelets, and the veils;

20\. The tires, and the fetters, and the zones, And the perfume-boxes,
and the amulets;

21\. The rings, and the jewels of the nostrils;

22\. The embroidered robes, and the tunics, And the cloaks, and the
little purses,

23\. The transparent garments, and the fine linen vests, And the
turbans, and the mantles.

24\. And there shall be instead of perfume, a putrid ulcer;And instead
of well-girt raiment, rags;And instead of high-dressed hair,
baldness;And instead of a zone, a girdle of sackcloth; And sun-burnt
skin, instead of beauty.

The daughters of Zion - walk - What is meant by these several kinds of
action and articles of dress cannot be well conjectured. How our
ancestors understood them will appear from the following, which is the
translation of these verses in my old MS. Bible: -

16\. The doughteris of Syon wenteh with strught out necks, and ib beckes
(winking) of eegen, geeden and flappeden with hondis for joye, and
geeden: and with theire feet in curyous goying geeden; - 17. the Lord
schall fully make ballid the top of the boughtris of Syon: and the Lord
the her of hem schal naken. And for ournemente schal be schenschip.

18\. In that day, the Lord schal don awey the ournement of Schoon and
hoosis: 19. and beegis, and brochis, and armeerclis, and mytris; 20. and
coombis, and rybanys and reversis at the hemmys, and oynment boris and
ereringis; 21. and ryngis and jemmys in the frount hongynge; 22. and
chaunginge clothis, and litil pallis, and scheetis, and prynys; 23. and
scheweris, and neche hercheuys, and flyetis, and roketis; 24. and ther
schal be for swot smel, stynke, and for gyrdil, a litl coord; and for
crisp her, ballidnesse; and for brest boond and heyr.

Some of these things are hard to be understood, though I think this
version as good as that of the very learned bishop: but there is little
doubt that articles of clothing and dress bore these names in the
fourteenth century.

[Isaiah 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 3:17</span></span>

The Lord will smite "Will the Lord humble" - ταπεινωσει, Septuagint; and
so Syriac and Chaldee. For שפח sippach they read שפל shaphal. Instead of
יהוה Yehovah, many MSS. have אדני Adonai.

Will discover their secret parts "Expose their nakedness" - It was the
barbarous custom of the conquerors of those times to strip their
captives naked, and to make them travel in that condition, exposed to
the inclemency of the weather; and the worst of all, to the intolerable
heat of the sun. But this to the women was the height of cruelty and
indignity; and especially to such as those here described, who had
indulged themselves in all manner of delicacies of living, and all the
superfluities of ornamental dress; and even whose faces had hardly ever
been exposed to the sight of man. This is always mentioned as the
hardest part of the lot of captives. Nahum, [Nah
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#005), [Nah
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#006), denouncing the fate of Nineveh,
paints it in very strong colors: -

"Behold, I am against thee, saith Jehovah, God of hosts:

And I will discover thy skirts upon thy face;

And I will expose thy nakedness to the nations;

And to the kingdoms thy shame.

And I will throw ordures upon thee;

And I will make thee vile, and set thee as a gazing-stock."

[Isaiah 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 3:18</span></span>

Ornaments about their feet "The ornaments of the feet rings" - The late
learned Dr. Hunt, professor of Hebrew and Arabic in the University of
Oxford, has very well explained the word עכס both verb and noun, in his
very ingenious Dissertation on Prov, [Isa
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#022), [Isa
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#023). The verb means to skip, to
bound, to dance along, and the noun, those ornaments of the feet which
the Eastern ladies wore; chains or rings, which made a tinkling sound as
they moved nimbly in walking. Eugene Roger, Description de la Terre
Sainte, 54:2 ch. 2, speaking of the Arabian women, of the first rank in
Palestine, says,"Au lieu de brasselets elles ont de menottes d'argent,
qu'elles portent aux poignets et aux pieds; ou sont attachez quantite de
petits annelets d'argent, qui font un cliquetis comme d'une cymbale,
lorsqu'elles cheminent ou se mouvent quelque peu." See Dr. Hunt's
Dissertation; where he produces other testimonies to the same purpose
from authors of travels. Hindoo women of ill fame wear loose ornaments
one above another on their ankles, which at every motion make a tinkling
noise. See Ward.

And their cauls "the net-works" - I am obliged to differ from the
learned Schroederus almost at first setting out. He renders the word
שביסים shebisim by soliculi, little ornaments, bullae, or studs, in
shape representing the sun, and so answering to the following word
שהרנים saharonim, lunulae, crescents. He supposes the word to be the
same with שמישים shemishim, the י yod in the second syllable making the
word diminutive, and the letter מ mem being changed for ב beth, a letter
of the same organ. How just and well founded his authorities for the
transmutation of these letters in the Arabic language are, I cannot
pretend to judge; but as I know of no such instance in Hebrew, it seems
to me a very forced etymology. Being dissatisfied with this account of
the matter, I applied to my good friend above mentioned, the late Dr.
Hunt, who very kindly returned the following answer to my inquiries: -

"I have consulted the Arabic Lexicons, as well MS. as printed, but
cannot find שביסים shebisim in any of them, nor any thing belonging to
it; so that no help is to be had from that language towards clearing up
the meaning of this difficult word. But what the Arabic denies, the
Syriac perhaps may afford; in which I find the verb שבש shabas, to
entangle or interweave, an etymology which is equally favorable to our
marginal translation, net-works, with שבץ shabats, to make chequer work,
or embroider, (the word by which Kimchi and others have explained שביס
shabis); and has moreover this advantage over it, that the letters ש sin
and ס samech are very frequently put for each other, but צ tsaddi and ס
samech scarcely ever. Aben Ezra joins שביסים shebisim and עכסים achasim,
which immediately precedes it, together; and says that שביס shabis was
the ornament of the leps, as עכס eches was of the feet. His words are,
שביס תכשיט של שוקים כמו עכס של רגלים - L."

[Isaiah 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 3:20</span></span>

The tablets - The words בתי הנפש bottey hannephesh, which we translate
tablets, and Bishop Lowth, perfume boxes, literally signify houses of
the soul; and may refer to strong scented bottles used for pleasure and
against fainting; similar to bottles with otto of roses, worn by the
ladies of the East to the present time.

[Isaiah 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 3:21</span></span>

Nose-jewels "The jewels of the nostril" - נזמי האף nizmey haaph.
Schroederus explains this, as many others do, of jewels, or strings of
pearl hanging from the forehead, and reaching to the upper part of the
nose; than which nothing can be more ridiculous, as such are seldom seen
on an Asiatic face. But it appears from many passages of Holy Scripture
that the phrase is to be literally and properly understood of
nose-jewels, rings set with jewels hanging from the nostrils, as
ear-rings from the ears, by holes bored to receive them.

Ezekiel, enumerating the common ornaments of women of the first rank,
has not omitted this particular, and is to be understood in the same
manner, [Eze 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#011), [Eze
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#012). See also [Gen
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#047) : -

"And I decked thee with ornaments;

And I put bracelets upon thine hands,

And a chain on thy neck:

And I put a jewel on thy nose,

And ear-rings on thine ears,

And a splendid crown upon thine head."

And in an elegant proverb of Solomon, [Pro
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#022), there is a manifest allusion to
this kind of ornament, which shows it to have been used in his time: -

"As a jewel of gold in the snout of a swine;

So is a woman beautiful, but wanting discretion."

This fashion, however strange it may appear to us, was formerly and is
still common in many parts of the East, among women of all ranks. Paul
Lucas, speaking of a village or clan of wandering people, a little on
this side of the Euphrates, says, (2d Voyage du Levant, tom. i., art.
24), "The women, almost all of them, travel on foot; I saw none handsome
among them. They have almost all of them the nose bored; and wear in it
a great ring, which makes them still more deformed." But in regard to
this custom, better authority cannot be produced than that of Pietro
della Valle, in the account which he gives of the lady before mentioned,
Signora Maani Gioerida, his own wife. The description of her dress, as
to the ornamental parts of it, with which he introduces the mention of
this particular, will give us some notion of the taste of the Eastern
ladies for finery. "The ornaments of gold and of jewels for the head,
for the neck, for the arms, for the legs, and for the feet (for they
wear rings even on their toes) are indeed, unlike those of the Turks,
carried to great excess, but not of great value: for in Bagdad jewels of
high price are either not to be had, or are not used; and they wear such
only as are of little value, as turquoises, small rubies, emeralds,
carbuncles, garnets, pearls, and the like. My spouse dresses herself
with all of them according to their fashion; with exception, however, of
certain ugly rings of very large size, set with jewels, which, in truth,
very absurdly, it is the custom to wear fastened to one of their
nostrils, like buffaloes: an ancient custom, however, in the East,
which, as we find in the Holy Scriptures, prevailed among the Hebrew
ladies even in the time of Solomon, [Pro
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#022). These nose-rings, in
complaisance to me, she has left off, but I have not yet been able to
prevail with her cousin and her sisters to do the same; so fond are they
of an old custom, be it ever so absurd, who have been long habituated to
it." Viaggi, Tom. i., Let. 17.

It is the left nostril that is bored and ornamented with rings and
jewels. More than one hundred drawings from life of Eastern ladies lie
now before me, and scarcely one is without the nose-jewel: both the arms
and wrists are covered with bracelets, arm-circles, etc., as also their
legs and feet; the soles of their feet and palms of their hands coloured
beautifully red with henna, and their hair plaited and ornamented
superbly. These beautiful drawings are a fine comment on this chapter.

[Isaiah 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 3:23</span></span>

The glasses - The conjunction ו vau, and - And the glasses, is added
here by forty-three of Kennicott's and thirty-four of De Rossi's MSS.,
and one of my own, ancient, as well as by many editions.

And the veils. "The transparent garments" - Τα διαφανη Λακωνικα, Sept. A
kind of silken dress, transparent, like gauze; worn only by the most
elegant women, and such as dressed themselves elegantius quam necesse
esset probis, "more elegantly than modest women should." Such garments
are worn to the present day; garments that not only show the shape of
every part of the body, but the very color of the skin. This is
evidently the case in some scores of drawings of Asiatic females now
before me. This sort of garments was afterwards in use among the Greeks.
Prodicus, in his celebrated fable (Xenoph. Memorab. Socr. lib. ii.)
exhibits the personage of Sloth in this dress: Εσθητα δε, εξ ἡς αν
μαλιστα ὡρα διαλαμποι: -

"Her robe betray'd

Through the clear texture every tender limb,

Height'ning the charms it only seem'd to shade;

And as it flow'd adown so loose and thin,

Her stature show'd more tall, more snowy white her skin."

They were called multitia and coa (scil, vestimenta) by the Romans, from
their being invented, or rather introduced into Greece, by one Pamphila
of the island of Cos. This, like other Grecian fashions, was received at
Rome, when luxury began to prevail under the emperors. It was sometimes
worn even by the men, but looked upon as a mark of extreme effeminacy.
See Juvenal, Sat. ii., 65, etc. Publius Syrus, who lived when the
fashion was first introduced, has given a humorous satirical description
of it in two lines, which by chance have been preserved: -

"Aequum est, induere nuptam ventum textilem?

Palam prostare nudam in nebula linea?"

[Isaiah 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 3:24</span></span>

Instead of sweet smell "perfume" - A principal part of the delicacy of
the Asiatic ladies consists in the use of baths, and of the richest oils
and perfumes; an attention to which is in some degree necessary in those
hot countries. Frequent mention is made of the rich ointments of the
spouse in the Song of Solomon, [Sol
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#010), [Sol
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011) : -

"How beautiful are thy breasts, my sister, my spouse!

How much more excellent than wine;

And the odour of thine ointments than all perfumes!

Thy lips drop as the honey-comb, my spouse!

Honey and milk are under thy tongue:

And the odor of thy garments is as the odour of Lebanon."

The preparation for Esther's being introduced to King Ahasuerus was a
course of bathing and perfuming for a whole year; "six months with oil
of myrrh, and six months with sweet odours;" [Est
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#012) (note). A diseased and loathsome
habit of body, instead of a beautiful skin, softened and made agreeable
with all that art could devise, and all that nature, so prodigal in
those countries of the richest perfumes, could supply, must have been a
punishment the most severe and the most mortifying to the delicacy of
these haughty daughters of Sion.

Burning instead of beauty "A sunburnt skin" - Gaspar Sanctius thinks the
words כי תחת ki thachath an interpolation, because the Vulgate has
omitted them. The clause כי תחת יפי ki thachath yophi seems to me rather
to be imperfect at the end. Not to mention that כי ki, taken as a noun
for adustio, burning, is without example, and very improbable. The
passage ends abruptly, and seems to want a fuller conclusion.

In agreement with which opinion, of the defect of the Hebrew text in
this place, the Septuagint, according to MSS. Pachom. and 1 D. ii., and
Marchal., which are of the best authority, express it with the same
evident marks of imperfection at the end of the sentence; thus: ταυτα
σοι αντι καλλωπισμου The two latter add δου. This chasm in the text,
from the loss probably of three or four words, seems therefore to be of
long standing.

Taking כי ki in its usual sense, as a particle, and supplying לך lech
from the σοι of the Septuagint, it might possibly have been originally
somewhat in this form: -

מראה רעת לך תהיה יפי תחת כי marah

raath

lech

thihyeh

yophi

thachath

ki

"Yea, instead of beauty thou shalt have an illfavoured countenance."

כי תחת יפי ki thachath yophi (q. יחת yachath), "for beauty shall be
destroyed." Syr. חתת chathath or נחת nachath.-Dr. Durell.

"May it not be כהי cohey, 'wrinkles instead of beauty?' as from יפה
yaphah is formed יפי yephi, yophi; from מרה marah, מרי meri, etc.; so
from כהה cahah, to be wrinkled, כהי cohey." - Dr. Jubb. The כי ki is
wanting in one MS., and has been omitted by several of the ancients.

[Isaiah 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 3:25</span></span>

Thy mighty men - For גבורתך geburathech an ancient MS. has גבורך
gibborech. The true reading, from the Septuagint, Vulgate, Syriac, and
Chaldee, seems to be גבוריך gibborayich.

[Isaiah 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 3:26</span></span>

Sit upon the ground - Sitting on the ground was a posture that denoted
mourning and deep distress. The prophet Jeremiah ([Lam
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#008)) has given it the first place
among many indications of sorrow, in the following elegant description
of the same state of distress of his country: -

"The elders of the daughter of Sion sit on the ground, they are silent:
They have cast up dust on their heads; they have girded themselves with
sackcloth; The virgins of Jerusalem have bowed down their heads to the
ground."

"We find Judea," says Mr. Addison, (on Medals, Dial. ii), "on several
coins of Vespasian and Titus, in a posture that denotes sorrow and
captivity. I need not mention her sitting on the ground, because we have
already spoken of the aptness of such a posture to represent an extreme
affliction. I fancy the Romans might have an eye on the customs of the
Jewish nation, as well as those of their country, in the several marks
of sorrow they have set on this figure. The psalmist describes the Jews
lamenting their captivity in the same pensive posture: 'By the waters of
Babylon we sat down and wept, when we remembered thee, O Zion.' But what
is more remarkable, we find Judea represented as a woman in sorrow
sitting on the ground, in a passage of the prophet, that foretells the
very captivity recorded on this medal." Mr. Addison, I presume, refers
to this place of Isaiah; and therefore must have understood it as
foretelling the destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish nation by the
Romans: whereas it seems plainly to relate, in its first and more
immediate view at least, to the destruction of the city by
Nebuchadnezzar, and the dissolution of the Jewish state under the
captivity at Babylon. - L.

Several of the coins mentioned here by Mr. Addison are in my own
collection: and to such I have already referred in this work. I shall
describe one here. On the obverse a fine head of the emperor Vespasian
with this legend, Imperator Julius Caesar Vespasianus Augustus, Pontifex
Maximus, Tribunitia Potestate Pater Patriae, Consul VIII.

On the reverse a tall palm tree, emblem of the land of Palestine, the
emperor standing on the left, close to the tree, with a trophy behind
him; on the right, Judea under the figure of a female captive sitting on
the ground, with her head resting on her hand, the elbow on her knee,
weeping. Around is this legend, Judea Capta. Senates Consulto. However
this prediction may refer proximately to the destruction of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar, I am fully of opinion that it ultimately refers to the
final ruin of the Jewish state by the Romans. And so it has been
understood by the general run of the best and most learned interpreters
and critics.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 4](isa004)

</div>
