<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa055)  [Next](isa057) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 56](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 56:0</span></span>

Whoever would partake of the blessings of the Gospel is required to be
holy in all manner of life and conversation. And he that will be so is
declared to be accepted according to this gracious dispensation, the
blessings of which are large as the human race, without any respect to
persons or to nations, [Isa 56:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001). At
the ninth verse begins a different subject, or new section of prophecy.
It opens with calling on the enemies of the Jews, (the Chaldeans, or
perhaps the Romans), as beasts of prey against them, for the sins of
their rulers, teachers, and other profane people among them, whose guilt
drew down judgments on the nation, [Isa
56:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009).

[Isaiah 56:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 56:2</span></span>

That keepeth the Sabbath from polluting it - Kimchi has an excellent
note here. "The Sabbath is sanctified when it is distinguished in
dignity; and separated from other days.

1\. As to the body, in meat, drink, and clean clothing.

2\. As to the soul, that it be empty of worldly occupations, and be
busily employed in the words of the law and wisdom, and in meditation on
the works of the Lord."

The rabbins say, "Jerusalem had never been destroyed, had not the
Sabbaths been profaned in it."

[Isaiah 56:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 56:5</span></span>

I will give them an everlasting name - For לו lo, him, in the singular,
it is evident that we ought to read למו lamo, them, in the plural: so
read the Septuagint, Syriac, Chaldee, and Vulgate.

[Isaiah 56:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 56:6</span></span>

The sons of the stranger - The Gentiles.

That join themselves to the Lord - Who shall enter into the Christian
covenant by baptism and faith in Christ, as the Jews and proselytes did
by circumcision.

To serve him - To live according to the Gospel, and ever do that which
is right in the sight of the Lord.

To love the name of the Lord - The name of Jesus, the Christ, the Savior
of sinners, the Anointed of God, and the Giver of the Holy Spirit to his
followers.

To be his servants - To worship no other God but Jehovah, and to trust
in none for salvation but his Christ.

That keepeth the Sabbath - That observes it as a type of the rest that
remains for the people of God.

And taketh hold of my covenant - בבריתי biberithi, "of my covenant
sacrifice;" as without this he can do nothing good; and without it
nothing can be acceptable to the infinite majesty of the Most High.

[Isaiah 56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 56:7</span></span>

Shall be accepted - A word is here lost out of the text: it is supplied
from the Septuagint, יהיו yihyu, εσονται, "they shall be." - Houbigant.

[Isaiah 56:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 56:9</span></span>

All ye beasts of the field - Here manifestly begins a new section. The
prophet in the foregoing chapters, having comforted the faithful Jews
with many great promises of God's favor to be extended to them, in the
restoration of their ruined state, and in the enlargement of his Church
by the admission of the Gentiles; here on a sudden makes a transition to
the more disagreeable part of the prospect, and to a sharp reproof of
the wicked and unbelievers; and especially of the negligent and
faithless governors and teachers, of the idolaters and hypocrites, who
would still draw down his judgments upon the nation. Probably having in
view the destruction of their city and polity by the Chaldeans, and
perhaps by the Romans. The same subject is continued in the next
chapter; in which the charge of corruption and apostasy becomes more
general against the whole Jewish Church. Some expositors have made great
difficulties in the 9th verse of this chapter, where there seems to be
none. It is perfectly well explained by Jeremiah, [Jer
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007), [Jer
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009), where, having introduced God
declaring his purpose of punishing his people, by giving them up as a
prey to their enemies the Chaldeans, a charge to these his agents is
given in words very nearly the same with those of Isaiah in this place:
-

"I have forsaken my house; I have deserted my heritage;

I have given up the beloved of my soul into the hands of her enemies. -

Come away, be gathered together, all ye beasts of the field;

Come away to devour."

All ye beasts in the forest "All ye beasts of the forest" - Instead of
ביער baiyaar, three MSS. have יער yaar, without the preposition; which
seems to be right, and is confirmed by all the ancient Versions.

[Isaiah 56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 56:10</span></span>

His watchmen are blind - Kimchi observes, "The flock is intrusted to the
care of these watchmen. The wild beasts come; these dogs bark not; and
the wild beasts devour the flock. Thus they do not profit the flock.
Yea, they injure it; for the owner trusts in them, that they will watch
and be faithful; but they are not. These are the false teachers and
careless shepherds."

Dumb dogs, they cannot bark - See note on [Isa
62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006).

Sleeping "Dreamers" - הזים hozim, ενυπνιαζομενοι, Septuagint. This seems
to be the best authority for the meaning of this word, which occurs only
in this place: but it is to be observed, that eleven MSS. of Kennicott's
and De Rossi's, and four editions, have חזים chazim, seers, or those who
see; and so the Vulgate seems to have read, videntes vana, "seeing vain
things."

Loving to slumber - לנום lanum: but six of Kennicott's and seven of De
Rossi's MSS. read לנוס lanus, to fly, "to change their residence:" but
what connection such reading can have with the sense of the passage, I
cannot discern. What is taken for ס samech here is, I have no doubt, a
narrow formed final ם mem, which has been mistaken for the above. Many
instances occur in my own MSS., where the final ם mem is similar to the
samech; and yet no such change was intended by the scribe.

[Isaiah 56:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 56:11</span></span>

Greedy dogs - Insatiably feeding themselves with the fat, and clothing
themselves with the wool, while the flock is scattered, ravaged, and
starved! O what an abundance of these dumb and greedy dogs are there
found hanging on and prowling about the flock of Christ! How can any
careless, avaricious, hireling minister read this without agitation and
dismay?

[Isaiah 56:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 56:12</span></span>

I will fetch wine "Let us provide wine" - For אקחה ekchah, first person
singular, an ancient MS. has נקחה nikchah, first person plural; and
another ancient MS. has אק ak upon a rasure. So the Syriac, Chaldee, and
Vulgate render it. The spirit of this Epicurean sentiment is this: Let
us indulge ourselves in the present time to the utmost, and instead of
any gloomy forebodings of the future, let us expect nothing but
increasing hilarity for every day we shall live. Thus they,

"Counting on long years of pleasure here,

Are quite unfurnished for the world to come."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 57](isa057)

</div>
