<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa010)  [Next](isa012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 11:0</span></span>

The Messiah represented as a slender twig shooting up from the root of
an old withered stem, which tender plant, so extremely weak in its first
appearance, should nevertheless become fruitful and mighty, [Isa
11:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001). Great equity of the Messiah's
government, [Isa 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#005). Beautiful
assemblages of images by which the great peace and happiness of his
kingdom are set forth, [Isa 11:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006).
The extent of his dominion shall be ultimately that of the whole
habitable globe, [Isa 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009). The
prophet, borrowing his imagery from the exodus from Egypt, predicts,
with great majesty of language, the future restoration of the outcasts
of Israel and the dispersed of Judah, (viz., the whole of the twelve
tribes of Israel), from their several dispersions, and also that blessed
period when both Jews and Gentiles shall assemble under the banner of
Jesus, and zealously unite in extending the limits of his kingdom, [Isa
11:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010).

The prophet had described the destruction of the Assyrian army under the
image of a mighty forest, consisting of flourishing trees growing thick
together, and of a great height; of Lebanon itself crowned with lofty
cedars, but cut down and laid level with the ground by the axe wielded
by the hand of some powerful and illustrious agent. In opposition to
this image he represents the great Person who makes the subject of this
chapter as a slender twig shooting out from the trunk of an old tree,
cut down, lopped to the very root, and decayed; which tender plant, so
weak in appearance, should nevertheless become fruitful and prosper.
This contrast shows plainly the connection between this and the
preceding chapter, which is moreover expressed by the connecting
particle; and we have here a remarkable instance of that method so
common with the prophets, and particularly with Isaiah, of taking
occasion, from the mention of some great temporal deliverance, to launch
out into the display of the spiritual deliverance of God's people by the
Messiah; for that this prophecy relates to the Messiah we have the
express authority of St. Paul, [Rom
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#012). 'He joins this paragraph, with
respect to the days of the Messiah, with the fidelity that was in the
days of Hezekiah." - Kimchi, in [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001). Thus in the latter part of
Isaiah's prophecies the subject of the great redemption, and of the
glories of the Messiah's kingdom, arises out of the restoration of Judah
by the deliverance from the captivity of Babylon, and is all along
connected and intermixed with it.

[Isaiah 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 11:4</span></span>

With the rod of his mouth "By the blast of his mouth" - For בשבט
beshebet, by the rod, Houbigant reads בשבת beshebeth, by the blast of
his mouth, from נשב nashab, to blow. The conjecture is ingenious and
probable; and seems to be confirmed by the Septuagint and Chaldee, who
render it by the word of his mouth, which answers much better to the
correction than to the present reading. Add to this, that the blast of
his mouth is perfectly parallel to the breath of his lips in the next
line.

[Isaiah 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 11:5</span></span>

The girdle "The cincture" - All the ancient Versions, except that of
Symmachus, have two different words for girdle in the two hemistichs. It
is not probable that Isaiah would have repeated אזור azer, when a
synonymous word so obvious as חגור chagor occurred. The tautology seems
to have arisen from the mistake of some transcriber. The meaning of this
verse is, that a zeal for justice and truth shall make him active and
strong in executing the great work which he shall undertake. See note on
[Isa 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#027).

[Isaiah 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 11:6</span></span>

The wolf also shall, etc. "Then shall the wolf," etc. - The idea of the
renewal of the golden age, as it is called, is much the same in the
Oriental writers with that of the Greeks and Romans: - the wild beasts
grow tame; serpents and poisonous herbs become harmless; all is peace
and harmony, plenty and happiness: -

Occidet et serpens, et fallax herba veneni Occidet.

Vega. Eclog. 4:24.

"The serpent's brood shall die. The sacred ground

Shall weeds and noxious plants refuse to bear."

\- Nec magnos metuent armenta leones.

Virg. Eclog. 4:22.

"Nor shall the flocks fear the great lions."

Non lupus insidias explorat ovilia circum,

Nec gregibus nocturnus obambulat: acrior illum

Cura domat: timidae damae cervique fugaces

Nunc interque canes, et circum tecta vagantur.

Virg. Georg. 3:537.

"The nightly wolf that round the enclosure prowled,

To leap the fence, now plots not on the fold:

Tamed with a sharper pain, the fearful doe

And flying stag amidst the greyhounds go;

And round the dwellings roam, of man, their former foe."

Dryden.

Nec vespertinus circumgemit ursus ovile,

Nec intumescit alta viperis humus.

Hor. Epod. 16:51.

"Nor evening bears the sheepfold growl around,

Nor mining vipers heave the tainted ground."

Dryden.

Εσται δη τουτ' αμαρ, ὁπηνικα νεβρον εν ευνᾳ

Καρχαροδων δινεσθαι ιδων λυκος ουκ εθελησει.

Theoc. Idyl. 24:84.

There shall be a time when the ravenous wolf shall see the kid lying at
ease, and shall feel no desire to do it an injury.

I have laid before the reader these common passages from the most
elegant of the ancient poets, that he may see how greatly the prophet on
the same subject has the advantage upon the comparison; how much the
former fall short of that beauty and elegance, and variety of imagery,
with which Isaiah has set forth the very same ideas. The wolf and the
leopard not only forbear to destroy the lamb and the kid, but even take
their abode and lie down together with them. The calf, and the young
lion, and the fatling, not only come together, but are led quietly in
the same band, and that by a little child. The heifer and the she-bear
not only feed together, but even lodge their young ones, for whom they
used to be most jealously fearful, in the same place. All the serpent
kind is so perfectly harmless, that the sucking infant and the newly
weaned child puts his hand on the basilisk's den, and plays upon the
hole of the aspic. The lion not only abstains from preying on the weaker
animals, but becomes tame and domestic, and feeds on straw like the ox.
These are all beautiful circumstances, not one of which has been touched
upon by the ancient poets. The Arabian and Persian poets elegantly apply
the same ideas to show the effects of justice impartially administered,
and firmly supported, by a great and good king: -

"Mahmoud the powerful king, the ruler of the world,

To whose tank the wolf and the lamb come, together to drink."

Ferdusi.

"Through the influence of righteousness, the hungry wolf

Becomes mild, though in the presence of the white kid."

Ibn Onein. Jones, Poes. Asiat. Comment., p. 380.

The application is extremely ingenious and beautiful: but the exquisite
imagery of Isaiah is not equalled.

[Isaiah 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 11:7</span></span>

In this verse a word is omitted in the text, יחדו yachdav, together;
which ought to be repeated in the second hemistich, being quite
necessary to the sense. It is accordingly twice expressed by the
Septuagint and Syriac.

[Isaiah 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 11:8</span></span>

The cockatrice' den - This is supposed, both by the Targum and by
Kimchi, to mean the pupil of this serpent's eye. "When," says Kimchi,
"he is in the mouth of his den, in an obscure place, then his eyes
sparkle exceedingly: the child, seeing this, and supposing it to be a
piece of crystal, or precious stone, puts forth his hand to take it.
What would be very dangerous at another time, shall be safe in the days
of the Messiah; for the serpent will not hurt the child."

[Isaiah 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 11:10</span></span>

A root of Jesse, which shall stand etc. "The root of Jesse, which
standeth," etc. - St. John hath taken this expression from Isaiah, [Rev
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005), and [Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016), where Christ hath twice applied
it to himself. Seven MSS. have עומד omed, standing, the present
participle. Radix Isaei dicitur jam stare, et aliquantum stetisse, in
signum populorum. - Vitringa. "The root of Jesse is said to stand, and
for some time to have stood, for an ensign to the people." Which rightly
explains either of the two readings. [Psa
110:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001) (note) is a good comment on
this verse.

[Isaiah 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 11:11</span></span>

And it shall come to pass in that day - This part of the chapter
contains a prophecy which certainly remains yet to be accomplished.

The Lord "Jehovah" - For אדני Adonai, thirty-three MSS. of Kennicott's,
and many of De Rossi's, and two editions, read יהוה Yehovah.

The islands of the sea - The Roman and Turkish empires, say Kimchi.

[Isaiah 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 11:13</span></span>

The adversaries of Judah "And the enmity of Judah" - צררים tsorerim,
Postulat pars posterior versus, ut intelligantur inimicitiae Judae in
Ephraimum: et potest (צררים tsorerim) inimicitiam notare, ut (נחומים
nichumim) poenitentiam, [Hos 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008). -
Secker.

[Isaiah 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 11:15</span></span>

The Lord - shall smite it in the seven streams "Smite with a drought" -
The Chaldee reads החריב hecherib; and so perhaps the Septuagint, who
have ερημωσει, the word by which they commonly render it. Vulg.
desolabit; "shall desolate." The Septuagint, Vulgate, and Chaldee read
הדריכהו hidrichahu, "shall make it passable," adding the pronoun, which
is necessary: but this reading is not confirmed by any MS.

Here is a plain allusion to the passage of the Red Sea. And the Lord's
shaking his hand over the river with his vehement wind, refers to a
particular circumstance of the same miracle: for "he caused the sea to
go back by a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry
land," [Exo 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021). The tongue; a very
apposite and descriptive expression for a bay such as that of the Red
Sea. It is used in the same sense, [Jos
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#002), [Jos
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#005); [Jos
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#019). The Latins gave the same name
to a narrow strip of land running into the sea: tenuem producit in
aequora linguam. Lucan. 2:613. He shall smite the river to its seven
streams. This has been supposed to refer to the Nile, because it falls
into the Mediterranean Sea by seven mouths: but R. Kimchi understands it
of the Euphrates, which is the opinion of some good judges. See the
Targum. See below.

Herodotus, lib. i, 189, tells a story of his Cyrus, (a very different
character from that of the Cyrus of the Scriptures and Xenophon), which
may somewhat illustrate this passage, in which it is said that God would
inflict a kind of punishment and judgment on the Euphrates, and render
it fordable by dividing it into seven streams. "Cyrus, being impeded in
his march to Babylon by the Gyndes, a deep and rapid river which falls
into the Tigris, and having lost one of his sacred white horses that
attempted to pass it, was so enraged against the river that he
threatened to reduce it, and make it so shallow that it should be easily
fordable even by women, who should not be up to their knees in passing
it. Accordingly he set his whole army to work, and cutting three hundred
and sixty trenches, from both sides of the river, turned the waters into
them, and drained them off."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 12](isa012)

</div>
