<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam003)  [Next](jam005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 4:0</span></span>

The origin of wars and contentions, and the wretched lot of those who
are engaged in them, [Jam 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001), [Jam
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#002). Why so little heavenly good is
obtained, [Jam 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003). The friendship of
the world is enmity with God, [Jam
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004), [Jam
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#005). God resists the proud, [Jam
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006). Men should submit to God, and
pray, [Jam 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#007), [Jam
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#008). Should humble themselves, [Jam
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#009), [Jam
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#010). And not speak evil of each
other, [Jam 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#011), [Jam
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#012). The impiety of those who consult
not the will of God, and depend not on his providence, [Jam
4:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013). The sin of him who knows the
will of God, and does not do it, [Jam
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#016), [Jam
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#017).

[James 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 4:1</span></span>

From whence come wars and fightings - About the time in which St. James
wrote, whether we follow the earlier or the later date of this epistle,
we find, according to the accounts given by Josephus, Bell. Jud. lib.
ii. c. 17, etc., that the Jews, under pretense of defending their
religion, and procuring that liberty to which they believed themselves
entitled, made various insurrections in Judea against the Romans, which
occasioned much bloodshed and misery to their nation. The factions also,
into which the Jews were split, had violent contentions among
themselves, in which they massacred and plundered each other. In the
provinces, likewise, the Jews became very turbulent; particularly in
Alexandria, and different other parts of Egypt, of Syria, and other
places, where they made war against the heathens, killing many, and
being massacred in their turn. They were led to these outrages by the
opinion that they were bound by their law to extirpate idolatry, and to
kill all those who would not become proselytes to Judaism. These are
probably the wars and fightings to which St. James alludes; and which
they undertook rather from a principle of covetousness than from any
sincere desire to convert the heathen. See Macknight.

Come they not hence - of your lusts - This was the principle from which
these Jewish contentions and predatory wars proceeded, and the principle
from which all the wars that have afflicted and desolated the world have
proceeded. One nation or king covets another's territory or property;
and, as conquest is supposed to give right to all the possessions gained
by it, they kill, slay, burn, and destroy, till one is overcome or
exhausted, and then the other makes his own terms; or, several
neighboring potentates fall upon one that is weak; and, after murdering
one half of the people, partition among themselves the fallen king's
territory; just as the Austrians, Prussians, and Russians have done with
the kingdom of Poland! - a stain upon their justice and policy which no
lapse of time can ever wash out.

These wars and fightings could not be attributed to the Christians in
that time; for, howsoever fallen or degenerate, they had no power to
raise contentions; and no political consequence to enable them to resist
their enemies by the edge of the sword, or resistance of any kind.

[James 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jam 4:2</span></span>

Ye lust, and have not - Ye are ever covetous, and ever poor.

Ye kill, and, desire to have - Ye are constantly engaged in
insurrections and predatory wars, and never gain any advantage.

Ye have not, because ye ask not - Ye get no especial blessing from God
as your fathers did, because ye do not pray. Worldly good is your god;
ye leave no stone unturned in order to get it; and as ye ask nothing
from God but to consume it upon your evil desires and propensities, your
prayers are not heard.

[James 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 4:3</span></span>

Ye ask, and receive not - Some think that this refers to their prayers
for the conversion of the heathen; and on the pretense that they were
not converted thus; they thought it lawful to extirpate them and possess
their goods.

Ye ask amiss - Κακως αιτεισθε· Ye ask evilly, wickedly. Ye have not the
proper dispositions of prayer, and ye have an improper object. Ye ask
for worldly prosperity, that ye may employ it in riotous living. This is
properly the meaning of the original, ἱνα εν ταις ἡδοναις ὑμων
δαπανησητε, That ye may expend it upon your pleasures. The rabbins have
many good observations on asking amiss or asking improperly, and give
examples of different kinds of this sort of prayer; the phrase is Jewish
and would naturally occur to St. James in writing on this subject.
Whether the lusting of which St. James speaks were their desire to make
proselytes, in order that they might increase their power and influence
by means of such, or whether it were a desire to cast off the Roman
yoke, and become independent; the motive and the object were the same,
and the prayers were such as God could not hear.

[James 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 4:4</span></span>

Ye adulterers and adulteresses - The Jews, because of their covenant
with God, are represented as being espoused to him; and hence their
idolatry, and their iniquity in general, are represented under the
notion of adultery. And although they had not since the Babylonish
captivity been guilty of idolatry; according to the letter; yet what is
intended by idolatry, having their hearts estranged from God, and
seeking their portion in this life and out of God, is that of which the
Jews were then notoriously guilty. And I rather think that it is in this
sense especially that St. James uses the words. "Lo! they that are far
from thee shall perish; thou hast destroyed all them that go a whoring
from thee." But perhaps something more than spiritual adultery is
intended. See [Jam 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#009).

The friendship of the world - The world was their god; here they
committed their spiritual adultery; and they cultivated this friendship
in order that they might gain this end.

The word μοιχαλιδες, adulteresses, is wanting in the Syriac, Coptic,
Ethiopic, Armenian, Vulgate, and one copy of the Itala.

Whosoever - will be a friend of the world - How strange it is that
people professing Christianity can suppose that with a worldly spirit,
worldly companions, and their lives governed by worldly maxims, they can
be in the favor of God, or ever get to the kingdom of heaven! When the
world gets into the Church, the Church becomes a painted sepulchre; its
spiritual vitality being extinct.

[James 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 4:5</span></span>

Do ye think that the scripture saith in vain - This verse is exceedingly
obscure. We cannot tell what scripture St. James refers to; many have
been produced by learned men as that which he had particularly in view.
Some think [Gen 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005) : "Every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually."
[Gen 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021) : "The imagination of man's
heart is evil from his youth." [Num
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#029) : "Moses said unto him, Enviest
thou for my sake?" and [Pro 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#010) :
"The soul of the wicked desireth evil." None of these scriptures, nor
any others, contain the precise words in this verse; and therefore St.
James may probably refer, not to any particular portion, but to the
spirit and design of the Scripture in those various places where it
speaks against envying, covetousness, worldly associations, etc., etc.

Perhaps the word in this and the two succeeding verses may be well
paraphrased thus: "Do ye think that concerning these things the
Scripture speaks falsely, or that the Holy Spirit which dwells in us can
excite us to envy others instead of being contented with the state in
which the providence of God has placed us? Nay, far otherwise; for He
gives us more grace to enable us to bear the ills of life, and to lie in
deep humility at his feet, knowing that his Holy Spirit has said, [Pro
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#034) : God resisteth the proud, but
giveth grace to the humble. Seeing these things are so, submit
yourselves to God; resist the devil, who would tempt you to envy, and he
will flee from you; draw nigh to God and he will draw nigh to you."

I must leave this sense as the best I can give, without asserting that I
have hit the true meaning. There is not a critic in Europe who has
considered the passage that has not been puzzled with it. I think the
5th verse should be understood as giving a contrary sense to that in our
translation. Every genuine Christian is a habitation of the Holy Ghost,
and that Spirit προς φθονον επιποθει, excites strong desires against
envy; a man must not suppose that he is a Christian if he have an
envious or covetous heart.

[James 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 4:6</span></span>

But he giveth more grace - Μειζονα χαριν, A greater benefit, than all
the goods that the world can bestow; for he gives genuine happiness, and
this the world cannot confer. May this be St. James' meaning?

God resisteth the proud - Αντιτασσεται· Sets himself in battle array
against him.

Giveth grace unto the humble - The sure way to please God is to submit
to the dispensation of his grace and providence; and when a man
acknowledges him in all his ways, he will direct all his steps. The
covetous man grasps at the shadow, and loses the substance.

[James 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 4:7</span></span>

Submit - to God - Continue to bow to all his decisions, and to all his
dispensations.

Resist the devil - He cannot conquer you if you continue to resist.
Strong as he is, God never permits him to conquer the man who continues
to resist him; he cannot force the human will. He who, in the terrible
name of Jesus, opposes even the devil himself, is sure to have a speedy
and glorious conquest. He flees from that name, and from his conquering
blood.

[James 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 4:8</span></span>

Draw nigh to God - Approach Him, in the name of Jesus, by faith and
prayer, and he will draw nigh to you - he will meet you at your coming.
When a soul sets out to seek God, God sets out to meet that soul; so
that while we are drawing near to him, he is drawing near to us. The
delicacy and beauty of these expressions are, I think, but seldom noted.

Cleanse your hands, ye sinners - This I think to be the beginning of a
new address, and to different persons; and should have formed the
commencement of a new verse. Let your whole conduct be changed; cease to
do evil learn to do well. Washing or cleansing the hands was a token of
innocence and purity.

Purify your hearts - Separate yourselves from the world, and consecrate
yourselves to God: this is the true notion of sanctification. We have
often seen that to sanctify signifies to separate a thing or person from
profane or common use, and consecrate it or him to God. This is the true
notion of קדש kadash, in Hebrew, and ἁγιαζω in Greek. The person or
thing thus consecrated or separated is considered to be holy, and to be
God's property; and then God hallows it to himself. There are,
therefore, two things implied in a man's sanctification:

1\. That he separates himself from evil ways and evil companions, and
devotes himself to God.

2\. That God separates guilt from his conscience, and sin from his soul,
and thus makes him internally and externally holy.

This double sanctification is well expressed in Sohar, Levit. fol. 33,
col. 132, on the words, be ye holy, for I the Lord am holy: אותו מלמעלה
ארס מקדש עצמו מלמטה מקישין, a man sanctifies himself on the earth, and
then he is sanctified from heaven. As a man is a sinner, he must have
his hands cleansed from wicked works; as he is double-minded, he must
have his heart sanctified. Sanctification belongs to the heart, because
of pollution of mind; cleansing belongs to the hands, because of sinful
acts. See the note on [Jam 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#008), for
the signification of double-minded.

[James 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 4:9</span></span>

Be afflicted, and mourn - Without true and deep repentance ye cannot
expect the mercy of God.

Let your laughter be turned to mourning - It appears most evidently that
many of those to whom St. James addressed this epistle had lived a very
irregular and dissolute life. He had already spoken of their lust, and
pleasures, and he had called them adulterers and adulteresses; and
perhaps they were so in the grossest sense of the words. He speaks here
of their laughter and their joy; and all the terms taken together show
that a dissolute life is intended. What a strange view must he have of
the nature of primitive Christianity, who can suppose that these words
can possibly have been addressed to people professing the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, who were few in number, without wealth or consequence, and
were persecuted and oppressed both by their brethren the Jews and by the
Romans!

[James 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 4:10</span></span>

Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord - In [Jam
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#007) they were exhorted to submit to
God; here they are exhorted to humble themselves in his sight.
Submission to God's authority will precede humiliation of soul, and
genuine repentance is performed as in the sight of God; for when a
sinner is truly awakened to a sense of his guilt and danger, he seems to
see, whithersoever he turns, the face of a justly incensed God turned
against him.

He shall lift you up - Mourners and penitents lay on the ground, and
rolled themselves in the dust. When comforted and pardoned, they arose
from the earth, shook themselves from the dust, and clothed themselves
in their better garments. God promises to raise these from the dust,
when sufficiently humbled.

[James 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 4:11</span></span>

Speak not evil one of another - Perhaps this exhortation refers to evil
speaking, slander, and backbiting in general, the writer having no
particular persons in view. It may, however, refer to the contentions
among the zealots, and different factions then prevailing among this
wretched people, or to their calumnies against those of their brethren
who had embraced the Christian faith.

He that speaketh evil of his brother - It was an avowed and very general
maxim among the rabbins, that "no one could speak evil of his brother
without denying God, and becoming an atheist." They consider detraction
as the devil's crime originally: he calumniated God Almighty in the
words, "He doth know that in the day in which ye eat of it, your eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall be like God, knowing good and evil;" and
therefore insinuated that it was through envy God had prohibited the
tree of knowledge.

Speaketh evil of the law - The law condemns all evil speaking and
detraction. He who is guilty of these, and allows himself in these
vices, in effect judges and condemns the law; i.e. he considers it
unworthy to be kept, and that it is no sin to break it.

Thou art not a doer of the law, but a judge - Thou rejectest the law of
God, and settest up thy own mischievous conduct as a rule of life; or,
by allowing this evil speaking and detraction, dost intimate that the
law that condemns them is improper, imperfect, or unjust.

[James 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 4:12</span></span>

There is one lawgiver - Και κριτης, And judge, is added here by AB,
about thirty others, with both the Syriac, Erpen's Arabic, the Coptic,
Armenian, Ethiopic, Slavonic, Vulgate, two copies of the Itala, Cyril of
Antioch, Euthalius, Theophylact, and Cassiodorus. On this evidence
Griesbach has received it into the text.

The man who breaks the law, and teaches others so to do, thus in effect
set himself up as a lawgiver and judge. But there is only one such
lawgiver and judge - God Almighty, who is able to save all those who
obey him, and able to destroy all those who trample under feet his
testimonies.

Who art thou that judgest another? - Who art thou who darest to usurp
the office and prerogative of the supreme Judge? But what is that law of
which St. James speaks? and who is this lawgiver and judge? Most critics
think that the law mentioned here is the same as that which he elsewhere
calls the royal law and the law of liberty, thereby meaning the Gospel;
and that Christ is the person who is called the lawgiver and judge.
This, however, is not clear to me. I believe James means the Jewish law;
and by the lawgiver and judge, God Almighty, as acknowledged by the
Jewish people. I find, or think I find, from the closest examination of
this epistle, but few references to Jesus Christ or his Gospel. His
Jewish creed, forms, and maxims, this writer keeps constantly in view;
and it is proper he should, considering the persons to whom he wrote.
Some of them were, doubtless, Christians; some of them certainly no
Christians; and some of them half Christians and half Jews. The two
latter descriptions are those most frequently addressed.

[James 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 4:13</span></span>

Go to now - Αγε νυν· Come now, the same in meaning as the Hebrew הבה
habah, come, [Gen 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#003), [Gen
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004), [Gen
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007). Come, and hear what I have to
say, ye that say, etc.

To-day, or to-morrow, we will go - This presumption on a precarious life
is here well reproved; and the ancient Jewish rabbins have some things
on the subject which probably St. James had in view. In Debarim Rabba,
sec. 9, fol. 261, 1, we have the following little story; "Our rabbins
tell us a story which happened in the days of Rabbi Simeon, the son of
Chelpatha. He was present at the circumcision of a child, and stayed
with its father to the entertainment. The father brought out wine for
his guests that was seven years old, saying, With this wine will I
continue for a long time to celebrate the birth of my new-born son. They
continued supper till midnight. At that time Rabbi Simeon arose and went
out, that he might return to the city in which he dwelt. On the way he
saw the angel of death walking up and down. He said to him, Who art
thou? He answered, I am the messenger of God. The rabbin said, Why
wanderest thou about thus? He answered, I slay those persons who say, We
will do this, or that, and think not how soon death may overpower them:
that man with whom thou hast supped, and who said to his guests, With
this wine will I continue for a long time to celebrate the birth of my
new-born son, behold the end of his life is at hand, for he shall die
within thirty days." By this parable they teach the necessity of
considering the shortness and uncertainty of human life; and that God is
particularly displeased with those ...

"Who, counting on long years of pleasure here,

Are quite unfurnished for a world to come."

And continue there a year, and buy and sell - This was the custom of
those ancient times; they traded from city to city, carrying their goods
on the backs of camels. The Jews traded thus to Tyre, Sidon, Caesarea,
Crete, Ephesus, Philippi, Thessalonica, Corinth, Rome, etc. And it is to
this kind of itinerant mercantile life that St. James alludes. See at
the end of this chapter, ([Jam 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#017)
(note)).

[James 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 4:14</span></span>

Whereas ye know not - This verse should be read in a parenthesis. It is
not only impious, but grossly absurd, to speak thus concerning futurity,
when ye know not what a day may bring forth. Life is utterly precarious;
and God has not put it within the power of all the creatures he has made
to command one moment of what is future.

It is even a vapour - Ατμις γαρ εστιν· It is a smoke, always fleeting,
uncertain, evanescent, and obscured with various trials and afflictions.
This is a frequent metaphor with the Hebrews; see [Psa
102:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#011); My days are like a shadow:
[Job 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#009); Our days upon earth are a
shadow: [Ch1 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#015); Our days on the
earth are a shadow, and there is no abiding. Quid tam circumcisum, tam
breve, quam hominis vita longissima? Plin. l. iii., Ep. 7. "What is so
circumscribed, or so short, as the longest life of man?" "All flesh is
grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field. The
grass withereth, and the flower fadeth, because the breath of the Lord
bloweth upon it. Surely the people is like grass." St. James had
produced the same figure, [Jam 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#010),
[Jam 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#011). But there is a very
remarkable saying in the book of Ecclesiasticus, which should be quoted:
"As of the green leaves of a thick tree, some fall and some grow; so is
the generation of flesh and blood: one cometh to an end, and another is
born." Ecclus. 14:18.

We find precisely the same image in Homer as that quoted above. Did the
apocryphal writer borrow it from the Greek poet?

Οἱη περ φυλλων γενεη, τοιηδε και ανδρων·

Φυλλα τα μεν τ' ανεμος χαμαδις χεει, αλλα δε θ' ὑλη

Τηλεθοωσα φυει, εσρος δ' επιγιγνεται ὡρη·

Ὡς ανδρων γενεη, ἡ μεν φυει, ἡ δ' αποληγει.

Il. l. vi., ver. 146.

Like leaves on trees the race of man is found,

Now green in youth, now withering on the ground

Another race the following spring supplies;

They fall successive, and successive rise.

So generations in their course decay;

So flourish these, when those are pass'd away.

Pope.

[James 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 4:15</span></span>

For that ye ought to say - Αντι τοι λεγειν ὑμας· Instead of saying, or
instead of which ye should say,

If the Lord will, we shall live - I think St. James had another example
from the rabbins in view, which is produced by Drusius, Gregory,
Cartwright, and Schoettgen, on this clause: "The bride went up to her
chamber, not knowing what was to befall her there." On which there is
this comment: "No man should ever say that he will do this or that,
without the condition If God Will. A certain man said, 'To-morrow shall
I sit with my bride in my chamber, and there shall rejoice with her.' To
which some standing by said, אם גוזר השם im gozer hashshem, 'If the Lord
will.' To which he answered, 'Whether the Lord will or not, to-morrow
will I sit with my bride in my chamber.' He did so; he went with his
bride into his chamber, and at night they lay down; but they both died,
antequam illam cognosceret." It is not improbable that St. James refers
to this case, as he uses the same phraseology.

On this subject I shall quote another passage which I read when a
schoolboy, and which even then taught me a lesson of caution and of
respect for the providence of God. It may be found in Lucian, in the
piece entitled, Χαρων, η επισκοπουντες, c. 6: Επι δειπνον, οιμαι,
κληθεις ὑπο τινος των φιλων ες την ὑστεραιαν, μαλιστα ἡξω, εφη· και
μεταξυ λεγοντος, απο του τεγους κεραμις επιπεσουσα, ουκ οιδ' ὁτου
κινησαντος, απεκτεινεν αυτον· εγελασα ουν, ουκ επιτελεσαντος την
ὑποσχεσιν. "A man was invited by one of his friends to come the next day
to supper. I will certainly come, said he. In the mean time a tile fell
from a house, I knew not who threw it, and killed him. I therefore
laughed at him for not fulfilling his engagement." It is often said Fas
est et ab hoste doceri, " we should learn even from our enemies." Take
heed, Christian, that this heathen buffoon laugh thee not out of
countenance.

[James 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jam 4:16</span></span>

But now ye rejoice in your boastings - Ye glory in your proud and
self-sufficient conduct, exulting that ye are free from the trammels of
superstition, and that ye can live independently of God Almighty. All
such boasting is wicked, πονηρα εστιν, is impious. In an old English
work, entitled, The godly man's picture drawn by a Scripture pencil,
there are these words: "Some of those who despise religion say, Thank
God we are not of this holy number! They who thank God for their
unholiness had best go ring the bells for joy that they shall never see
God."

[James 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 4:17</span></span>

To him that knoweth to do good - As if he had said: After this warning
none of you can plead ignorance; if, therefore, any of you shall be
found to act their ungodly part, not acknowledging the Divine
providence, the uncertainty of life, and the necessity of standing every
moment prepared to meet God - as you will have the greater sin, you will
infallibly get the greater punishment. This may be applied to all who
know better than they act. He who does not the Master's will because he
does not know it, will be beaten with few stripes; but he who knows it
and does not do it, shall be beaten with many; [Luk
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047), [Luk
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048). St. James may have the
Christians in view who were converted from Judaism to Christianity. They
had much more light and religious knowledge than the Jews had; and God
would require a proportionable improvement from them.

1\. Saady, a celebrated Persian poet, in his Gulistan, gives us a
remarkable example of this going from city to city to buy and sell, and
get gain. "I knew," says he, "a merchant who used to travel with a
hundred camels laden with merchandise, and who had forty slaves in his
employ. This person took me one day to his warehouse, and entertained me
a long time with conversation good for nothing. 'I have,' said he, 'such
a partner in Turquestan; such and such property in India; a bond for so
much cash in such a province; a security for such another sum.' Then,
changing the subject, he said, 'I purpose to go and settle at
Alexandria, because the air of that city is salubrious.' Correcting
himself, he said, 'No, I will not go to Alexandria; the African sea (the
Mediterranean) is too dangerous. But I will make another voyage; and
after that I will retire into some quiet corner of the world, and give
up a mercantile life.' I asked him (says Saady) what voyage he intended
to make. He answered, 'I intend to take brimstone to Persia and China,
where I am informed it brings a good price; from China I shall take
porcelain to Greece; from Greece I shall take gold tissue to India; from
India I shall carry steel to Haleb (Aleppo); from Haleb I shall carry
glass to Yemen (Arabia Felix); and from Yemen I shall carry printed
goods to Persia. When this is accomplished I shall bid farewell to the
mercantile life, which requires so many troublesome journeys, and spend
the rest of my life in a shop.' He said so much on this subject, till at
last he wearied himself with talking; then turning to me he said, 'I
entreat thee, Saady, to relate to me something of what thou hast seen
and heard in thy travels.' I answered, Hast thou never heard what a
traveler said, who fell from his camel in the desert of Joor? Two things
only can fill the eye of a covetous man - contentment, or the earth that
is cast on him when laid in his grave."

This is an instructive story, and is taken from real life. In this very
way, to those same places and with the above specified goods, trade is
carried on to this day in the Levant. And often the same person takes
all these journeys, and even more. We learn also from it that a covetous
man is restless and unhappy, and that to avarice there are no bounds.
This account properly illustrates that to which St. James refers: To-day
or to-morrow we will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and
buy and sell, and get gain.

2\. Providence is God's government of the world; he who properly trusts
in Divine providence trusts in God; and he who expects God's direction
and help must walk uprightly before him; for it is absurd to expect God
to be our friend if we continue to be his enemy.

3\. That man walks most safely who has the least confidence in himself.
True magnanimity keeps God continually in view. He appoints it its work,
and furnishes discretion and power; and its chief excellence consists in
being a resolute worker together with him. Pride ever sinks where
humility swims; for that man who abases himself God will exalt. To know
that we are dependent creatures is well; to feel it, and to act
suitably, is still better.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 5](jam005)

</div>
