<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg002)  [Next](jdg004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 3:0</span></span>

An account of the nations that we left to prove Israel, [Jdg
3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001). How the people provoked the
Lord, [Jdg 3:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#005). They are delivered
into the power of the king of Mesopotamia, by whom they are enslaved
eight years, [Jdg 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008). Othniel is
raised up as their deliverer; he discomfits the king of Mesopotamia,
delivers Israel, and the land enjoys peace for forty years, [Jdg
3:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009). They again rebel, and are
delivered into the hand of the king of Moab, by whom they are enslaved
eighteen years, [Jdg 3:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012). They are
delivered by Ehud, who kills Eglon, king of Moab, and slays ten thousand
Moabites, and the land rests fourscore years, vv. 15-30.

[Judges 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 3:1</span></span>

Now these are the nations - The nations left to prove the Israelites
were the five lordships or satrapies of the Philistines, viz., Gath,
Askelon, Ashdod, Ekron, and Gaza; the Sidonians, the Hivites of Lebanon,
Baal-hermon, etc.; with the remains of the Canaanites, viz., the
Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites, and Jebusites. Those who were left to be
proved were those Israelites that had not seen all the wars of Canaan.

[Judges 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 3:2</span></span>

That - Israel might know, to teach them war - This was another reason
why the Canaanites were left in the land, that the Israelites might not
forget military discipline, but habituate themselves to the use of arms,
that they might always be able to defend themselves against their foes.
Had they been faithful to God, they would have had no need of learning
the art of war; but now arms became a sort of necessary substitute for
that spiritual strength which had departed from them. Thus Gods in his
judgments leaves one iniquitous nation to harass and torment another.
Were all to turn to God, men need learn war no more.

[Judges 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 3:4</span></span>

To know whether they would hearken - This would be the consequence of
the Canaanites being left among them: if they should be faithful to God,
their enemies would not be able to enslave them; should they be
rebellious, the Lord would abandon them to their foes.

[Judges 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 3:6</span></span>

And they took their daughters - They formed matrimonial alliances with
those proscribed nations, served their idols, and thus became one with
them in politics and religion.

[Judges 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 3:7</span></span>

Served Baalim and the groves - No groves were ever worshipped, but the
deities who were supposed to be resident in them; and in many cases
temples and altars were built in groves, and the superstition of
consecrating groves and woods to the honor of the deities was a practice
very usual with the ancients. Pliny assures us that trees, in old times,
served for the temples of the gods. Tacitus reports this custom of the
old Germans; Quintus Curtius, of the Indians; and Caesar, and our old
writers, mention the same of the Druids in Britain. The Romans were
admirers of this way of worship and therefore had their luci or groves
in most parts of the city, dedicated to some deity. But it is very
probable that the word אשרות asheroth which we translate groves, is a
corruption of the word עשתרות ashtaroth, the moon or Venus, (see on [Jdg
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013) (note)), which only differs in
the letters ע ת, from the former. Ashtaroth is read in this place by the
Chaldee Targum, the Syriac, the Arabic, and the Vulgate, and by one of
Dr. Kennicott's MSS.

[Judges 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 3:8</span></span>

Chushan-rishathaim - Kushan, the wicked or impious; and so the word is
rendered by the Chaldee Targum, the Syriac, and the Arabic, wherever it
occurs in this chapter.

King of Mesopotamia - King of ארם נהרים Aram naharayim, "Syria of the
two rivers;" translated Mesopotamia by the Septuagint and Vulgate. It
was the district situated between the Tigris and Euphrates, called by
the Arabian geographers Maverannaher, "the country beyond the river," it
is now called Diarbek. See the note on [Act
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009).

Served Chushan - eight years - He overran their country, and forced them
to pay a very heavy tribute.

[Judges 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 3:9</span></span>

Raised up - Othniel, the son of Kenaz - This noble Hebrew was of the
tribe of Judah, and nephew and son-in-law to Caleb, whose praise stands
without abatement in the sacred records. Othniel had already signalized
his valor in taking Kirjath-sepher, which appears to have been a very
hazardous exploit. By his natural valor, experience in war, and the
peculiar influence of the Divine Spirit, he was well qualified to
inspire his countrymen with courage, and to lead them successfully
against their oppressors.

[Judges 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 3:10</span></span>

His hand prevailed - We are not told or what nature this war was, but it
was most decisive; and the consequence was an undisturbed peace of forty
years, during the whole life of Othniel. By the Spirit of the Lord
coming upon him, the Chaldee understands the spirit of prophecy; others
understand the spirit of fortitude and extraordinary courage, as opposed
to the spirit of fear or faintness of heart; but as Othniel was judge,
and had many offices to fulfill besides that of a general, he had need
of the Spirit of God, in the proper sense of the word, to enable him to
guide and govern this most refractory and fickle people; and his
receiving it for these purposes, shows that the political state of the
Jews was still a theocracy. No man attempted to do any thing in that
state without the immediate inspiration of God, the pretension to which
was always justified by the event.

[Judges 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 3:12</span></span>

The children of Israel did evil - They forgat the Lord and became
idolaters, and God made those very people, whom they had imitated in
their idolatrous worship, the means of their chastisement.

The Lord strengthened Eglon the king of Moab - The success he had
against the Israelites was by the especial appointment and energy of
God.

He not only abandoned the Israelites, but strengthened the Moabites
against them. Eglon is supposed to have been the immediate successor of
Balak. Some great men have borne names which, when reduced to their
grammatical meaning, appear very ridiculous: the word עגלון Eglon
signifies a little calf!

[Judges 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 3:13</span></span>

The city of palm trees - This the Targum renders the city of Jericho;
but Jericho had been destroyed by Joshua, and certainly was not rebuilt
till the reign of Ahab, long after this, [Kg1
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#034). However, as Jericho is
expressly called the city of palm trees, [Deu
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#003), the city in question must have
been in the vicinity or plain of Jericho, and the king of Moab had
seized it as a frontier town contiguous to his own estates. Calmet
supposes that the city of palm trees means En-gaddi.

[Judges 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 3:15</span></span>

Ehud the son of Gera - a man left handed - איש אטר יד ימינו ish itter
yad yemino, a man lame in his right hand, and therefore obliged to use
his left. The Septuagint render it ανδρα αμφοτεροδεξιον, an ambidexter,
a man who could use both hands alike. The Vulgate, qui utraque manu pro
dextera utebatur, a man who could use either hand as a right hand, or to
whom right and left were equally ready. This is not the sense of the
original, but it is the sense in which most interpreters understand it.
It is well known that to be an ambidexter was in high repute among the
ancients: Hector boasts of it: -

Αυταρ εγων εν οιδα μαχας τ,ανδροκτασιας τε·

Οιδ' επι δεξια, οιδ' επ' αριστερα νωμησαι βων

Αζαλεην, το μοι εστι ταλαυρινον πολεμιζειν.

Iliad, lib. vii., ver. 237.

"But am in arms well practiced; many a Greek

Hath bled by me, and I can shift my shield

From right to left; reserving to the last

Force that suffices for severest toil."

Cowper.

Asteropaeus is also represented by Homer as an ambidexter, from which he
derives great advantages in fight: -

Ὡς φατ' απειλησας· ὁ δ' ανεσχετο διος Αχιλλευς

Πηλιαδα μελιην· ὁ δ' ὁμαρτη δουρασιν αμφις

Ἡρως Αστεροπαιος, επει περιδεξιος ηε.

Iliad, lib. xxi., ver. 161.

So threatened he. Then raised Achilles high

The Pelian ash: - and his two spears at once

Alike, (a practiced warrior), with both hands

Asteropaeus hurled."

Cowper.

We are informed by Aristotle, that Plato recommended to all soldiers to
acquire by study and exercise an equal facility of using both hands.
Speaking of Plato, he says: Και την εν τοις πολεμικοισασκεσιν, ὁπως
αμφιδεξιοι γινωνται κατα την μελετην, ὡς δεον μη την μεν χρησιμον ειναι
ταιν χεροιν, την δε αχρηστον. - De Repub., lib. ii., cap. 12. "He
(Plato) also made a law concerning their warlike exercises, that they
should acquire a habit of using both hands alike; as it is not fit that
one of the hands should be useful and the other useless." In [Jdg
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016) of this book we have an account
of seven hundred men of Benjamin, each of whom was אטר יד ימינו itter
yad yemino, lame of his right hand, and yet slinging stones to a hair's
breadth without missing: these are generally thought to be ambidexters.

Sent a present unto Eglon - This is generally understood to be the
tribute money which the king of Moab had imposed on the Israelites.

[Judges 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 3:16</span></span>

A dagger which had two edges, of a cubit length - The word גמד gomed,
which we translate cubit, is of very doubtful signification. As the root
seems to signify contracted, it probably means an instrument made for
the purpose shorter than usual, and something like the Italian stiletto.
The Septuagint translate it by σπιθαμη, a span, and most of the versions
understand it in the same sense.

Upon his right thigh - Because he was left-handed. Ordinarily the sword
is on the left side, that it may be readily drawn out by the right hand;
but as Ehud was left-handed, to be convenient his sword must be on the
right side.

[Judges 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 3:17</span></span>

Eglon was a very fat man - The איש בריא ish bari of the text is
translated by the Septuagint ανηρ αστειος σφοδρα, a very beautiful or
polite man, and in the Syriac, a very rude man. It probably means what
we call lusty or corpulent.

[Judges 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 3:18</span></span>

Made an end to offer the present - Presents, tribute, etc., in the
eastern countries were offered with very great ceremony; and to make the
more parade several persons, ordinarily slaves, sumptuously dressed, and
in considerable number, were employed to carry what would not be a
burden even to one. This appears to have been the case in the present
instance.

[Judges 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 3:19</span></span>

He - turned - from the quarries - פסילים pesilim. Some of the versions
understand this word as meaning idols or graven images, or some spot
where the Moabites had a place of idolatrous worship. As פסל pasal
signifies to cut, hew, or engrave, it may be applied to the images thus
cut, or to the place, or quarry whence they were digged: but it is most
likely that idols are meant. Some think that trenches are meant, and
that pesilim here may mean the boundaries of the two countries: and when
Ehud had got thus far, he sent away the people that were with him, under
pretense of having a secret message to Eglon, and so got rid of his
attendants, in presence of whom he could not have executed his scheme,
nor have secured his escape afterwards. But I do not see the evidence of
this mode of interpretation.

[Judges 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 3:20</span></span>

He was sitting in a summer parlor - Besides the platforms, says Dr.
Shaw, which were upon the ancient houses of the East, and which are
found there to this day, it is probable that heretofore, as well as at
present, most of the great houses had a smaller one annexed, which
seldom consisted of more than one or two rooms and a terrace. Others,
built as they frequently are above the porch or gateway, have, if we
except the ground-floor, all the conveniences belonging to the house,
properly so called. There is a door of communication from them into the
gallery of the house, kept open or shut at the discretion of the master
of the house, besides another door which opens immediately from a privy
stairs down into the porch or street, without giving the least
disturbance to the house. In these back houses strangers are usually
lodged and entertained; hither the men are wont to retire from the hurry
and noise of their families, to be more at leisure for meditation or
diversions; and they are often used for wardrobes and magazines. These
the Arabs call oleah, which exactly answers to the Hebrew word עלית
aliyath found in this place; and without doubt such was the apartment in
which Eglon received Ehud, by the privy stairs belonging to which he
escaped, after having killed Eglon. The doors of the Eastern buildings
are large, and their chambers spacious, conveniences well adapted to
those hotter climates; but in the present passage something more seems
to be meant; at least there are now other conveniences in the East to
give coolness to particular rooms, which are very common. In Egypt the
cooling their rooms is effected by openings at the top, which let in the
fresh air. Mons. Maillet informs us that their halls are made very large
and lofty, with a dome at the top, which towards the north has several
open windows, so constructed as to throw the north wind down into the
rooms; and by this means, though the country is excessively hot, they
can make the coolness of those apartments so great, as often not to be
borne without being wrapped in furs. Eglon's was a chamber; and some
contrivance to mitigate the heat of it was the more necessary, as he
appears to have kept his court at Jericho, [Jdg
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#013), [Jdg
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#028), where the heat is so excessive
as sometimes to prove fatal. See Harmer's Observations.

I have a message from God unto thee - דבר אלהים לי אליך debar elohim li
aleycha, a word of the gods to me, unto thee. It is very likely that the
word elohim is used here to signify idols, or the pesilim mentioned
above, [Jdg 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#019). Ehud, having gone so
far as this place of idolatry, might feign he had there been
worshipping, and that the pesilim had inspired him with a message for
the king; and this was the reason why the king commanded silence, why
every man went out, and why he rose from his seat or throne, that he
might receive it with the greater respect. This, being an idolater, he
would not have done to any message coming from the God of Israel. I have
a message from God unto thee is a popular text: many are fond of
preaching from it. Now as no man should ever depart from the literal
meaning of Scripture in his preaching, we may at once see the absurdity
of taking such a text as this; for such preachers, to be consistent,
should carry a two-edged dagger of a cubit length on their right thigh,
and be ready to thrust it into the bowels of all those they address!
This is certainly the literal meaning of the passage, and that it has no
other meaning is an incontrovertible truth.

[Judges 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 3:22</span></span>

The haft also went in after the blade - As the instrument was very
short, and Eglon very corpulent, this might readily take place.

And the dirt came out - This is variously understood: either the
contents of the bowels issued through the wound, or he had an evacuation
in the natural way through the fright and anguish. The original, פרשדונה
parshedonah, occurs only here, and is supposed to be compounded of פרש
peresh, dung, and שדה shadah, to shed, and may be very well applied to
the latter circumstance; so the Vulgate understood it: Statinque per
secreta naturae alvi stercora proruperunt.

[Judges 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 3:24</span></span>

He covereth his feet - He has lain down on his sofa in order to sleep;
when this was done they dropped their slippers, lifted up their feet,
and covered them with their long loose garments. But the versions, in
general, seem to understand it as implying a certain natural act.

[Judges 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 3:26</span></span>

Passed beyond the quarries - Beyond the pesilim, which appear to have
been the Moabitish borders, where they had set up those hewn stones as
landmarks, or sacred boundary stones.

[Judges 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 3:28</span></span>

Took the fords of Jordan - It is very likely that the Moabites, who were
on the western side of Jordan, hearing of the death of Eglon, were
panic-struck, and endeavored to escape over Jordan at the fords near
Jericho, when Ehud blew his trumpet in the mountains of Ephraim, and
thus to get into the land of the Moabites, which lay on the east of
Jordan; but Ehud and his men, seizing the only pass by which they could
make their escape, slew ten thousand of them in their attempt to cross
at those fords. What is called here the fords was doubtless the place
where the Israelites had passed Jordan when they (under Joshua) took
possession of the promised land.

[Judges 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 3:29</span></span>

All lusty, and all men of valor - Picked, chosen troops, which Eglon
kept among the Israelites to reduce and overawe them.

[Judges 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 3:30</span></span>

The land had rest fourscore years - This is usually reckoned from the
deliverance under Othniel, that being a term from which they dated every
transaction, as in other cases they dated from the exodus, from the
building of Solomon's temple, etc., and as other nations did from
particular events: the Romans, from the building of the city; the
Mohammedans, from the Hijreh, or flight of Mohammed to Medina; the
Christians, from the birth of Christ, etc., etc. But see the preface,
and the different chronological schemes there mentioned.

[Judges 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 3:31</span></span>

And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath - Dr. Hales supposes that
"Shamgar's administration in the West included Ehud's administration of
eighty years in the East; and that, as this administration might have
been of some continuance, so this Philistine servitude which is not
noticed elsewhere, might have been of some duration; as may be
incidentally collected from Deborah's thanksgiving, [Jdg
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006)."

Slew - six hundred men with an ox-goad - מלמד הבקר malmad habbakar, the
instructer of the oxen. This instrument is differently understood by the
versions: the Vulgate has vomere, with the coulter or ploughshare, a
dreadful weapon in the hand of a man endued with so much strength; the
Septuagint has αροτροποδι των βοων, with the ploughshare of the oxen;
the Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic, understand it of the goad, as does our
translation.

1\. That the ox-goad, still used in Palestine, is a sufficiently
destructive weapon if used by a strong and skillful hand, is evident
enough from the description which Mr. Maundrell gives of this implement,
having seen many of them both in Palestine and Syria: "It was
observable," says he, "that in ploughing they used goads of an
extraordinary size; upon measuring of several I found them about eight
feet long, and at the bigger end about six inches in circumference. They
were armed at the lesser end with a sharp prickle for driving the oxen,
and at the other end with a small spade or paddle of iron, strong and
massy, for cleansing the plough from the clay that encumbers it in
working." See his Journey from Aleppo, etc., 7th edit., pp. 110, 111. In
the hands of a strong, skillful man, such an instrument must be more
dangerous and more fatal than any sword. It is worthy of remark that the
ox-goad is represented by Homer to have been used prior to this time in
the same way. In the address of Diomed to Glaucus, Iliad. lib. vi., ver.
129, Lycurgus is represented as discomfiting Bacchus and the Bacchanals
with this weapon. The siege of Troy, according to the best chronologers,
happened within the time of the Israelitish judges.

Ουκ αν εγωγε θεοισιν επουρανιοισι μαχοιμην·

Ουδε γαρ ουδε Δρυαντος υἱος κρατερος Λυκουργος

Σευε κατ' ηγαθεον Νυσσηΐον· αἱ δ' ἁμα πασαι

Θυσθλα χαμαι κατεχευαν, ὑπ' ανδροφονοιο Λυκουργου

Θεινομεναι βουπληγι.

"I fight not with the inhabitants of heaven;

That war Lycurgus, son of Dryas, waged,

Nor long survived. - From Nyssa's sacred heights

He drove the nurses of the frantic god,

Thought drowning Bacchus: to the ground they cast

All cast, their leafy wands; while, ruthless, he

Spared not to smite them with his murderous goad."

The meaning of this fable is: Lycurgus, king of Thrace, finding his
subjects addicted to drunkenness, proscribed the cultivation of the vine
in his dominions, and instituted agriculture in its stead; thus θυσθλα,
the thyrsi, were expelled, βουπληγι, by the ox-goad. The account,
however, shows that Shamgar was not the only person who used the ox-goad
as an offensive weapon. If we translate βουπληξ a cart-whip, the
parallel is lost.

2\. It appears that Shamgar was merely a laboring man; that the
Philistines were making an inroad on the Israelites when the latter were
cultivating their fields; that Shamgar and his neighbors successfully
resisted them; that they armed themselves with their more portable
agricultural instruments; and that Shamgar, either with a ploughshare or
an ox-goad, slew six hundred of those marauders.

3\. The case of Ehud killing Eglon is a very serious one; and how far he
was justified in this action is with all a question of importance, and
with not a few a question of difficulty. "Is it right to slay a tyrant?"
I, without hesitation, answer, No individual has a right to slay any
man, except it be in his own defense, when a person attacks him in order
to take away his life. "But may not any of his oppressed subjects put an
end to the life of a tyrant?" No. The state alone can judge whether a
king is ruling contrary to the laws and constitution of that state; and
if that state have provided laws for the punishment of a ruler who is
endeavoring to destroy or subvert that constitution, then let him be
dealt with according to those laws. But no individual or number of
individuals in that state has any right to dispose of the life of the
ruler but according to law. To take his life in any other way is no less
than murder. It is true God, the author of life and the judge of all
men, may commission one man to take away the life of a tyrant. But the
pretension to such a commission must be strong, clear, and unequivocal;
in short, if a man think he have such a commission, to be safe, he
should require the Lord to give him as full an evidence of it as he did
to Moses; and when such a person comes to the people, they should
require him to give as many proofs of his Divine call as the Hebrews did
Moses, before they should credit his pretensions. "But had not Ehud a
Divine call?" I cannot tell. If he had, he did not murder Eglon; if he
had not, his act, however it succeeded, was a murderous act; and if he
had no message from God, (and there is no proof that he had), then he
was a most base and hypocritical assassin. The sacred historian says
nothing of his motives nor call; he mentions simply the fact, and leaves
it without either observation or comment, and every reader is left to
draw his own inference. The life of any ruler can only be at the
disposal of the constitution, or that system of rules, laws, and
regulations, by which the people he rules should be governed; if he rule
not according to these, he is, ipso facto, deposed from his government.
If he break the constitution, to the great injury or ruin of his
subjects, then he is to be judged by those laws according to which he
must have pledged himself to govern. If a king be deposed on any other
account, it is rebellion. If his life be taken away by any means but
those provided by the constitution, it is murder. No pretended or proved
tyranny can justify his being taken off in any other way, or on any
other account. And what constitution in the civilized world provides for
the death of the supreme magistrate? It is true the good people, as they
were called, of England and France, have each under a pretense of law,
beheaded their king; and they endeavored to justify their conduct on the
ground that those kings had broken the constitution: this being proved,
they should have been deposed. But by what law, either of those nations
or of the civilized world, were their lives taken away? Let it be
remembered that the inflation of the punishment of death, either against
or without law, is murder.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 4](jdg004)

</div>
