<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg012)  [Next](jdg014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 13:0</span></span>

The Israelites corrupt themselves, abut are delivered into the hands of
the Philistines forty years, [Jdg
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001). An Angel appears to the wife of
Manoah, foretells the birth of her son, and gives her directions how to
treat both herself and her child, who was to be a deliverer of Israel,
[Jdg 13:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#002). She informs her husband
of this transaction, [Jdg 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#006), [Jdg
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#007). Manoah prays that the Angel may
reappear; he is heard, and the Angel appears to him and his wife, and
repeats his former directions concerning the mother and the child, [Jdg
13:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#008). Manoah presents an offering
to the Lord, and the Angel ascends in the flame, [Jdg
13:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#015). Manoah is alarmed, but is
comforted by the judicious rejections of his wife, [Jdg
13:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#021). Samson is born, and begins
to feel the influence of the Divine Spirit, [Jdg
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#024), [Jdg
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#025).

[Judges 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 13:1</span></span>

Delivered them into the hand of the Philistines - It does not appear
that after Shamgar, to the present time, the Philistines were in a
condition to oppress Israel, or God had not permitted them to do it; but
now they have a commission, the Israelites having departed from the
Lord. Nor is it evident that the Philistines had entirely subjected the
Israelites, as there still appears to have been a sort of commerce
between the two people. They had often vexed and made inroads upon them,
but they had them not in entire subjection; see [Jdg
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#011).

[Judges 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 13:2</span></span>

A certain man of Zorah - A town in the tribe of Judah, but afterwards
given to Dan.

[Judges 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 13:3</span></span>

The angel of the Lord - Generally supposed to have been the same that
appeared to Moses, Joshua, Gideon, etc., and no other than the second
person of the ever-blessed Trinity.

[Judges 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 13:4</span></span>

Beware - drink not wine - As Samson was designed to be a Nazarite from
the womb, it was necessary that, while his mother carried and nursed
him, she should live the life of a Nazarite, neither drinking wine nor
any inebriating liquor, nor eating any kind of forbidden meat. See the
account of the Nazarite and his vow in the notes on [Num
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#002) (note), etc.

[Judges 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 13:5</span></span>

He shall begin to deliver Israel - Samson only began this deliverance,
for it was not till the days of David that the Israelites were
completely redeemed from the power of the Philistines.

[Judges 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 13:6</span></span>

But I asked him not whence he was, neither told he me his name - This
clause is rendered very differently by the Vulgate, the negative Not
being omitted: Quem cum interrogassem quis esset, et unde venisset, et
quo nomine vocaretur, noluit mihi dicere; sed hoc respondit. "Who, when
I asked who he was and whence he came, and by what name he was called,
would not tell me; but this he said," etc. The negative is also wanting
in the Septuagint, as it stands in the Complutensian Polyglot: Και
ηρωτων αυτον ποθεν εστιν, και το ονομα αυτου ουκ απηγγειλε μοι; "And I
asked him whence he was, and his name, but he did not tell me." This is
also the reading of the Codex Alexandrinus; but the Septuagint, in the
London Polyglot, together with the Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic, read the
negative particle with the Hebrew text, I asked Not his name, etc.

[Judges 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 13:9</span></span>

The angel of God came again - This second appearance of the angel was
probably essential to the peace of Manoah, who might have been jealous
of his wife had he not had this proof that the thing was of the Lord.

[Judges 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 13:15</span></span>

Until we shall have made ready a kid - Not knowing his quality, Manoah
wished to do this as an act of hospitality.

[Judges 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 13:16</span></span>

I will not eat of thy bread - As I am a spiritual being, I subsist not
by earthly food.

And if thou wilt offer a burnt-offering - Neither shall I receive that
homage which belongs to God; thou must therefore offer thy
burnt-offering to Jehovah.

[Judges 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 13:18</span></span>

Seeing it is secret? - It was because it was secret that they wished to
know it. The angel does not say that it was secret, but הוא פלאי hu peli
it is Wonderful; the very character that is given to Jesus Christ, [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006) : His name shall be called, פלא
Wonderful; and it is supposed by some that the angel gives this as his
name, and consequently that he was our blessed Lord.

[Judges 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 13:19</span></span>

The angel did wondrously - He acted according to his name; he, being
wonderful, performed wonderful things; probably causing fire to arise
out of the rock and consume the sacrifice, and then ascending in the
flame.

[Judges 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 13:22</span></span>

We shall surely die, because we have seen God - See the note on [Jdg
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#022).

[Judges 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 13:23</span></span>

If the Lord were pleased to kill us, etc. - This is excellent reasoning,
and may be of great use to every truly religious mind, in cloudy and
dark dispensations of Divine Providence. It is not likely that God, who
has preserved thee so long, borne with thee so long, and fed and
supported thee all thy life long, girding thee when thou knewest him
not, is less willing to save and provide for thee and thine now than he
was when, probably, thou trustedst less in him. He who freely gave his
Son to redeem thee, can never be indifferent to thy welfare; and if he
give thee power to pray to and trust in him, is it at all likely that he
is now seeking an occasion against thee, in order to destroy thee? Add
to this the very light that shows thee thy wretchedness, ingratitude,
and disobedience, is in itself a proof that he is waiting to be gracious
to thee; and the penitential pangs thou feelest, and thy bitter regret
for thy unfaithfulness, argue that the light and fire are of God's own
kindling, and are sent to direct and refine, not to drive thee out of
the way and destroy thee. Nor would he have told thee such things of his
love, mercy, and kindness, and unwillingness to destroy sinners, as he
has told thee in his sacred word, if he had been determined not to
extend his mercy to thee.

[Judges 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 13:24</span></span>

And called his name Samson - The original שמשון shimshon, which is from
the root שמש shamash, to serve, (whence shemesh, the sun), probably
means either a little sun, or a little servant; and this latter is so
likely a name to be imposed on an only son, by maternal fondness, that
it leaves but little doubt of the propriety of the etymology.

And the Lord blessed him - Gave evident proofs that the child was under
the peculiar protection of the Most High; causing him to increase daily
in stature and extraordinary strength.

[Judges 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 13:25</span></span>

The Spirit of the Lord began to move him - He felt the degrading bondage
of his countrymen, and a strong desire to accomplish something for their
deliverance. These feelings and motions he had from the Divine Spirit.

Camp of Dan - Probably the place where his parents dwelt; for they were
Danites, and the place is supposed to have its name from its being the
spot where the Danites stopped when they sent some men of their company
to rob Micah of his teraphim, etc. See [Jdg
18:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#013). As he had these influences
between Zorah and Eshtaol, it is evident that this was while he dwelt at
home with his parents; for Zorah was the place where his father dwelt;
see [Jdg 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#002). Thus God began, from
his infancy, to qualify him for the work to which he had called him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 14](jdg014)

</div>
