<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg020)  [Next](rut000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 21:0</span></span>

The Israelites mourn because of the desolation of Benjamin, and consult
the Lord, [Jdg 21:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#001). They inquire
who of Israel had not come to this war, as they had vowed that those who
would not make this a common cause should be put to death, [Jdg
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005), [Jdg
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#006). They consult how they shall
procure wives for the six hundred men who had fled to the rock Rimmon,
[Jdg 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#007). Finding that the men of
Jabesh-gilead had not come to the war, they send twelve thousand men
against them, smite them, and bring off four hundred virgins, which they
give for wives to those who had taken refuge in Rimmon, [Jdg
21:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#008). To provide for the two
hundred which remained, they propose to carry off two hundred virgins of
the daughters of Shiloh, who might come to the annual feast of the Lord,
held at that place, [Jdg 21:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#015).
They take this counsel, and each carries away a virgin from the feast,
[Jdg 21:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#023).

[Judges 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 21:1</span></span>

Now the men of Israel had sworn - Of this oath we had not heard before;
but it appears they had commenced this war with a determination to
destroy the Benjamites utterly, and that if any of them escaped the
sword no man should be permitted to give him his daughter to wife. By
these means the remnant of the tribe must soon have been annihilated.

[Judges 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 21:2</span></span>

The people came to the house of God - Literally, the people came בית־אל
to Bethel; this is considered as the name of a place by the Chaldee,
Syriac, Arabic, and Septuagint.

And wept sore - Their revenge was satisfied, and now reflection brings
them to contrition for what they had done.

[Judges 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 21:3</span></span>

Why is this come to pass - This was a very impertinent question. They
knew well enough how it came to pass. It was right that the men of
Gibeah should be punished, and it was right that they who vindicated
them should share in that punishment; but they carried their revenge too
far, they endeavored to exterminate both man and beast, [Jdg
20:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#048).

[Judges 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 21:4</span></span>

Built there an altar - This affords some evidence that this was not a
regular place of worship, else an altar would have been found in the
place; and their act was not according to the law, as may be seen in
several places of the Pentateuch. But there was neither king nor law
among them, and they did whatever appeared right in their own eyes.

[Judges 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 21:7</span></span>

How shall we do for wives for them - From this it appears that they had
destroyed all the Benjamitish women and children! They had set out with
the purpose of exterminating the whole tribe, and therefore they
massacred the women, that if any of the men escaped, they might neither
find wife nor daughter; and they bound themselves under an oath not to
give any of their females to any of the remnant of this tribe, that thus
the whole tribe might utterly perish.

[Judges 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 21:8</span></span>

There came none to the camp from Jabesh-gilead - As they had sworn to
destroy those who would not assist in this war, [Jdg
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005), they determined to destroy the
men of Jabesh, and to leave none alive except the virgins, and to give
these to the six hundred Benjamites that had escaped to the rock Rimmon.
So twelve thousand men went, smote the city, and killed all the males
and all the married women. The whole account is dreadful; and none could
have been guilty of all these enormities but those who were abandoned of
God. The crime of the men of Gibeah was of the deepest die; the
punishment, involving both the guilty and innocent, was extended to the
most criminal excess; and their mode or redressing the evil which they
had occasioned was equally abominable.

[Judges 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 21:13</span></span>

And to call peaceably unto them - To proclaim peace to them; to assure
them that the enmity was all over, and that they might with safety leave
their strong hold.

[Judges 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 21:14</span></span>

Yet so they sufficed them not - There were six hundred men at Rimmon,
and all the young women they saved from Jabesh were only four hundred;
therefore, there were two hundred still wanting.

[Judges 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 21:19</span></span>

There is a feast of the Lord - What this feast was is not known: it
might be either the passover, pentecost, or the feast of tabernacles, or
indeed some other peculiar to this place. All the above feasts were
celebrated at that time of the year when the vines were in full leaf;
therefore the Benjamites might easily conceal themselves in the
vineyards; and the circumstances will answer to any of those feasts.

On the east side of the highway, etc. - I can see no reason for this
minute description, unless it intimates that this feast was to be held
this year in rather a different place to that which was usual: and, as
the Benjamites had been shut up in their strong hold in Rimmon, they
might not have heard of this alteration; and it was necessary, in such a
case, to give them the most circumstantial information, that they might
succeed in their enterprise without being discovered.

[Judges 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 21:21</span></span>

And catch you every man his wife - That is, Let each man of the two
hundred Benjamites seize and carry off a woman, whom he is, from that
hour, to consider as his wife.

[Judges 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 21:22</span></span>

Be favorable unto them - They promise to use their influence with the
men of Shiloh to induce them to consent to a connection thus
fraudulently obtained, and which the necessity of the case appeared to
them to justify.

We reserved not to each man his wife in the war - The reading of the
Vulgate is very remarkable: Miseremini eorum, non enim rapuerunt eas
jure bellantium atque victorum, sed rogantibus ut acciperent non
dedistis, et a vestra parte peccatum est. - "Pardon them, for they have
not taken them as victors take captives in war; but when they requested
you to give them you did not; therefore the fault is your own." Here it
is intimated that application had been made to the people of Shiloh to
furnish these two hundred Benjamites with wives, and that they had
refused; and it was this refusal that induced the Benjamites to seize
and carry them off. Does not St. Jerome, the translator, refer to the
history of the rape of the Sabine virgins? See below. Houbigant
translates the Hebrew thus: Veniam quaeso illis date; non enim ad bellum
duxerant suam quisque uxorem; et nisi eas illis nunc concedetis, delicti
rei eritis. - "Pardon them, I beseech you, for they have not each taken
his wife to the war; and unless you now give these to them, you will
sin." This intimates that, as the Benjamites had not taken their wives
with them to the war, where some, if not all, of them might have
escaped; and the Israelites found them in the cities, and put them all
to the sword; therefore the people of Shiloh should give up those two
hundred young women to them for wives; and if they did not, it would be
a sin, the circumstances of the case being considered.

Our translation seems to give as a reason to the men of Shiloh why they
should pardon this rape, that as they had not permitted the women to
live in their war with Benjamin, therefore these men are now destitute;
and the concession which they wish them to make may be considered as
more of an obligation to the Israelites than to the Benjamites. It is an
obscure sentence; and the reader, if not pleased with what is laid down,
may endeavor to satisfy himself with others which he may find in
different versions and commentators. The Vulgate gives a good sense to
the passage; but probably Houbigant comes nearest to the meaning.

[Judges 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 21:23</span></span>

They went and returned unto their inheritance - It appears that the
Benjamites acted in the most honorable way by the women whom they had
thus violently carried off; and we may rest assured they took them to an
inheritance at least equal to their own, for it does not appear that any
part of the lands of the Benjamites was alienated from them, and the six
hundred men in question shared, for the present, the inheritance of many
thousands.

[Judges 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 21:24</span></span>

Every man to his tribe - Though this must have been four months after
the war with Benjamin, [Jdg 20:47](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#047); yet
it appears the armies did not disband till they had got the remnant of
Benjamin settled, as is here related.

[Judges 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 21:25</span></span>

In those days there was no king in Israel - Let no one suppose that the
sacred writer, by relating the atrocities in this and the preceding
chapters, justifies the actions themselves; by no means. Indeed, they
cannot be justified; and the writer by relating them gives the strongest
proof of the authenticity of the whole, by such an impartial relation of
facts that were highly to be discredit of his country.

I Have already referred to the rape of the Sabine virgins. The story is
told by Livy, Hist. lib. i., cap. 9, the substance of which is as
follows: Romulus having opened an asylum at his new-built city of Rome
for all kinds of persons, the number of men who flocked to his standard
was soon very considerable; but as they had few women, or, as Livy says,
penuria mulierum, a dearth of women, he sent to all the neighboring
states to invite them to make inter-marriages with his people. Not one
of the tribes around him received the proposal; and some of them
insulted his ambassador, and said, Ecquod feminis quoque asylum
aperuissent? Id enim demum compar connubium fore? "Why have you not also
opened an asylum for Women, which would have afforded you suitable
matches?" This exasperated Romulus, but he concealed his resentment,
and, having published that he intended a great feast to Neptune
Equester, invited all the neighboring tribes to come to it: they did so,
and were received by the Romans with the greatest cordiality and
friendship. The Sabines, with their wives and children, came in great
numbers, and each Roman citizen entertained a stranger. When the games
began, and each was intent on the spectacle before them, at a signal
given, the young Romans rushed in among the Sabine women, and each
carried off one, whom however they used in the kindest manner, marrying
them according to their own rites with due solemnity, and admitting them
to all the rights and privileges of the new commonwealth. The number
carried off on this occasion amounted to near seven hundred; but this
act of violence produced disastrous wars between the Romans and the
Sabines, which were at last happily terminated by the mediation of the
very women whose rape had been the cause of their commencement. The
story may be seen at large in Livy, Plutarch, and others.

Thus ends the book of Judges; a work which, while it introduces the
history of Samuel and that of the kings of Judah and Israel, forms in
some sort a supplement to the book of Joshua, and furnishes the only
account we have of those times of anarchy and confusion, which extended
nearly from the times of the elders who survived Joshua, to the
establishment of the Jewish monarchy under Saul, David, and their
successors. For other uses of this book, see the preface.

Masoretic Notes on the Book of Judges

The number of verses in this book is six hundred and eighteen.

Its Masoretic chapters are fourteen.

And its middle verse is [Jdg 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#008) :
And that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel, etc.

Corrected for a new edition, December 1, 1827. - A. C.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Introduction](rut000)

</div>
