<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg007)  [Next](jdg009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 8:0</span></span>

The Ephraimites are angry with Gideon because he did not call them
particularly to his assistance; he pacifies them, [Jdg
8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#001). Gideon and his three hundred
men pass over Jordan, pursuing the Midianites; and, being faint, ask
victuals from the princes of Succoth, but are refused, [Jdg
8:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#004). They make the like application
to the people of Penuel, and are also refused, [Jdg
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#008), [Jdg
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#009). Gideon defeats Zebah and
Zalmunna, the two kings of Midian, and takes them prisoners, [Jdg
8:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#010). He chastises the men of
Succoth and Penuel, [Jdg 8:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#013). He
slays Zebah and Zalmunna, who had killed his brethren, [Jdg
8:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#018). The Israelites offer him the
kingdom, which he refuses, [Jdg 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#022),
[Jdg 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#023). He requires from them the
gold rings which they had taken from the Ishmaelites, and makes an
ephod, which he sets up at Ophrah; and it became an instrument of
idolatry, [Jdg 8:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#024). The land
enjoys peace forty years; Gideon dies, having seventy-one sons, [Jdg
8:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#028). The Israelites fall into
idolatry, and forget their obligations to Gideon's family, [Jdg
8:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#033).

[Judges 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 8:1</span></span>

The men of Ephraim said - This account is no doubt displaced; for what
is mentioned here could not have taken place till the return of Gideon
from the pursuit of the Midianites; for he had not yet passed Jordan,
[Jdg 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#004). And it was when he was
beyond that river that the Ephraimites brought the heads of Oreb and
Zeeb to him, [Jdg 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#025).

[Judges 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 8:2</span></span>

Is not the gleaning, etc. - That is, The Ephraimites have performed more
important services than Gideon and his men; and he supports the
assertion by observing that it was they who took the two Midianitish
generals, having discomfited their hosts at the passes of Jordan.

[Judges 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 8:3</span></span>

Then their anger was abated - A soft answer turneth away wrath. He might
have said that he could place but little dependence on his brethren
when, through faint-heartedness, 22,000 left him at one time; but he
passed this by, and took a more excellent way.

[Judges 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 8:4</span></span>

Faint, yet pursuing - The Vulgate paraphrases this, et prae lassitudine,
fugientes persequi non poterant; "and, through fatigue, unable to pursue
the fugitives."

[Judges 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 8:5</span></span>

Give, I pray you, loaves of bread - As Gideon was engaged in the common
cause of Israel, he had a right to expect succor from the people at
large. His request to the men of Succoth and Penuel was both just and
reasonable.

[Judges 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 8:6</span></span>

Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thine hand - They feared to
help Gideon, lest, if he should be overpowered, the Midianites would
revenge it upon them; and they dared not trust God.

[Judges 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 8:7</span></span>

I will tear your flesh - What this punishment consisted in I cannot say;
it must mean a severe punishment: as if he had said, I will thresh your
flesh with briers and thorns, as corn is threshed out with threshing
instruments; or, Ye shall be trodden down under the feet of my
victorious army, as the corn is trodden out with the feet of the ox.
Succoth was beyond Jordan, in the tribe of Gad. Penuel was also in the
same tribe, and not far distant from Succoth.

[Judges 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 8:9</span></span>

I will break down this tower - Probably they had not only denied him,
but insultingly pointed to a tower in which their chief defense lay; and
intimated to him that he might do his worst, for they could amply defend
themselves.

[Judges 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 8:10</span></span>

Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor - If this were a place, it is nowhere
else mentioned in Scripture. Some contend that קרקר karkor signifies
rest; and thus the Vulgate understood it: Zebah and Zalmunna
requiescebant, rested, with all their army. And this seems the most
likely, for it is said, [Jdg 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#011),
that Gideon smote the host, for the host was secure.

[Judges 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 8:13</span></span>

Returned from battle before the sun was up - This does not appear to be
a proper translation of מלמעלה החרס milmaaleh hechares. It should be
rendered from the ascent of Chares: this is the reading of the
Septuagint, the Syriac, and the Arabic.

[Judges 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 8:14</span></span>

He described unto him the princes of Succoth - The young man probably
gave him the names of seventy persons, the chief men of Succoth, who
were those who were most concerned in refusing him and his men the
refreshment he requested.

[Judges 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 8:16</span></span>

He taught the men of Succoth - Instead of וידע he taught, Houbigant
reads וידש he tore; and this is not only agreeable to what Gideon had
threatened, [Jdg 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#007), but is supported
by the Vulgate, Septuagint, Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic. The Hebrew text
might have been easily corrupted in this place by the change of ש shin
into ע ain, letters very similar to each other.

[Judges 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 8:18</span></span>

What manner of men were they whom ye slew at Tabor? - We have no
antecedent to this question; and are obliged to conjecture one: it seems
as if Zebah and Zalmunna had massacred the family of Gideon, while he
was absent on this expedition. Gideon had heard some confused account of
it, and now questions them concerning the fact. They boldly acknowledge
it, and describe the persons whom they slew, by which he found they were
his own brethren. This determines him to avenge their death by slaying
the Midianitish kings, whom he otherwise was inclined to save. He might
have heard that his brethren had been taken prisoners, and might have
hoped to have exchanged them for the kings now in his hand; but when he
found they had been all slain, he decrees the death of their murderers.
There is something in this account similar to that in the 12th Aeneis of
Virgil: - When Turnus was overthrown, and supplicated for his life, and
Aeneas was inclined to spare him; he saw the belt of his friend Pallas,
whom Turnus had slain, and which he now wore as a trophy: this
immediately determined the Trojan to sacrifice the life of Turnus to the
manes of his friend. The story is well told: -

Stetit acer in armis

Aeneas, volvens oculos, dextramque repressit.

Et jam jamque magis cunctantem flectere sermo

Coeperat: infelix humero cum apparuit ingens

Balteus, et notis fulserunt cingula bullis

Pallantis pueri; victum quem vulnere Turnus

Straverat, atque humeris inimicum insigne gerebat.

Ille oculis postquam saevi monumenta doloris

Exuviasque hausit: furiis accensus et ira

Terribilis: Tune hinc spoliis indute meorum

Eripiare mihi? - Pallas, te hoc vulnere Pallas

Immolat; et poenam scelerato ex sanguine sumit.

Hoc dicens furrum adverso sub pectore condit Fervidus.

Virg. Aen. lib. xii., ver. 938.

"In deep suspense the Trojan seem'd to stand,

And, just prepared to strike, repress'd his hand.

He roll'd his eyes, and every moment felt

His manly soul with more compassion melt.

When, casting down a casual glance, he spied

The golden belt that glitter'd on his side;

The fatal spoils which haughty Turnus tore

From dying Pallas, and in triumph wore.

Then roused anew to wrath, he loudly cries,

(Flames, while he spoke, came flashing from his eyes),

Traitor! dost thou! dost thou to grace pretend,

Clad, as thou art, in trophies of my friend? -

To his sad soul a grateful offering go;

'Tis Pallas, Pallas gives this deadly blow.

He rais'd his arm aloft; and at the word,

Deep in his bosom drove the shining sword."

Dryden.

The same principle impels Gideon to slay Zebah and Zalmunna which
induced Aeneas to kill Turnus: and perhaps the ornaments which he took
from their camels' necks, [Jdg 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#021),
were some of the spoils of his slaughtered brethren.

[Judges 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 8:20</span></span>

He said unto Jether his first-born - By the ancient laws of war,
prisoners taken in war might be either slain, sold, or kept for slaves.
To put a captive enemy to death no executioner was required. Gideon
slays Zebah and Zalmunna with his own hand. So Samuel is said to have
hewn Agag in pieces, [Sa1 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#033).
Benaiah slew Joab, [Kg1 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#025). Saul
orders his guards to slay the priests who had contributed to the escape
of David, [Sa1 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#017); and David caused
one of his attendants to slay the Amalekite who pretended to have slain
Saul, [Sa2 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#015).

[Judges 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 8:21</span></span>

Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise, thou, and fall upon us - It was
disgraceful to fall by the hands of a child; and the death occasioned by
the blows of such a person must be much more lingering and tormenting.
Some have even employed children to despatch captives. Civilis, a Roman
knight, headed a revolt of the Gauls against Rome, in the year of the
city 824. Of him Tacitus says, Hist. lib. iv., c. 61: Ferebatur parvulo
filio quosdam captivorum sagittis jaculisque puerilibus figendos
obtulisse: "He is said to have given to his little son some prisoners,
as butts to be shot at with little darts and arrows." This was for their
greater torment and dishonor; and to inure his child to blood! Could any
thing like this have been the design of Gideon?

The ornaments that were on their camels' necks. - The heads, necks,
bodies, and legs of camels, horses, and elephants, are highly ornamented
in the eastern countries, and indeed this was common, from the remotest
antiquity, in all countries. Virgil refers to it as a thing long before
his time, and thus describes the horses given by King Latinus to the
ambassadors of Aeneas. - Aen. lib. vii., ver. 274.

Haec effatus equos numero pater eligit omni.

Stabant tercentum nitidi in praesepibus altis:

Omnibus extemplo Teucris jubet ordine duci

Instratos ostro alipedes pictisque tapetis. Aurea

pectoribus demissa monilia pendent: Tecti auro

fulvum mandunt sub dentibus aurum.

"He said, and order'd steeds to mount the band: In

lofty stalls three hundred coursers stand; Their

shining sides with crimson cover'd o'er; The

sprightly steeds embroider'd trappings wore, With

golden chains, refulgent to behold: Gold were their

bridles, and they champ'd on gold."

Pitt.

Instead of ornaments, the Septuagint translate τους μηνισκους, the
crescents or half-moons; and this is followed by the Syriac and Arabic.
The worship of the moon was very ancient; and, with that of the sun,
constituted the earliest idolatry of mankind. We learn from [Jdg
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#024) that the Ishmaelites, or Arabs,
as they are termed by the Targum, Syriac, and Arabic, had golden
ear-rings, and probably a crescent in each; for it is well known that
the Ishmaelites, and the Arabs who descended from them, were addicted
very early to the worship of the moon; and so attached were they to this
superstition, that although Mohammed destroyed the idolatrous use of the
crescent, yet it was universally borne in their ensigns, and on the tops
of their mosques, as well as in various ornaments.

[Judges 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 8:22</span></span>

Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's son - That is,
Become our king, and let the crown be hereditary in thy family. What a
weak, foolish, and inconstant people were these! As yet their government
was a theocracy; and now, dazzled with the success of a man who was only
an instrument in the hands of God to deliver them from their enemies,
they wish to throw off the Divine yoke, and shackle themselves with an
unlimited hereditary monarchy! An unlimited monarchy is a curse; a
limited monarchy may be a blessing: the latter may be an appointment of
God; the former never can. Those who cast off their allegiance to their
Maker, are guilty of folly and extravagance of every kind.

[Judges 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 8:23</span></span>

The Lord shall rule over you - Few with such power at their command
would have acted as Gideon. His speech calls them back to their first
principles, and should have excited in them both shame and contrition.
How different is this speech from that of Oliver Cromwell when the
commons offered him the crown of England!

[Judges 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 8:24</span></span>

Give me every man the ear-rings of his prey - The spoils taken from
their enemies in this warfare. This is a transaction very like to that
of the Israelites and Aaron; when they brought him their golden
ear-rings, out of which he made the molten calf, [Exo
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#002), etc. Whether Gideon designed
this ephod for an instrument of worship, or merely as a trophy, is not
very clear. It is most likely that he had intended to establish a place
of worship at Ophrah; and he took this occasion to provide the proper
sacerdotal vestments.

[Judges 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 8:26</span></span>

The weight of the golden ear-rings - was a thousand and seven hundred
shekels of gold - Taking the shekel at half an ounce weight, the sum of
the gold collected in ear-rings was seventy pounds ten ounces; and
worth, as gold now rates, about 3,100 sterling. This computation of the
weight of the golden ear-rings, taken from the slaughtered Ishmaelites,
will bring to the reader's mind the slaughter of the Roman knights by
the Carthaginians at the battle of Cannae, from whose spoils Hannibal
sent three bushels of gold rings to the city of Carthage!

[Judges 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jdg 8:27</span></span>

Gideon made an ephod thereof - That is, he made an ephod out of this
mass of gold; but he could not employ it all in making this one garment,
for it is not likely that any man could wear a coat of nearly one
hundred pounds weight. It is likely that he made a whole tabernacle
service in miniature out of this gold.

All Israel went thither a whoring after it - This form of speech often
occurs, and has been often explained. The whole Jewish nation is
represented as being united to God as a wife is to her husband. Any act
of idolatry is considered as a breach of their covenant with God, as an
act of whoredom is the breach of the marriage agreement between man and
wife. God calls himself the husband of the Jewish nation, and their
idolatries acts of whoredom, adultery, and fornication. All Israel paid
idolatrous worship to the ephod or sacerdotal establishment made by
Gideon at Ophrah, and this is called going a whoring after it; see on
[Jdg 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#033) (note). For a description of
the ephod, see [Exo 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#007) (note); and
for the other garments of the priests, see [Exo
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#004) (note), etc.

[Judges 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 8:28</span></span>

Forty years in the days of Gideon - The Midianites were so completely
humbled that they could make head no more against Israel during the
forty years in which the government of Gideon lasted.

[Judges 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 8:31</span></span>

His concubine - A lawful but secondary wife, whose children could not
inherit.

Whose name he called Abimelech - That is, my father is king, or my
father hath reigned. This name was doubtless given by the mother, and so
it should be understood here; she wished to raise her son to the supreme
government, and therefore gave him a name which might serve to stimulate
him to seek that which she hoped he should enjoy in his father's right.
See the following chapter, Judges 9 (note).

[Judges 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jdg 8:32</span></span>

Gideon - died in a good old age - Supposed to have been A.M. 2799; b.c.
1205.

[Judges 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jdg 8:33</span></span>

A whoring after Baalim - This term has probably a different meaning here
from what it has [Jdg 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#007); for it is
very likely that in most parts of the pagan worship there were many
impure rites, so that going a whoring after Baalim may be taken in a
literal sense.

Baal-berith - Literally, the lord of the covenant; the same as Jupiter
faederis, or Mercury, among the Romans; the deity whose business it was
to preside over compacts, leagues, treaties, covenants, etc. Some of the
versions understand it as if the Israelites had made a covenant or
agreement to have Baal for their god; so the Vulgate: Percusseruntque
cum Baal faedus, ut esset eis in deum.

[Judges 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jdg 8:34</span></span>

Remembered not the Lord their God - They attributed their deliverance to
some other cause, and did not give him the glory of their salvation.

[Judges 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jdg 8:35</span></span>

Neither showed they kindness to the house of - Gideon - They were both
unthankful and unholy. Though they had the clearest proofs of God's
power and goodness before their eyes, yet they forgot him. And although
they were under the greatest obligations to Gideon, and were once so
sensible of them that they offered to settle the kingdom on him and his
family, yet they forgot him also; for, becoming foes to God, they could
not be friends to Man. Jerubbaal, namely, Gideon. - This is improper; it
should be Jerubbaal Gideon, as we say Simon Peter, or call any man by
his Christian name and surname.

The ancients, particularly St. Ambrose and Augustine, have endeavored to
find out a parallel between our blessed Lord and Gideon. We have already
seen what Origen has made of the whole account, who is followed in the
main by the above Latin fathers. As I believe no such parallel was
intended by the Spirit of God, I must be excused from going into their
details. It is no credit either to Christ or Christianity to be compared
to such persons and their transactions.

1\. Of Gideon the most we can say is that which the angel said, he was a
mighty man of valor.

2\. He was also a true patriot, he loved his country, and hazarded his
life for it; and yet he would not stir till he had the most
incontestable proofs that God would, by his supernatural assistance,
make him victorious.

3\. He was most evidently disinterested, and void of ambition; he
refused the kingdom when it was offered to him and to his heirs after
him. But, consistently with the belief he had in God, he could not
accept it, as this would have been a complete alteration of the Jewish
constitution, which acknowledged no ruler but God himself.

4\. His motive in making the ephod is not well understood; probably it
was done with no reprehensible design. But the act was totally wrong; he
had no Divine authority to make such an innovation in the religious
worship of his country. The ark was at Shechem; and there was the proper
and only accredited priest. The act therefore can never be excused,
whatever may be said of his motive.

5\. His private character does not appear to have been very exemplary;
he had many wives, and seventy sons by them, besides one by a concubine,
which he kept at Shechem, where he was often obliged to go as judge, for
the purpose of administering justice. In short, there is scarcely a
trait in his character worthy to be compared with any thing in the
conduct of the Redeemer of mankind.

6\. Parallels to Christ, and the work of his Spirit in the salvation of
men, have been diligently sought in the sacred writings, by both
commentators and preachers; and we have had voluminous treaties on types
and antitypes; and how little has sound doctrine or true piety derived
from them! They have often served to unsettle the former, and have been
rather inimical than favorable to the interests of the latter. When the
Spirit of God says such things are types and such things are allegories,
it is our duty to believe and examine; when men produce their types and
metaphors, it may be our duty to doubt, be suspicious, and pass on.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 9](jdg009)

</div>
