<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg011)  [Next](jdg013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 12:0</span></span>

The Ephraimites are incensed against Jephthah, because he did not call
them to war against the Ammonites; and threaten his destruction, [Jdg
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#001). He vindicates himself, [Jdg
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#002), [Jdg
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#003); and arms the Gileadites against
the men of Ephraim; they fight against them, and kill forty-two thousand
Ephraimites at the passages of Jordan, [Jdg
12:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#004). Jephthah dies, having judged
Israel six years, [Jdg 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#007). Ibzan
judge seven years, [Jdg 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#008). His
posterity and death, [Jdg 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#009), [Jdg
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#010). Elon judge ten years, and dies,
[Jdg 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#011), [Jdg
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#012). Abdon judge eight years, [Jdg
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#013). His posterity and death, [Jdg
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#014), [Jdg
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#015).

[Judges 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 12:1</span></span>

The men of Ephraim gathered themselves together - ויצעק vaiyitstsaek,
they called each other to arms; summoning all their tribe and friends to
arm themselves to destroy Jephthah and the Gileadites, being jealous
lest they should acquire too much power.

[Judges 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 12:3</span></span>

I put my life in my hands - I exposed myself to the greatest
difficulties and dangers. But whence did this form of speech arise?
Probably from a man's laying hold of his sword, spear, or bow. "This is
the defender of my life; on this, and my proper use of it, my life
depends." When a man draws his sword against his foe, his enemy will
naturally aim at his life; and his sword in his hand is his sole
defense. It is then, Fight and conquer, or die. Thus Jephthah took his
life in his hand. This phrase occurs in some other places of Scripture;
see [Sa1 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#005); [Sa1
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#021). And the words of the Conqueror,
[Isa 63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005), seem to confirm the above
view of the subject: I looked, and there was none to help; and I
wondered there was none to uphold; therefore mine own arm brought
salvation unto me; i.e., by mine own arm I saved my life, and brought
destruction on mine enemies.

[Judges 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 12:4</span></span>

And fought with Ephraim - Some commentators suppose that there were two
battles in which the Ephraimites were defeated: the first mentioned in
the above clause; and the second occasioned by the taunting language
mentioned in the conclusion of the verse, Ye Gileadites are fugitives of
Ephraim. Where the point of this reproach lies, or what is the reason of
it, cannot be easily ascertained.

[Judges 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 12:6</span></span>

Say now Shibboleth; and he said Sibboleth - The original differs only in
the first letter ס samech, instead of ש sheen; אמר נא שבלת ויאמר סבלת
emar na Shibboleth, vaiyomer Sibboleth. The difference between ש seen,
without a point, which when pointed is pronounced sheen, and ס samech,
is supposed by many to be imperceptible. But there can be no doubt there
was, to the ears of a Hebrew, a most sensible distinction. Most
Europeans, and, indeed, most who have written grammars of the language,
perceive scarcely any difference between the Arabic seen and saad; but
as both those letters are radical not only in Arabic but in Hebrew, the
difference of enunciation must be such as to be plainly perceivable by
the ear; else it would be impossible to determine the root of a word
into which either of these letters entered, except by guessing, unless
by pronunciation the sounds were distinct. One to whom the Arabic is
vernacular, hearing a native speak, discerns it in a moment; but the
delicate enunciation of the characteristic difference between those
letters ש seen and ס samech, and seen and saad, is seldom caught by a
European. Had there been no distinction between the seen and samech but
what the Masoretic point gives now, then ס samech would not have been
used in the word סבלת sibboleth, but ש seen, thus שבלת: but there must
have been a very remarkable difference in the pronunciation of the
Ephraimites, when instead of שבלת shibboleth, an ear of corn, (see [Job
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#024)), they said סבלת sibboleth,
which signifies a burden, [Exo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006);
and a heavy burden were they obliged to bear who could not pronounce
this test letter. It is likely that the Ephraimites were, in reference
to the pronunciation of sh, as different from the Gileadites as the
people in some parts of the north of England are, in the pronunciation
of the letter r, from all the other inhabitants of the land. The sound
of th cannot be pronounced by the Persians in general; and yet it is a
common sound among the Arabians. To this day multitudes of the German
Jews cannot pronounce ת th, but put ss in the stead of it: thus for בית
beith (a house) they say bess. Mr. Richardson, in his "Dissertation on
the Languages, Literature, and Manners of the Eastern Nations," prefixed
to his Persian and Arabic Dictionary, p. ii., 4th. edition, makes some
observations on the different dialects which prevailed in Arabia Felix,
the chief of which were the Hemyaret and Koreish; and to illustrate the
point in hand, he produces the following story from the Mohammedan
writers: "An envoy from one of the feudatory states, having been sent to
the tobba, (the sovereign), that prince, when he was introduced,
pronounced the word T'heb, which in the Hemyaret implied, Be seated:
unhappily it signified, in the native dialect of the ambassador,
Precipitate thyself; and he, with a singular deference for the orders of
his sovereign, threw himself instantly from the castle wall and
perished." Though the Ephraimites had not a different dialect, they had,
it appears, a different pronunciation, which confounded, to others,
letters of the same organ, and thus produced, not only a different
sound, but even an opposite meaning. This was a sufficient test to find
out an Ephraimite; and he who spake not as he was commanded, at the
fords of Jordan, spoke against his own life.

For he could not frame to pronounce it right - This is not a bad
rendering of the original ולא יכין לדבר כן velo yachin ledabber ken;
"and they did not direct to speak it thus." But instead of יכין yachin,
to direct, thirteen of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS., with two ancient
editions, read יבין yabin; "they did not understand to speak it thus."
The versions take great latitude in this verse. The Vulgate makes a
paraphrase: Dic ergo Shibboleth, quod interpretatur spica: qui
respondebat Sibboleth; eadem litera spicam exprimere non valens. "Say
therefore, Shibboleth; which interpreted is an ear of corn: but he
answered, Sibboleth; not being able to express an ear of corn by that
letter." In my very ancient copy of the Vulgate, probably the editio
princeps, there is sebboleth in the first instance as the test word, and
thebboleth as the Ephraimite pronunciation. But cebboleth is the reading
of the Complutensian Polyglot, and is supported by one of my own MSS.,
yet the former reading, thebboleth, is found in two of my MSS. The
Chaldee has שובלתא shubbaltha for the Gileaditish pronunciation, and
סבלתא subbaltha for that of Ephraim. The Syriac has shelba and sebla.
The Arabic has the same word, with sheen and seen; and adds, "He said
Sebla, for the Ephraimites could not pronounce the letter sheen." These
notices, however trivial at first view, will not be thought unimportant
by the Biblical critic.

[Judges 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 12:8</span></span>

And after him Ibzan - It appears that during the administration of
Jephthah, six years - Ibzan, seven years - Elon, ten years - and Abdon,
eight years, (in the whole thirty-one years), the Israelites had peace
in all their borders; and we shall find by the following chapter that in
this time of rest they corrupted themselves, and were afterwards
delivered into the power of the Philistines.

1\. We find that Ibzan had a numerous family, sixty children; and Abdon
had forty sons and thirty grandsons; and that they lived splendidly,
which is here expressed by their riding on seventy young asses; what we
would express by they all kept their carriages; for the riding on fine
asses in those days was not less dignified than riding in coaches in
ours.

2\. It does not appear that any thing particular took place in the civil
state of the Israelites during the time of these latter judges; nothing
is said concerning their administration, whether it was good or bad; nor
is any thing mentioned of the state of religion. It is likely that they
enjoyed peace without, and their judges were capable of preventing
discord and sedition within. Yet, doubtless, God was at work among them,
though there were none to record the operations either of his hand or
his Spirit; but the people who feared him no doubt bore testimony to the
word of his grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 13](jdg013)

</div>
