<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg016)  [Next](jdg018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 17:0</span></span>

Micah, an Ephraimite, restores to his mother eleven hundred shekels of
silver, which he had taken from her, [Jdg
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#001), [Jdg
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#002). She dedicates this to God; and
out of a part of it makes a graven image and a molten image, and gets
them up in the house of Micah, [Jdg
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#003), [Jdg
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#004); who consecrates one of his sons
to be his priest, [Jdg 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#005). He
afterwards finds a Levite, whom he consecrates for a priest, and gives
him annually ten shekels of silver, with his food and clothing, [Jdg
17:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#006).

[Judges 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 17:1</span></span>

And there was a man of Mount Ephraim - It is extremely difficult to fix
the chronology of this and the following transactions. Some think them
to be here in their natural order; others, that they happened in the
time of Joshua, or immediately after the ancients who outlived Joshua.
All that can be said with certainty is this, that they happened when
there was no king in Israel; i.e., about the time of the Judges, or in
some time of the anarchy, [Jdg 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#006).

[Judges 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 17:2</span></span>

About which thou cursedst - Houbigant and others understand this of
putting the young man to his oath. It is likely that when the mother of
Micah missed the money, she poured imprecations on the thief; and that
Micah, who had secreted it, hearing this, was alarmed, and restored the
money lest the curses should fall on him.

[Judges 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 17:3</span></span>

I had wholly dedicated - From this it appears that Micah's mother,
though she made a superstitious use of the money, had no idolatrous
design, for she expressly says she had dedicated it ליהוה layhovah, to
Jehovah; and this appears to have been the reason why she poured
imprecations on him who had taken it.

[Judges 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 17:4</span></span>

A graven image and a molten image - What these images were, we cannot
positively say; they were most probably some resemblance of matters
belonging to the tabernacle. See below.

[Judges 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 17:5</span></span>

The man Micah had a house of gods - בית אלהים beith Elohim should, I
think, be translated house or temple of God; for it is very likely that
both the mother and the son intended no more than a private or domestic
chapel, in which they proposed to set up the worship of the true God.

Made an ephod - Perhaps the whole of this case may be stated thus: Micah
built a house of God - a chapel in imitation of the sanctuary; he made a
graven image representing the ark, a molten image to represent the
mercy-seat, teraphim to represent the cherubim above the mercy-seat, and
an ephod in imitation of the sacerdotal garments; and he consecrated one
of his sons to be priest. Thus gross idolatry was not the crime of
Micah; he only set up in his own house an epitome of the Divine worship
as performed at Shiloh. What the teraphim were, see the note on [Gen
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019); for the ephod, see the note on
[Exo 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#007); and for the sacerdotal
vestments in general, see the note on [Exo
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#004), etc.

Who became his priest - כהן cohen, which the Targum translates chumera.
The word כהן cohen is the common name in Hebrew for a priest of the true
God; but sometimes it is applied to idolatrous priests. When it is to be
understood in the former sense, the Targum renders it cahen; when in the
latter, it uses the word כומרא chumera, by which it always understands
an idolatrous priest. But that this was not a case of idolatry, and that
the true God was worshipped here, is evident from the word Jehovah being
used, [Jdg 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#004), and oracular answers
being given at this house, as we see from [Jdg
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#006), etc.

[Judges 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 17:6</span></span>

There was no king in Israel - The word מלך melech, which generally means
king, is sometimes taken for a supreme governor, judge, magistrate, or
ruler of any kind; (see [Gen 36:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#031),
and [Deu 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005)); and it is likely it
should be so understood here.

Every man did that which was right in his own eyes - He was his own
governor, and what he did he said was right; and, by his cunning and
strength, defended his conduct. When a man's own will, passions, and
caprice, are to be made the rule of law, society is in a most perilous
and ruinous state. Civil government is of God; and without it the earth
must soon be desolated. There was a time when there was no king in
England; and that was, in general, a time of scandal to religion, and
oppression to men.

[Judges 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 17:7</span></span>

Of the family of Judah - The word family may be taken here for tribe; or
the young man might have been of the tribe of Judah by his mother, and
of the tribe of Levi by his father, for he is called here a Levite; and
it is probable that he might have officiated at Shiloh, in the Levitical
office. A Levite might marry into any other tribe, providing the woman
was not an heiress.

[Judges 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 17:8</span></span>

To sojourn where he could find - He went about the country seeking for
some employment, for the Levites had no inheritance: besides, no secure
residence could be found where there was no civil government.

[Judges 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 17:10</span></span>

Be unto me a father and a priest - Thou shalt be master of my house, as
if thou wert my father; and, as priest, thou shalt appear in the
presence of God for me. The term father is often used to express honor
and reverence.

Ten shekels of silver - About thirty shillings per annum, with board,
lodging, and clothes. Very good wages in those early times.

[Judges 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 17:11</span></span>

The Levite was content - He thought the place a good one, and the wages
respectable.

[Judges 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 17:12</span></span>

Micah consecrated the Levite - וימלא את יד vayemalle eth yad, he filled
his hands, i.e., he gave him an offering to present before the Lord,
that he might be accepted by him. He appointed him to be priest; God was
to accept and consecrate him; and for this purpose he filled his hand;
i.e., furnished him with the proper offering which he was to present on
his inauguration.

[Judges 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 17:13</span></span>

Now know I that the Lord will do me good - As he had already provided an
epitome of the tabernacle, a model of the ark, mercy-seat, and cherubim;
and had got proper sacerdotal vestments, and a Levite to officiate; he
took for granted that all was right, and that he should now have the
benediction of God. Some think that he expected great gain from the
concourse of the people to his temple; but of this there is no evidence
in the text. Micah appears to have been perfectly sincere in all that he
did.

I Have already remarked that there is no positive evidence that Micah or
his mother intended to establish any idolatrous worship. Though they
acted without any Divine command in what they did; yet they appear, not
only to have been perfectly sincere, but also perfectly disinterested.
They put themselves to considerable expense to erect this place of
worship, and to maintain, at their own proper charges, a priest to
officiate there; and without this the place, in all probability, would
have been destitute of the worship and knowledge of the true God. His
sincerity, disinterestedness, and attachment to the worship of the God
of his fathers, are farther seen in the joy which he expressed on
finding a Levite who might legally officiate in his house. It is true,
he had not a Divine warrant for what he did; but the state of the land,
the profligacy of his countrymen, his distance from Shiloh, etc.,
considered, he appears to deserve more praise than blame, though of the
latter he has received a most liberal share from every quarter. This
proceeds from that often-noticed propensity in man to take every thing
which concerns the character of another by the worst handle. It cannot
be considered any particular crime, should these notes be found at any
time leaning to the other side.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 18](jdg018)

</div>
