<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg013)  [Next](jdg015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 14:0</span></span>

Samson marries a wife of the Philistines, [Jdg
14:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#001). Slays a young lion at Timnath,
in the carcass of which he afterwards finds a swarm of bees, [Jdg
14:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#005). He makes a feast; they appoint
him thirty companions, to whom he puts forth a riddle, which they cannot
expound, [Jdg 14:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#010). They entice
his wife to get the interpretation from him; she succeeds, informs them,
and they tell the explanation, [Jdg
14:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#015). He is incensed, and slays
thirty of the Philistines, [Jdg 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#019),
[Jdg 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#020).

[Judges 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 14:1</span></span>

Went down to Timnath - A frontier town of the Philistines, at the
beginning of the lands belonging to the tribe of Judah, [Jos
15:57](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#057); but afterwards given up to Dan,
[Jos 19:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#043). David took this place from
the Philistines, but they again got possession of it in the reign of
Ahaz, [Ch2 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018).

[Judges 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 14:3</span></span>

Is there never a woman - To marry with any that did not belong to the
Israelitish stock, was contrary to the law, [Exo
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#016); [Deu
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#003). But this marriage of Samson was
said to be of the Lord, [Jdg 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#004);
that is, God permitted it, (for in no other sense can we understand the
phrase), that it might be a means of bringing about the deliverance of
Israel.

For she pleaseth me well - כי היאישרה בעיני ki hi yisherah beeynai, for
she is right in my eyes. This is what is supposed to be a sufficient
reason to justify either man or woman in their random choice of wife or
husband; the maxim is the same with that of the poet: -

"Thou hast no fault, or I no fault can spy;

Thou art all beauty or all blindness I."

When the will has sufficient power, its determinations are its own rule
of right. That will should be pure and well directed that says, It shall
be so, because I Will it should be so. A reason of this kind is similar
to that which I have seen in a motto on the brass ordnance of Lewis
XIV., Ultima Ratio Regum, the sum of regal logic; i.e., "My will, backed
by these instruments of destruction, shall be the rule of right and
wrong." The rules and principles of this logic are now suspected; and it
is not likely to be generally received again without violent
demonstration.

[Judges 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 14:5</span></span>

A young lion roared against him - Came fiercely out upon him, ready to
tear him to pieces.

[Judges 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 14:6</span></span>

He rent him as he would have rent a kid - Now it is not intimated that
he did this by his own natural strength, but by the Spirit of the Lord
coming mightily upon him: so that his strength does not appear to be his
own, nor to be at his command; his might was, by the will of God,
attached to his hair and to his Nazarate.

[Judges 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 14:7</span></span>

And talked with the woman - That is, concerning marriage; thus forming
the espousals.

[Judges 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 14:8</span></span>

After a time - Probably about one year; as this was the time that
generally elapsed between espousing and wedding.

A swarm of bees and honey in the carcass - By length of time the flesh
had been entirely consumed off the bones, and a swarm of bees had formed
their combs within the region of the thorax, nor was it an improper
place; nor was the thing unfrequent, if we may credit ancient writers;
the carcasses of slain beasts becoming a receptacle for wild bees. The
beautiful espisode in the 4th Georgic of Virgil, beginning at ver. 317,
proves that the ancients believed that bees might be engendered in the
body of a dead ox: -

Pastor Aristaeus fugiens Peneia Tempe -

Quatuor eximios praestanti corpore tauros

Ducit, et intacta totidem cervice juvencas.

Post, ubi nona suos Aurora induxerat ortus.

Inferias Orphei mittit, lucumque revisit.

Hic ver o subitum, ac dietu mirabile monstrum

Adspiciunt, liquefacta bourn per viscera toto

Stridere apes utero, et ruptis effervere costis;

Immensasque trahi nubes, jamque arbore summa

Confluere, et lentis uvam demittere ramis.

Virg. Geor. lib. iv., ver. 550.

"Sad Aristaeus from fair Tempe fled,

His bees with famine or diseases dead -

Four altars raises, from his herd he culls

For slaughter four the fairest of his bulls;

Four heifers from his female store he took,

All fair, and all unknowing of the yoke.

Nine mornings thence, with sacrifice and prayers,

The powers atoned, he to the grove repairs.

Behold a prodigy! for, from within

The broken bowels, and the bloated skin,

A buzzing noise of bees his ears alarms,

Straight issuing through the sides assembling swarms!

Dark as a cloud, they make a wheeling flight,

Then on a neighboring tree descending light,

Like a large cluster of black grapes they show,

And make a large dependance from the bough.

Dryden.

[Judges 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 14:10</span></span>

Samson made there a feast - The marriage feast, when he went to marry
his espoused wife.

[Judges 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 14:11</span></span>

They brought thirty companions - These are called in Scripture children
of the bride-chamber, and friends of the bridegroom. See the whole of
this subject particularly illustrated in the observations at the end of
[Joh 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#025) (note).

[Judges 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 14:12</span></span>

I will now put forth a riddle - Probably this was one part of the
amusements at a marriage-feast; each in his turn proposing a riddle, to
be solved by any of the rest on a particular forfeit; the proposer
forfeiting, if solved, the same which the company must forfeit if they
could not solve it.

Thirty sheets - I have no doubt that the Arab hayk, or hake, is here
meant; a dress in which the natives of the East wrap themselves, as a
Scottish Highlander does in his plaid. In Asiatic countries the dress
scarcely ever changes; being nearly the same now that it was 2000 years
ago. Mr. Jackson, in his account of the Empire of Morocco, thus mentions
the Moorish dress: "It resembles," says he, "that of the ancient
patriarchs, as represented in paintings; (but the paintings are taken
from Asiatic models); that of the men consists of a red cap and turban,
a (kumja) shirt, which hangs outside of the drawers, and comes down
below the knee; a (caftan) coat, which buttons close before, and down to
the bottom, with large open sleeves; over which, when they go out of
doors, they throw carelessly, and sometimes elegantly, a hayk, or
garment of white cotton, silk, or wool, five or six yards long, and five
feet wide. The Arabs often dispense with the caftan, and even with the
shirt, wearing nothing but the hayk." When an Arab does not choose to
wrap himself in the hayk, he throws it over his left shoulder, where it
hangs till the weather, etc., obliges him to wrap it round him. The hayk
is either mean or elegant, according to the quality of the cloth, and of
the person who wears it. I have myself seen the natives of Fez, with
hayks, or hykes, both elegant and costly. By the changes of garments, it
is very likely that the kumja and caftan are meant, or at least the
caftan; but most likely both: for the Hebrew has חליפות בגדים chaliphoth
begadim, changes or succession of garments. Samson, therefore, engaged
to give or receive thirty hayks, and thirty kumjas and caftans, on the
issue of the interpretation or non-interpretation of his riddle: these
were complete suits.

[Judges 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 14:14</span></span>

And he said unto there - Thus he states or proposes his riddle: -

Out of the eater came forth meat,

And out of the strong came forth sweetness.

Instead of strong, the Syriac and Arabic have bitter. I have no doubt
that the riddle was in poetry; and perhaps the two hemistichs above
preserve its order. This was scarcely a fair riddle; for unless the fact
to which it refers were known, there is no rule of interpretation by
which it could be found out. We learn from the Scholiast, on
Aristophanes, Vesp. v. 20, that it was a custom among the ancient Greeks
to propose at their festivals, what were called γριφοι, griphoi,
riddles, enigmas, or very obscure sayings, both curious and difficult,
and to give a recompense to those who found them out, which generally
consisted in either a festive crown, or a goblet full of wine. Those who
failed to solve them were condemned to drink a large portion of fresh
water, or of wine mingled with a sea-water, which they were compelled to
take down at one draught, without drawing their breath, their hands
being tied behind their backs. Sometimes they gave the crown to the
deity in honor of whom the festival was made: and if none could solve
the riddle, the reward was given to him who proposed it. Of these
enigmas proposed at entertainments etc., we have numerous examples in
Athenaeus, Deipnosoph, lib. x., c. 15, p. 142, edit. Argentorat., and
some of them very like this of Samson for example: -

Διδους τις ουκ εδωκεν, ουδ' εχων εχει;

"Who gives, and does not give?

Who has not, and yet has?"

This may be spoken of an enigma and its proposer: he gives it, but he
does not give the sense; the other has it, but has not the meaning.

Εστι φυσις θηλεια βρεφη σοζους' ὑπο κολποις

Αυτης· ταυτα δ' αφωνα βοην ἱστησι γεγωνον.

Και δια ποντιον οιδμα, και ηπειρου δια πασης,

Οἱς εθελει θνητων· τοις δ' ου παρεουσις ακουειν

Εξεστι· κωφην δ' ακοης αισθησιν εχουσιν.

"There is a feminine Nature, fostering her children in her bosom; who,
although they are dumb, send forth a distinct voice over every nation of
the earth, and every sea, to whom soever they please. It is possible for
those who are absent to hear, and for those who are deaf to hear also."

The relator brings in Sappho interpreting it thus: -

Θηλεια μεν ουν εστι φυσις, επιστολη.

Βρεφη δ' εν αυτῃ περιφερει τα γραμματα

Αφωνα δ' οντα ταυτα τοις πορῥω λαλει,

Οἱς βουλεθ\\uu903? ἑτερος δ' αν τυχῃ τις πλησιον

Ἑστως αναγινωσκοντος, ουκ ακουσεται.

"The Nature, which is feminine, signifies an epistle; and her children
whom she bears are alphabetical characters: and these, being dumb, speak
and give counsel to any, even at a distance; though he who stands nigh
to him who is silently reading, hears no voice."

Here is another, attributed by the same author to Theodectes: -

Της φυσεως ὁσα γαια φερει τροφος, ουδ' ὁσα ποντος,

Ουτε βροτοισιν εχει γυιων αυξησιν ὁμοιαν.

Αλλ' εν μεν γενεσει πρωτοσπορῳ εστι μεγιστη,

Εν δε μεσαις ακμαις μικρα, γηρᾳ δε προς αυτῳ

Μορφῃ και μεγεθει μειζων παλιν εστιν ἁπαντων.

"Neither does the nourishing earth so bear by nature, nor the sea, nor
is there among mortals a like increase of parts; for at the period of
its birth it is greatest, but in its middle age it is small, and in its
old age it is again greater in form and size than all."

This is spoken of a shadow. At the rising of the sun in the east, the
shadow of an object is projected illimitably across the earth towards
the west; at noon, if the sun be vertical to that place, the shadow of
the object is entirely lost; at sunsetting, the shadow is projected
towards the east, as it was in the morning towards the west.

Here is another, from the same author: -

Εισι κασιγνηται διτται, ὡν ἡ μια τικτει

Την ἑπεραν, αυτη δε τεκους' ὑπο τησδε τεκνουται.

"There are two sisters, the one of whom begets the other, and she who is
begotten produces her who begat her."

Day and night solve this enigma.

The following I have taken from Theognis: -

Ηδη γαρ με κεκληκε θαλαττιος οικαδε νεκρος,

Τεθνηκως, ζωῳ φθεγγομενος στοματι.

Theogn. Gnom., in fine.

"A dead seaman calls me to his house; And, although he be dead, he
speaks with a living mouth."

This dead seaman is a conch or large shellfish, of which the poet was
about to eat. The mouth by which it spoke signifies its being used as a
horn; as it is well known to produce, when opened at the spiral end and
blown, a very powerful sound.

[Judges 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 14:17</span></span>

And she wept before him - Not through any love to him, for it appears
she had none, but to oblige her paramours; and of this he soon had ample
proof.

[Judges 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 14:18</span></span>

If ye had not ploughed with my heifer - If my wife had not been
unfaithful to my bed, she would not have been unfaithful to my secret;
and, you being her paramours, your interest was more precious to her
than that of her husband. She has betrayed me through her attachment to
you. Calmet has properly remarked, in quoting the Septuagint, that to
plough with one's heifer, or to plough in another man's ground, are
delicate turns of expression used both by the Greeks and Latins, as well
as the Hebrews, to point out a wife's infidelities. Thus Theognis, Gnom.
v. 581: -

Εχθαιρω δε γυναικα περιδρομον, ανδρα τε μαργον.

Ὁς την αλλονριην βουλετ' αρουραν αρουν.

"I detest a woman who gads about, and also a libidinous man, who wishes
to plough in another man's ground."

Fundum alienium arat, incultum familiarem deserit.

Plautus.

"He ploughs another's farm, and leaves his own heritage uncultivated."

Milo domi non est, perepre at Milone profecto

Arva vacant, uxor non minus inde parit.

Martial.

"Milo is not at home, and Milo being from home, his field lies
uncultivated; his wife, nevertheless, continues to breed, and brings
forth children."

There is the same metaphor in the following lines of Virgil: -

Hoc faciunt, nimo ne luxu obtusior usus,

Sit genitali arvo, sulcosque oblimet inertes.

Geor. l. iii., v. 135.

In this sense Samson's words were understood by the Septuagint, by the
Syriac, and by Rabbi Levi. See Bochart, Hierozoic. p. 1, lib. ii., cap.
41, col. 406. The metaphor was a common one, and we need seek for no
other interpretation of the words of Samson.

[Judges 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 14:19</span></span>

The Spirit of the Lord came upon him - "The spirit of fortitude from
before the Lord." - Targum. He was inspired with unusual courage, and he
felt strength proportioned to his wishes.

He - slew thirty men - and took their spoils - He took their hayks,
their kumjas, and caftans, and gave them to the thirty persons who, by
unfair means, had solved his riddle; thus they had what our version
calls thirty sheets, and thirty changes of raiment. See the note on [Jdg
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#012).

[Judges 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 14:20</span></span>

But Samson's wife was given to his companion - This was the same kind of
person who is called the friend of the bridegroom, [Joh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029). And it is very likely that she
loved this person better than she loved her husband, and went to him as
soon as Samson had gone to his father's house at Zorah. She might,
however, have thought herself abandoned by him, and therefore took
another; this appears to have been the persuasion of her father, [Jdg
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#002). But her betraying his secret and
his interests to his enemies was a full proof he was not very dear to
her; though, to persuade him to the contrary, she shed many crocodile
tears; see [Jdg 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#016). He could not
keep his own secret, and he was fool enough to suppose that another
would be more faithful to him than he was to himself. Multitudes
complain of the treachery of friends betraying their secrets, etc.,
never considering that they themselves have been their first betrayers,
in confiding to others what they pretend to wish should be a secret to
the whole world! If a man never let his secret out of his own bosom, it
is impossible that he should ever be betrayed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 15](jdg015)

</div>
