<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jos024)  [Next](jdg001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the Book of Judges

The persons called Judges, שופטים Shophetim, from שפט, shaphat, to
judge, discern regulate, and direct, were the heads or chiefs of the
Israelites who governed the Hebrew republic from the days of Moses and
Joshua till the time of Saul. The word judge is not to be taken here in
its usual signification, i.e., one who determines controversies, and
denounces the judgment of the law in criminal cases, but one who directs
and rules a state or nation with sovereign power, administers justice,
makes peace or war, and leads the armies of the people over whom he
presides. Officers, with the same power, and nearly with the same name,
were established by the Tyrians in new Tyre, after the destruction of
old Tyre, and the termination of its regal state. The Carthaginian
Suffetes appear to have been the same as the Hebrew Shophetim; as were
also the Archons among the Athenians, and the Dictators among the
ancient Romans. But they were neither hereditary governors, nor were
they chosen by the people: they were properly vicegerents or lieutenants
of the Supreme God; and were always, among the Israelites, chosen by Him
in a supernatural way. They had no power to make or change the laws;
they were only to execute them under the direction of the Most High.
God, therefore, was king in Israel: the government was a theocracy; and
the judges were His deputies. The office, however, was not continual, as
there appear intervals in which there was no judge in Israel. And, as
they were extraordinary persons, they were only raised up on
extraordinary occasions to be instruments in the hands of God of
delivering their nation from the oppression and tyranny of the
neighboring powers. They had neither pomp nor state; nor, probably, any
kind of emoluments.

The chronology of the Book of Judges is extremely embarrassed and
difficult; and there is no agreement among learned men concerning it.
When the deliverances, and consequent periods of rest, so frequently
mentioned in this book, took place, cannot be satisfactorily
ascertained. Archbishop Usher, and those who follow him, suppose that
the rests, or times of peace, should be reckoned, not from the time in
which a particular judge gave them deliverance; but from the period of
the preceding deliverance, e.g.: It is said that Othniel, son of Kenaz,
defeated Cushan-rishathaim, [Jdg 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009),
and the land had rest forty years. After the death of Othniel the
Israelites again did wickedly, and God delivered them into the hands of
the Moabites, Ammonites, and Amalekites; and this oppression continued
eighteen years; [Jdg 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#014). Then God
raised up Ehud, who, by killing Eglon, king of Moab, and gaining a great
victory over the Moabites, in which he slew ten thousand of their best
soldiers, obtained a rest for the land which lasted forty years: [Jdg
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015), [Jdg
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#030); which rest is not counted from
this deliverance wrought by Ehud, but from that wrought by Othniel,
mentioned above; leaving out the eighteen years of oppression under
Eglon king of Moab: and so of the rest. This is a most violent manner of
settling chronological difficulties, a total perversion of the ordinary
meaning of terms, and not likely to be intended by the writer of this
book.

Sir John Marsham, aware of this difficulty, has struck out a new
hypothesis: he supposes that there were judges on each side Jordan; and
that there were particular wars in which those beyond Jordan had no
part. He observes, that from the exodus to the building of Solomon's
temple was four hundred and eighty years, which is precisely the time
mentioned in the sacred writings; ([Kg1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001)); and that from the time in which
the Israelites occupied the land beyond Jordan, to the days of Jephthah,
was three hundred years. But in reckoning up the years of the judges,
from the death of Moses to the time of Ibzan, who succeeded Jephthah,
there appears to be more than three hundred years; and from Jephthah to
the fourth year of Solomon, in which the foundation of the temple was
laid, there are again more than one hundred and fifty years; we must,
therefore, either find out some method of reconciling these differences,
or else abandon these epochs; but as the latter cannot be done, we must
have recourse to some plan of modification. Sir John Marsham's plan is
of this kind; the common plan is that of Archbishop Usher. I shall
produce them both, and let the reader choose for himself.

Who the author of the Book of Judges was, is not known; some suppose
that each judge wrote his own history, and that the book has been
compiled from those separate accounts; which is very unlikely. Others
ascribe it to Phinehas, to Samuel, to Hezekiah, and some to Ezra. But it
is evident that it was the work of an individual, and of a person who
lived posterior to the time of the judges, (see [Jdg
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#010), etc.), and most probably of
Samuel.

The duration of the government of the Israelites by judges, from the
death of Joshua to the commencement of the reign of Saul, was about
three hundred and thirty-nine years. But as this book does not include
the government of Eli, nor that of Samuel, but ends with the death of
Samson, which occurred in A.M. 2887; consequently, it includes only
three hundred and seventeen years; but the manner in which these are
reckoned is very different, as we have seen above; and as will be more
particularly evident in the following tables by Archbishop Usher and Sir
John Marsham.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 1](jdg001)

</div>
