<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg014)  [Next](jdg016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 15:0</span></span>

Samson, going to visit his wife, finds her bestowed on another, [Jdg
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001), [Jdg
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#002). He is incensed, vows revenge,
and burns the corn of the Philistines, [Jdg
15:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#003). They burn Samson's wife and
her father, [Jdg 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#006). He is still
incensed, makes a great slaughter among them, [Jdg
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#007), [Jdg
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#008). The Philistines gather together
against Israel, and to appease them the men of Judah bind Samson, and
deliver him into their hands, [Jdg
15:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#009). The Spirit of the Lord comes
upon him; he breaks his bonds, finds the jaw-bone of an ass, and
therewith kills a thousand men, [Jdg
15:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#014). He is sorely fatigued; and,
being thirsty, God miraculously produces water from an opening of the
ground in Lehi, and he is refreshed, [Jdg
15:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#017). He judges Israel in the time
of the Philistines twenty years, [Jdg
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#020).

[Judges 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 15:1</span></span>

Visited his wife with a kid - On her betraying him, he had, no doubt,
left her in great disgust. After some time his affection appears to have
returned; and, taking a kid, or perhaps a fawn, as a present, he goes to
make reconciliation, and finds her given to his brideman; probably, the
person to whom she betrayed his riddle.

[Judges 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 15:2</span></span>

Thou hadst utterly hated her - As he was conscious she had given him
great cause so to do.

Her younger sister - The father appears to have been perfectly sincere
in this offer.

[Judges 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 15:4</span></span>

Went and caught three hundred foxes - There has been much controversy
concerning the meaning of the term שועלים shualim, some supposing it to
mean foxes or jackals, and others handfuls or sheaves of corn. Much of
the force of the objections against the common version will be
diminished by the following considerations: -

1\. Foxes, or jackals, are common and gregarious in that country.

2\. It is not hinted that Samson collected them alone; he might have
employed several hands in this work.

3\. It is not said he collected them all in one day; he might have
employed several days, as well as many persons, to furnish him with
these means of vengeance.

4\. In other countries, where ferocious beasts were less numerous, great
multitudes have been exhibited at once.

Sylla, in a public show to the Roman citizens, exhibited one hundred
lions; Caesar, four hundred, and Pompey, nearly six hundred. The Emperor
Probus let loose in the theater, at one time, one thousand ostriches,
one thousand stags, one thousand wild boars, one thousand does, and a
countless multitude of other wild animals; at another time he exhibited
one hundred leopards from Libya, one hundred from Syria, and three
hundred bears. - See Flavius Vopiscus in the Life of Probus, cap. xix.,
beginning with Dedit Romanis etiam voluptates, etc.

That foxes, or the creature called shual, abounded in Judea, is evident
from their frequent mention in Scripture, and from several places
bearing their name. It appears they were so numerous that even their
cubs ruined the vineyards; see [Sol
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#015) : Take us the foxes, the little
foxes, that spoil our vines. Jeremiah complains that the foxes had
occupied the mountains of Judea, [Lam
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#018). They are mentioned as making
incursions into enclosures, etc., [Neh
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#003). Ezekiel compares the numerous
false prophets to these animals, [Eze
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#004). In [Jos
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#028) we find a place called Hazar
Shual, "the court of the foxes:" and in [Jos
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#042) a place called Shaal-abbin, "the
foxes;" no doubt from the number of those animals in that district. And
mention is made of the land of Shual, or of the fox, [Sa1
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#017).

The creature called shual is represented by travelers and naturalists
who have been in Judea as an animal between a wolf and a fox.
Hasselquist, who was on the spot, and saw many of them, calls it the
little Eastern fox. They are frequent in the East, and often destroy
infirm persons and children.

Dr. Kennicott, however, objects to the common interpretation; and gives
reasons, some of which are far from being destitute of weight. "The
three hundred foxes," says he, "caught by Samson, have been so
frequently the subject of banter and ridicule, that we should consider
whether the words may not admit a more rational interpretation: for,
besides the improbability arising here from the number of these foxes,
the use made of them is also very strange. If these animals were tied
tail to tail, they would probably pull contrary ways, and consequently
stand still; whereas a firebrand tied to the tail of each fox singly
would have been far more likely to answer the purpose here intended. To
obviate these difficulties it has been well remarked, that the word
שועלים shualim, here translated foxes, signifies also handfuls, [Eze
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#019), handfuls of barley; if we leave
out that one letter ו vau, which has been inserted or omitted elsewhere,
almost at pleasure. No less than seven Hebrew MSS. want that letter
here, and read שעלים shealim. Admitting this version, we see that Samson
took three hundred handfuls or sheaves of corn, and one hundred and
fifty firebrands; that he turned the sheaves end to end, and put a
firebrand between the two ends in the midst; and then, setting the
brands on fire, sent the fire into the standing corn of the Philistines.
The same word is now used twice in one chapter, ([Eze
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#004), [Eze
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#019)); in the former verse signifying
foxes, in the latter handfuls: and in [Kg1
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#010), where we render it handfuls, it
is αλωπεξι, foxes, in the Greek version." - Remarks on Select Passages.

The reasoning of Dr. Kennicott in the first part of this criticism has
already been answered; other parts shall be considered below. Though
there are seven MSS., which agree in the reading contended for by Dr.
Kennicott, yet all the versions are on the other side. I see no
improbability in the common version.

Turned tail to tail - Had he put a firebrand to each, which Dr.
Kennicott thinks more reasonable, the creature, naturally terrified at
fire, would have instantly taken to cover, and thus the design of Samson
would have been frustrated. But, tying two of them together by their
tails, they would frequently thwart each other in running, pull hither
and thither, and thus make the greater devastation. Had he tied them all
together, the confusion would have been so great that no execution could
have been done.

[Judges 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 15:6</span></span>

Burnt her and her father - This was probably done to appease Samson: as
they saw he had been unjustly treated both by his wife and her father;
therefore they destroyed them both, that they might cause his wrath to
cease from them. And this indeed seems intimated in the following verse:
And Samson said - Though ye have done this, yet will I be avenged of
you; that is, I am not yet satisfied: ye have done me great wrongs, I
must have proportionate redress; then I shall rest satisfied.

[Judges 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 15:8</span></span>

He smote them hip and thigh - This also is variously understood; but the
general meaning seems plain; he appears to have had no kind of defensive
weapon, therefore he was obliged to grapple with them, and, according to
the custom of wrestlers, trip up their feet, and then bruise them to
death. Some translate heaps upon heaps; others, he smote horsemen and
footmen; others, he wounded them from their legs to their thighs, etc.,
etc. See the different versions. Some think in their running away from
him he kicked them down, and then trod them to death: thus his leg or
thigh was against their hip; hence the expression.

The top of the rock Etam - It is very likely that this is the same place
as that mentioned [Ch1 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#032); it was in
the tribe of Simeon, and on the borders of Dan, and probably a fortified
place.

[Judges 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 15:10</span></span>

To bind Samson are we come up - It seems they did not wish to come to an
open rupture with the Israelites, provided they would deliver up him who
was the cause of their disasters.

[Judges 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 15:11</span></span>

Three thousand men of Judah went - It appears evidently from this that
Samson was strongly posted, and they thought that no less than three
thousand men were necessary to reduce him.

[Judges 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 15:12</span></span>

That ye will not fall upon me yourselves - He could not bear the thought
of contending with and slaying his own countrymen; for there is no doubt
that he could have as easily rescued himself from their hands as from
those of the Philistines.

[Judges 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 15:13</span></span>

They bound him with two new cords - Probably his hands with one and his
legs with the other.

[Judges 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 15:14</span></span>

When he came unto Lehi - This was the name of the place to which they
brought him, either to put him to death, or keep him in perpetual
confinement.

Shouted against him - His capture was a matter of public rejoicing.

[Judges 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 15:15</span></span>

He found a new jaw-bone of an ass - I rather think that the word טריה
teriyah, which we translate new, and the margin moist, should be
understood as signifying the tabia or putrid state of the ass from which
this jawbone was taken. He found there a dead ass in a state of
putrefaction; on which account he could the more easily separate the jaw
from its integuments; this was a circumstance proper to be recorded by
the historian, and a mark of the providence of God. But were we to
understand it of a fresh jaw-bone, very lately separated from the head
of an ass, the circumstance does not seem worthy of being recorded.

With the jaw-bore of an ass, heaps upon heaps - I cannot see the
propriety of this rendering of the Hebrew words בלחי החמור חמור חמרתים
bilchi hachamor, chemor chamorathayim; I believe they should be
translated thus: -

"With the jaw-bone of this ass, an ass (the foal) of two asses;

"With the jaw-bone of this ass I have slain a thousand men."

This appears to have been a triumphal song on the occasion; and the
words are variously rendered both by the versions, and by expositors.

[Judges 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 15:17</span></span>

Ramath-lehi - The lifting up or casting away of the jaw-bone. Lehi was
the name of the place before, Ramath was now added to it here; he lifted
up the jaw-bone against his enemies, and slew them.

[Judges 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 15:18</span></span>

I die for thirst - The natural consequence of the excessive fatigue he
had gone through in this encounter.

[Judges 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 15:19</span></span>

God clave a hollow place that was in the jaw - אשר בלחי asher ballechi,
that was in Lehi; that is, there was a hollow place in this Lehi, and
God caused a fountain to spring up in it. Because the place was hollow
it was capable of containing the water that rose up in it, and thus of
becoming a well.

En-hakkore - The well of the implorer; this name he gave to the spot
where the water rose, in order to perpetuate the bounty of God in
affording him this miraculous supply.

Which is in Lehi unto this day - Consequently not In the jaw-bone of the
ass, a most unfortunate rendering.

[Judges 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 15:20</span></span>

He judged Israel - twenty years - In the margin it is said, He seems to
have judged southwest Israel during twenty years of their servitude of
the Philistines, [Jdg 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001). Instead of
עשרים שנה esrim shanah, twenty years, the Jerusalem Talmud has ארבעים
שנה arbaim shanah, forty years; but this reading is not acknowledged by
any MS. or version. According to Calmet, the twenty years of the
judicature of Samson began the eighteenth year of the subjection of
Israel to the Philistines; and these twenty years are included in the
judicature of the high priest Eli.

The burning of the Philistines' corn by the means of foxes and
firebrands is a very remarkable circumstance; and there is a story told
by Ovid, in the 4th book of his Fasti, that bears a striking similitude
to this; and is supposed by some learned men to allude to Samson and his
foxes. The poet is at a loss to account for this custom, but brings in
an old man of Carseoli, with what must have appeared to himself a very
unsatisfactory solution. The passage begins as follows: -

Tertia post Hyadas cum luxerit orta, remotas,

Carcere partitos Circus habebit equos

Cur igitur missae vinctis ardentia taedis

Terga ferant vulpes, causa docenda mihi?

Vid. Ovid, Fastor. lib. iv., ver. 679.

The substance of the whole account, which is too long to be transcribed,
is this: It was a custom in Rome, celebrated in the month of April to
let loose a number of foxes in the circus, with lighted flambeaux on
their backs; and the Roman people took pleasure in seeing these animals
run about till roasted to death by the flames with which they were
enveloped. The poet wishes to know what the origin of this custom was,
and is thus informed by an old man of the city of Carseoli: "A
frolicksome young lad, about ten years of age, found, near a thicket, a
fox that had stolen away many fowls from the neighboring roosts. Having
enveloped his body with hay and straw, he set it on fire, and let the
fox loose. The animal, in order to avoid the flames, took to the
standing corn which was then ready for the sickle; and the wind, driving
the flames with double violence, the crops were everywhere consumed.
Though this transaction is long since gone by, the commemoration of it
still remains; for, by a law of this city, every fox that is taken is
burnt to death. Thus the nation awards to the foxes the punishment of
being burnt alive, for the destruction of the ripe corn formerly
occasioned by one of these animals."

Both Serrarius and Bochart reject this origin of the custom given by
Ovid; and insist that the custom took its rise from the burning of the
Philistines' corn by Samson's foxes. The origin ascribed to the custom
by the Carseolian they consider as too frivolous and unimportant to be
commemorated by a national festival. The time of the observation does
not accord with the time of harvest about Rome and in Italy, but it
perfectly accords with the time of harvest in Palestine, which was at
least as early as April. Nor does the circumstance of the fox wrapped in
hay and let loose, the hay being set on fire, bear any proper
resemblance to the foxes let loose in the circus with burning brands on
their backs.

These learned men therefore conclude that it is much more natural to
suppose that the Romans derived the custom from Judea, where probably
the burning of the Philistines' corn might, for some time, have been
annually commemorated.

The whole account is certainly very singular, and has not a very
satisfactory solution in the old man's tale, as related by the Roman
poet.

All public institutions have had their origin in facts; and if, through
the lapse of time or loss of records, the original facts be lost, we may
legitimately look for them in cases where there is so near a resemblance
as in that above.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 16](jdg016)

</div>
