<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg018)  [Next](jdg020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 19:0</span></span>

A Levite and his concubine disagree; and she leaves him and goes to her
father's house, [Jdg 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001), [Jdg
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#002). He follows to bring her back,
and is kindly entertained by her father five days, [Jdg
19:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#003). He returns; and lodges the
first night at Gibeah, in the tribe of Benjamin, [Jdg
19:9-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#009). The men of Gibeah attack the
house, and insist on abusing the body of the Levite; who, to save
himself, delivers to them his concubine, whose life falls a victim to
their brutality, [Jdg 19:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#022). The
Levite divides her dead body into twelve pieces, and sends one to each
of the twelve tribes; they are struck with horror, and call a council on
the subject, [Jdg 19:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#028).

[Judges 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 19:1</span></span>

There was no king in Israel - All sorts of disorders are attributed to
the want of civil government; justice, right, truth, and humanity, had
fallen in the streets.

Took to him a concubine - We have already seen that the concubine was a
sort of secondary wife; and that such connections were not disreputable,
being according to the general custom of those times. The word פילגש
pilegesh, concubine, is supposed by Mr. Parkhurst to be compounded of
פלג palag, "to divide, or share;" and נגש nagash, "to approach;" because
the husband shared or divided his attention and affections between her
and the real wife; from whom she differed in nothing material, except in
her posterity not inheriting.

[Judges 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 19:2</span></span>

Played the whore - Neither the Vulgate, Septuagint, Targum, nor
Josephus, understand this word as implying any act of conjugal
infidelity on the woman's part. They merely state that the parties
disagreed, and the woman returned to her father's house. Indeed all the
circumstances of the case vindicate this view of the subject. If she had
been a whore, or adulteress, it is not very likely that her husband
would have gone after her to speak friendly, literally, to speak to her
heart, and entreat her to return. The Vulgate simply states, quae
reliquit eum, that she left him; the Septuagint, ωργισθη αυτῳ, that she
was angry with him; the Targum ובסרת עלוהי ubserath alohi, that she
despised him; Josephus, αλλοτοιως ειχε, that she was alienated, or
separated herself, from him. Houbigant translates the clause: quae cum
ab eo alienata esset, vel irata in eum esset, eum reliquit; "who when
she was alienated from him, or angry with him, left him;" and he defends
this version in his note. I think the true meaning to be among the above
interpretations. They had contentions; she ceased to love him, her
affections were alienated from him; and she left his house, and went
home to her father.

[Judges 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 19:3</span></span>

He rejoiced to meet him - He hoped to be able completely to reconcile
his daughter and her husband.

[Judges 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 19:8</span></span>

And they tarried until afternoon - Merely that they might avoid the heat
of the day, which would have been very inconvenient in travelling.

[Judges 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 19:9</span></span>

The day groweth to an end - חנות היום chanoth haiyom, "the day is about
to pitch its tent;" that is, it was near the time in which travelers
ordinarily pitched their tents, to take up their lodging for the night.

[Judges 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 19:11</span></span>

When they were by Jebus - This was Jerusalem, in which, though after the
death of Joshua it appears to have been partly conquered by the tribe of
Judah, yet the Jebusites kept the strong hold of Zion till the days of
David, by whom they were finally expelled. See the note on [Jdg
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008).

[Judges 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 19:15</span></span>

No man - took them into his house to lodging - There was probably no inn
or house of public entertainment in this place, and therefore they could
not have a lodging unless furnished by mere hospitality. To say that
there were no inns in those primitive times, is not true; there were
such places, though not very frequent. Joseph's brethren found their
money in their sacks when they loosed them at an inn, [Gen
42:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#027). The house of Rahab was an inn,
[Jos 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001). And the woman whose house
Samson frequented at Gaza was a hostess, or one who kept a place of
public entertainment.

[Judges 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 19:19</span></span>

There is both straw and provender for our asses - In the countries
principally devoted to pasturage, there was no hay; but as they raised
some corn, they took great care of their straw, chopped it very small,
and having mixed it with barley, beans, or the pounded kernels of dates,
made it into balls, and fed their cattle with it. Straw, cut into what
is called chaff, is not unfrequently used in England for the same
purpose.

[Judges 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 19:20</span></span>

All thy wants lie upon me - Here was genuine hospitality: "Keep your
bread and wine for yourselves, and your straw and provender for your
asses; you may need them before you finish your journey; I will supply
all your wants for this night, therefore do not lodge in the street."

[Judges 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 19:22</span></span>

Sons of Belial - Profligate fellows. See the notes on [Deu
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#013).

That we may know him - See [Gen 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#005).
These were genuine sodomites as to their practice; sons of Belial,
rascals and miscreants of the deepest dye; worse than brutes, being a
compound of beast and devil inseparably blended.

[Judges 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 19:24</span></span>

Here is my daughter, a maiden - Such a proposal was made by Lot to the
men of Sodom, [Gen 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#008), but nothing
can excuse either. That the rights of hospitality were sacred in the
East, and most highly regarded we know; and that a man would defend, at
the expense of his life, the stranger whom he had admitted under his
roof, is true; but how a father could make such a proposal relative to
his virgin daughter, must remain among those things which are
incomprehensible.

[Judges 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 19:25</span></span>

So the man took his concubine - The word יחזק yachazek, which we here
translate simply took, signifies rather to take or seize by violence.
The woman would not go out to them; but her graceless husband forced her
to go, in order that he might save his own body. He could have but
little love for her, and this was the cause of their separation before.
The men of Gibeah who wished to abuse the body of the Levite; the Levite
who wished to save his body at the expense of the modesty, reputation,
and life of his wife; and the old man who wished to save his guest at
the expense of the violation of his daughter; are all characters that
humanity and modesty wish to be buried in everlasting oblivion.

When the day began to spring - Their turpitude could not bear the full
light of the day; and they dismissed the poor woman when the day began
to break.

[Judges 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 19:26</span></span>

Fell down at the door - She had strength to reach the door, but not to
knock for admittance: when she reached the door she fell down dead! The
reason of this abominable and horrid catastrophe is strongly signified
by the original words, [Jdg 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#025) :
וידעו אותה ויתעללו בה כל הלילה vaiyedu othah, vaiyithallelu bah col
hallailah, which we modestly translate, and they knew her, and they
abused her all the night. More literally, but still not fully: Illi cum
ea rem habuerunt, et alternatim in eam tota nocte ascenderunt. The
hithpahel used here in the verb עלל greatly increases the sense:
Conjugatio hithpahel frequentiam actus et immanem libidinem designat.
The Arabic is not too strong; the following is its meaning: Exercuerunt
in ea cupiditates suas, et maechati, sunt in ea ad matutinum usque.

[Judges 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 19:29</span></span>

Divided her - into twelve pieces - There is no doubt that with the
pieces he sent to each tribe a circumstantial account of the barbarity
of the men of Gibeah; and it is very likely that they considered each of
the pieces as expressing an execration, "If ye will not come and avenge
my wrongs, may ye be hewn in pieces like this abused and murdered
woman!" It was a custom among the ancient Highlanders in Scotland, when
one clan wished to call all the rest to avenge its wrongs, to take a
wooden cross, dip it in blood, and send it by a special messenger
through all the clans. This was called the fire cross, because at sight
of it each clan lighted a fire or beacon, which gave notice to all the
adjoining clans that a general rising was immediately to take place.

[Judges 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 19:30</span></span>

There was no such deed done nor seen - They were all struck with the
enormity of the crime; and considered it a sovereign disgrace to all the
tribes of Israel.

Consider of it - Literally, Put it to yourselves; take counsel upon it;
and speak. This was the prelude to the council held, and the subsequent
operations, which are mentioned in the following chapter.

I Have passed over the abominable transactions of this chapter as
lightly as I could, and shall make no apology to the learned or
unlearned reader for leaving some things untranslated.

What a blessing are wholesome laws, and a vigorous and attentive
magistracy! These wretched people had no form of government, and every
one did what was right in his own eyes: their own eye (corrupt
inclination) was the measure and rule of their conduct; and how bad a
rule, the abuse and murder of the Levite's wife testify. Reader, bless
God for a civil government.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 20](jdg020)

</div>
