<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer012)  [Next](jer014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 13:0</span></span>

This chapter contains an entire prophecy. The symbol of the linen
girdle, left to rot for a considerable time, was a type of the manner in
which the glory of the Jews should be marred during the course of their
long captivity, [Jer 13:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#001). The
scene of hiding the girdle being laid near the Euphrates, intimated that
the scene of the nation's distress should be Chaldea, which that river
waters. The next three verses, by another emblem frequently used to
represent the judgments of God, are designed to show that the calamities
threatened should be extended to every rank and denomination, [Jer
13:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#012). This leads the prophet to a
most affectionate exhortation to repentance, [Jer
13:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#015). But God, knowing that this
happy consequence would not ensue, sends him with an awful message to
the royal family particularly, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem in
general, declaring the approaching judgments in plain terms, [Jer
13:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#018). The ardent desire for the
reformation of Jerusalem, with which the chapter concludes, beautifully
displays the compassion and tender mercy of God.

[Jeremiah 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 13:1</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord unto me - This discourse is supposed to have been
delivered under the reign of Jeconiah, the son and successor of
Jehoiakim, who came to the throne in the eighteenth year of his age;
when the Chaldean generals had encamped near to Jerusalem, but did not
besiege it in form till Nebuchadnezzar came up with the great body of
the army. In these circumstances the prophet predicts the captivity;
and, by a symbolical representation of a rotten girdle, shows the people
their totally corrupt state; and by another of bottles filled with wine,
shows the destruction and madness of their counsels, and the confusion
that must ensue.

Go and get thee a linen girdle - This was either a vision, or God simply
describes the thing in order that the prophet might use it in the way of
illustration.

Put it not in water - After having worn it, let it not be washed, that
it may more properly represent the uncleanness of the Israelites; for
they were represented by the girdle; for "as the girdle cleaveth to the
loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of
Israel, and the whole house of Judah." And as a girdle is as well for
ornament as use; God took them for a name, and for a praise, and for a
glory, [Jer 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#011).

[Jeremiah 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 13:4</span></span>

Go to Euphrates, and hide it there - Intending to point out, by this
distant place, the country into which they were to be carried away
captive.

[Jeremiah 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 13:7</span></span>

And behold, the girdle was marred; it was profitable for nothing - This
symbolically represented the state of the Jews: they were corrupt and
abominable; and God, by sending them into captivity, "marred the pride
of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem," [Jer
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#009).

[Jeremiah 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 13:12</span></span>

Every bottle shall be filled with wine? - The bottles were made for the
purpose of being filled with wine; and it is likely, from the promising
appearance of the season and the grapes, that there was a great
likelihood of a copious vintage; and this made them say, "Do we not
certainly know that every bottle shall be filled with wine? Have we not
every prospect that it will be so? Do we need a revelation to inform us
of this?"

[Jeremiah 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 13:13</span></span>

Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land - with drunkenness
- You pretend to take this literally, but it is a symbol. You, and your
kings, and priests, and prophets, are represented by these bottles. The
wine is God's wrath against you, which shall first be shown by
confounding your deliberations, filling you with foolish plans of
defense, causing you from your divided counsels to fall out among
yourselves, so that like so many drunken men you shall reel about and
jostle each other; defend yourselves without plan, and fight without
order, till ye all fall an easy prey into the hands of your enemies. The
ancient adage is here fulfilled: -

Quos Deus vult perdere, prius dementat.

"Those whom God determines to destroy, he first renders foolish."

[Jeremiah 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 13:16</span></span>

Give glory to - God - Confess your sins and turn to him, that these sore
evils may be averted.

While ye look for light - While ye expect prosperity, he turned it into
the shadow of death - sent you adversity of the most distressing and
ruinous kind.

Stumble upon the dark mountains - Before you meet with those great
obstacles, which, having no light - no proper understanding in the
matter, ye shall be utterly unable to surmount.

[Jeremiah 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 13:17</span></span>

My soul shalt weep in secret places - If you will not hearken to the
Lord, there is no remedy: destruction must come; and there is nothing
left for me, but to go in secret, and mourn and bewail your wretched
lot.

[Jeremiah 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 13:18</span></span>

Say unto the king and to the queen - Probably Jeconiah and his mother,
under whose tutelage, being young when he began to reign, he was left,
as is very likely.

Sit down - Show that ye have humbled yourselves; for your state will be
destroyed, and your glorious crown taken from your heads.

[Jeremiah 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 13:19</span></span>

The cities of the south shall be shut up - Not only the cities of the
north, the quarter at which the Chaldeans entered, but the cities of the
south also; for he shall proceed from one extremity of the land to the
other, spreading devastation every where, and carrying off the
inhabitants.

[Jeremiah 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 13:20</span></span>

Where is the flock - thy beautiful flock? - Jerusalem is addressed.
Where are the prosperous multitudes of men, women, and children? Alas!
are they not driven before the Babylonians, who have taken them captive?

[Jeremiah 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 13:21</span></span>

Thou hast taught them to be captains, and as chief over thee - This is
said of their enemies, whether Assyrians or Chaldeans: for ever since
Ahaz submitted himself to the king of Assyria, the kings of Judah never
regained their independence. Their enemies were thus taught to be their
lords and masters.

[Jeremiah 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 13:22</span></span>

Are thy skirts discovered - Thy defenseless state is every where known;
thou art not only weak, but ignominiously so. It is thy scandal to be in
so depressed a condition; thou art lower than the basest of thy
adversaries, and thou art so because of thy sin.

[Jeremiah 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 13:23</span></span>

Can the Ethiopian change his skin - Can a black, at his own pleasure,
change the color of his skin? Can the leopard at will change the variety
of his spots? These things are natural to them, and they cannot be
altered; so sin, and especially your attachment to idolatry, is become a
second nature; and we may as well expect the Ethiopian to change his
skin, and the leopard his spots, as you to do good, who have been
accustomed to do evil. It is a matter of the utmost difficulty to get a
sinner, deeply rooted in vicious habits, brought to the knowledge of
himself and God. But the expression does not imply that the thing is as
impossible in a moral as it is in a natural sense: it only shows that it
is extremely difficult, and not to be often expected; and a thousand
matters of fact prove the truth of this. But still, what is impossible
to man is possible to God. See the note on [Jer
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027).

[Jeremiah 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 13:24</span></span>

The wind of the wilderness - Some strong tempestuous wind, proverbially
severe, coming from the desert to the south of Judea.

[Jeremiah 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 13:25</span></span>

Trusted in falsehood - In idols, and in lying prophets.

[Jeremiah 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 13:26</span></span>

Therefore will I discover thy skirts upon thy face - It was the custom
to punish lewd women by stripping them naked, and exposing them to
public view; or by throwing their clothes over their heads, as here
intimated. Was this the way to correct the evil?

[Jeremiah 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 13:27</span></span>

I have seen thine adulteries - Thy idolatries of different kinds,
practiced in various ways; no doubt often accompanied with gross
debauchery.

Wo unto thee, O Jerusalem wilt thou not be made clean? - We see from
this, that though the thing was difficult, yet it was not impossible,
for these Ethiopians to change their skin, for these leopards to change
their spots. It was only their obstinate refusal of the grace of God
that rendered it impossible. Man cannot change himself; but he may pray
to God to do it, and come to him through Christ, that he may do it. To
enable him to pray and believe, the power is still at hand. If he will
not use it, he must perish.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 14](jer014)

</div>
