<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer000)  [Next](jer002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

General title to the whole Book, [Jer
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001). Jeremiah receives a commission
to prophesy concerning nations and kingdoms, a work to which in the
Divine purpose he had been appointed before his birth, [Jer
1:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#004). The vision of the rod of an
almond tree and of the seething pot, with their signification, [Jer
1:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011). Promises of Divine protection
to Jeremiah in the discharge of the arduous duties of his prophetical
office, [Jer 1:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#017).

[Jeremiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 1:1</span></span>

The words of Jeremiah - These three verses are the title of the Book;
and were probably added by Ezra when he collected and arranged the
sacred books, and put them in that order in which they are found in
Hebrew Bibles in general. For particulars relative to this prophet, the
times of his prophesying, and the arrangement of his discourses, see the
introduction.

Eleventh year of Zedekiah - That is, the last year of his reign; for he
was made prisoner by the Chaldeans in the fourth month of that year, and
the carrying away of the inhabitants of Jerusalem was in the fifth month
of the same year.

[Jeremiah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 1:4</span></span>

The word of the Lord came unto me - Then I first felt the inspiring
influence of the Divine Spirit, not only revealing to me the subjects
which he would have me to declare to the people, but also the words
which I should use in these declarations.

[Jeremiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 1:5</span></span>

Before I formed thee - I had destined thee to the prophetic office
before thou wert born: I had formed my plan, and appointed thee to be my
envoy to his people. St. Paul speaks of his own call to preach the
Gospel to the Gentiles in similar terms, [Gal
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015), [Gal
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016).

[Jeremiah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 1:6</span></span>

I cannot speak - Being very young, and wholly inexperienced, I am
utterly incapable of conceiving aright, or of clothing these Divine
subjects in suitable language. Those who are really called of God to the
sacred ministry are such as have been brought to a deep acquaintance
with themselves, feel their own ignorance, and know their own weakness.
They know also the awful responsibility that attaches to the work; and
nothing but the authority of God can induce such to undertake it. They
whom God never called run, because of worldly honor and emolument: the
others hear the call with fear and trembling, and can go only in the
strength of Jehovah.

"How ready is the man to go,

Whom God hath never sent!

How timorous, diffident, and slow,

God's chosen instrument!"

[Jeremiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 1:7</span></span>

Whatsoever I command thee - It is my words and message, not thine own,
that thou shalt deliver. I shall teach thee; therefore thy youth and
inexperience can be no hinderance.

[Jeremiah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 1:8</span></span>

Be not afraid of their faces - That is, the Jews, whom he knew would
persecute him because of the message which he brought. To be fore-warned
is to be half armed. He knew what he was to expect from the disobedient
and the rebellious, and must now be prepared to meet it.

[Jeremiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 1:10</span></span>

I have - set thee over the nations - God represents his messengers the
prophets as doing what he commanded them to declare should be done. In
this sense they rooted up, pulled down, and destroyed - declared God's
judgments, they builder up and planted - declared the promises of his
mercy. Thus God says to Isaiah, [Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010) : "Make the heart of this people
fat - and shut their eyes." Show them that they are stupid and blind;
and that, because they have shut their eyes and hardened their hearts,
God will in his judgments leave them to their hardness and darkness.

[Jeremiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 1:11</span></span>

A rod of an almond tree - שקד shaked, from שקד shakad, "to be ready,"
"to hasten," "to watch for an opportunity to do a thing," to awake;
because the almond tree is the first to flower and bring forth fruit.
Pliny says, Floret prima omnium amygdala mense Januario; Martio vero
pomum maturat. It blossoms in January, when other trees are locked up in
their winter's repose; and it bears fruit in March, just at the
commencement of spring, when other trees only begin to bud. It was here
the symbol of that promptitude with which God was about to fulfill his
promises and threatening. As a rod, says Dahler, is an instrument of
punishment, the rod of the almond may be intended here as the symbol of
that punishment which the prophet was about to announce.

[Jeremiah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 1:12</span></span>

I will hasten my word - Here is a paronomasia. What dost thou see? I see
שקד shaked, "an almond," the hastening tree: that which first awakes.
Thou hast well seen, for (שקד shoked) I will hasten my word. I will
awake, or watch over my word for the first opportunity to inflict the
judgments which I threaten. The judgment shall come speedily; it shall
soon flourish, and come to maturity.

[Jeremiah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 1:13</span></span>

A seething pot - toward the north - We find, from [Eze
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#003), etc., that a boiling pot was an
emblem of war, and the desolations it produces. Some have thought that
by the seething pot Judea is intended, agitated by the invasion of the
Chaldeans, whose land lay north of Judea. But Dr. Blayney contends that
מפני צפונה mippeney tsaphonah should be translated, From the face of the
north, as it is in the margin; for, from the next verse, it appears that
the evil was to come from the north; and therefore the steam, which was
designed as an emblem of that evil, must have arisen from that quarter
also. The pot denotes the empire of the Babylonians and Chaldeans lying
to the north of Judea, and pouring forth its multitudes like a thick
vapor, to overspread the land. Either of these interpretations will suit
the text.

[Jeremiah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 1:14</span></span>

Shall break forth - תפתח tippathach, shall be opened. The door shall be
thrown abroad, that these calamities may pass out freely.

[Jeremiah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 1:15</span></span>

Shall set every one his throne at the entering of the gates - As the
gates of the cities were the ordinary places where justice was
administered, so the enemies of Jerusalem are here represented as
conquering the whole land, assuming the reins of government, and laying
the whole country under their own laws; so that the Jews should no
longer possess any political power: they should be wholly subjugated by
their enemies.

[Jeremiah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 1:16</span></span>

I will utter my judgments - God denounced his judgments: the conquest of
their cities, and the destruction of the realm, were the facts to which
these judgments referred; and these facts prove that the threatening was
fulfilled.

Worshipped the works of their own hands - Idolatry was the source of all
their wickedness and was the cause of their desolations. For למעשי
lemaasey, the works, more than a hundred MSS. of Kennicott's and De
Rossi's, with many editions, have למעשה lemaaseh, the work. Idolatry was
their One great Work, the business of their life, their trade.

[Jeremiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 1:17</span></span>

Gird up thy loins - Take courage and be ready, lest I confound thee;
take courage and be resolute, פן pen, lest by their opposition thou be
terrified and confounded. God is often represented as doing or causing
to be done, what he only permits or suffers to be done. Or, do not fear
them, I will not suffer thee to be confounded. So Dahler, Ne crains pas
que je te confonde a leurs yeux, "Do not fear that I shall confound thee
before them." It is well known that the phrase, gird up thy reins, is a
metaphor taken from the long robes of the Asiatics; which, on going a
journey, or performing their ordinary work, they were obliged to truss
up under their girdles, that the motions of the body might not be
impeded.

[Jeremiah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 1:18</span></span>

I have made thee this day a defenced city, and an iron pillar, and,
brazen walls - Though thou shalt be exposed to persecutions and various
indignities, they shall not prevail against thee. To their attacks thou
shalt be as an impregnable city; as unshaken as an iron pillar; and as
imperishable as a wall of brass. None, therefore, can have less cause to
apprehend danger than thou hast. The issue proved the truth of this
promise: he outlived all their insults; and saw Jerusalem destroyed, and
his enemies, and the enemies of his Lord, carried into captivity.
Instead of חמות chomoth, walls, many MSS. and editions read חמת chomath,
a wall, which corresponds with the singular nouns preceding.

[Jeremiah 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 1:19</span></span>

They shall not prevail against thee - Because I am determined to defend
and support thee against all thy enemies. One of the ancients has said,
Θεου θελοντος, και επι ῥιπος πλεῃ Σωζῃ· Thestius, apud Theophil. ad
Autolyc. lib. 2: "God protecting thee, though thou wert at sea upon a
twig, thou shouldst be safe."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 2](jer002)

</div>
