<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer047)  [Next](jer049) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 48](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 48:0</span></span>

The following prophecy concerning the Moabites is supposed to have had
its accomplishment during the long siege of Tyre in the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar. The whole of this chapter is poetry of the first order.
The distress of the cities of Moab, with which it opens, is finely
described. The cries of one ruined city resound to those of another,
[Jer 48:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001). The doleful helpless cry
of the children is heard, [Jer 48:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#004);
the highways, on either hand, resound with the voice of weeping, [Jer
48:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#005); and the few that remain resemble
a blasted tree in the wide howling waste, [Jer
48:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#006). Chemosh, the chief god of the
Moabites, and the capital figure in the triumph, is represented as
carried off in chains, with all his trumpery of priests and officers,
[Jer 48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007). The desolation of the
country shall be so general and sudden that, by a strong figure, it is
intimated that there shall be no possibility of escape, except it be in
the speediest flight, [Jer 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#008), [Jer
48:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#009). And some idea may be formed of
the dreadful wickedness of this people from the consideration that the
prophet, under the immediate inspiration of the Almighty, pronounces a
curse on those who do the work of the Lord negligently, in not
proceeding to their utter extermination, [Jer
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#010). The subject is then diversified
by an elegant and well-supported comparison, importing that the Moabites
increased in insolence and pride in proportion to the duration of their
prosperity, [Jer 48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011); but this
prosperity is declared to be nearly at an end; the destroyer is already
commissioned against Moab, and his neighbors called to sing the usual
lamentation at his funeral, [Jer
48:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#013). The prophet then represents
some of the women of Aroer and Ammon, (the extreme borders of Moab),
standing in the highways, and asking the fugitives of Moab, What
intelligence? They inform him of the complete discomfiture of Moab, [Jer
48:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#019), and of the total
annihilation of its political existence, [Jer
48:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#025). The Divine judgments about to
fall upon Moab are farther represented under the expressive metaphor of
a cup of intoxicating liquor, by which he should become an object of
derision because of his intolerable pride, his magnifying himself
against Jehovah, and his great contempt for the children of Israel in
the day of their calamity, [Jer 48:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026),
[Jer 48:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#027). The prophet then points
out the great distress of Moab by a variety of striking figures, viz.,
by the failure of the customary rejoicings at the end of harvest, by the
mournful sort of music used at funerals, by the signs which were
expressive among the ancients of deep mourning, as shaving the head,
clipping the beard, cutting the flesh, and wearing sackcloth; and by the
methods of catching wild beasts in toils, and by the terror and pitfall,
vv. 28-46. In the close of the chapter it is intimated that a remnant
shall be preserved from this general calamity whose descendants shall be
prosperous in the latter days, [Jer
48:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#047).

[Jeremiah 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 48:1</span></span>

Against Moab - This was delivered some time after the destruction of
Jerusalem. The Moabites were in the neighborhood of the Ammonites, and
whatever evils fell on the one would naturally involve the other. See
[Isa 15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001) and [Isa
16:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001) on this same subject.

Wo unto Nebo! for it is spoiled - This was a city in the tribe of
Reuben, afterwards possessed by the Moabites. It probably had its name
from Nebo, one of the principal idols of the Moabites.

Kiriathaim - Another city of the Moabites.

Misgab is confounded - There is no place of this name known, and
therefore several learned men translate המשגב hammisgab, literally, The
high tower, or fortress, which may apply to Kiriathaim, or any other
high and well-fortified place.

[Jeremiah 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 48:2</span></span>

No more praise of Moab - "The glory of Moab, that it had never been
conquered," (Dahler), is now at an end. Dr. Blayney translates: -

"Moab shall have no more glorying in Heshbon; They have devised evil
against her (saying.)"

And this most certainly is the best translation of the original. He has
marked also a double paronomasia in this and the next verse, a figure in
which the prophets delight; בחשבון חשבו becheshbon chashebu "in Cheshbon
they have devised," and מדמן תדמי madmen tiddommi, "Madmena, thou shalt
be dumb."

[Jeremiah 48:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 48:3</span></span>

Horonaim - Another city of Moab, near to Luhith. At this latter place
the hill country of Moab commenced. "It is a place," says Dahler,
"situated upon a height between Areopolis and Zoar."

[Jeremiah 48:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 48:6</span></span>

Flee, save your lives - The enemy is in full pursuit of you.

Be like the heath - כערוער caaroer, "like Aroer;" which some take for a
city, others for a blasted or withered tree. It is supposed that a place
of this name lay towards the north, in the land of the Ammonites, on a
branch of the river Jabbok; surrounded by deserts. Save yourselves by
getting into the wilderness, where the pursuing foe will scarcely think
it worth his while to follow you, as the wilderness itself must soon
destroy you.

[Jeremiah 48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 48:7</span></span>

Chemosh shall go forth into captivity - The grand national idol of the
Moabites, [Num 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#029); [Jdg
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#024). Ancient idolaters used to take
their gods with them to the field of battle. This was probably in
imitation of the Israelites, who took the ark with them in such cases.

[Jeremiah 48:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 48:9</span></span>

Give wings unto Moab - There is no hope in resistance, and to escape
requires the speediest flight. I cannot conceive how Dahler came to
translate thus: Tirez Moab par les chevaux, "Drag Moab away by the hair
of the head."

[Jeremiah 48:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 48:10</span></span>

Cursed be he that doeth the work of the Lord deceitfully - Moab is
doomed to destruction, and the Lord pronounces a curse on their enemies
if they do not proceed to utter extirpation. God is the Author of life,
and has a sovereign right to dispose of it as he pleases; and these had
forfeited theirs long ago by their idolatry and other crimes.

[Jeremiah 48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 48:11</span></span>

Moab hath been at ease - The metaphor here is taken from the mode of
preserving wines. They let them rest upon their lees for a considerable
time, as this improves them both in strength and flavour; and when this
is sufficiently done, they rack, or pour them off into other vessels.
Moab had been very little molested by war since he was a nation; he had
never gone out of his own land. Though some had been carried away by
Shalmaneser forty years before this, he has had neither wars nor
captivity.

Therefore his taste remained in him - Still carrying on the allusion to
the curing of wines; by resting long upon the lees, the taste and smell
are both improved. See the note on [Isa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006).

[Jeremiah 48:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 48:12</span></span>

I will send unto him wanderers that shall cause him to wander - Dr.
Blayney renders צעים tsaim, tilters; those who elevate one end of the
wine cask when nearly run out that the remains of the liquor may be the
more effectually drawn off at the cock. And this seems to be well
supported by the following words, -

And shall empty his vessels - I will send such as will carry the whole
nation into captivity.

[Jeremiah 48:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 48:13</span></span>

Beth-el their confidence - Alluding to the golden calves which Jeroboam
had there set up, and commanded all the Israelites to worship.

[Jeremiah 48:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 48:17</span></span>

How is the strong staff broken - The scepter. The sovereignty of Moab is
destroyed.

[Jeremiah 48:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 48:18</span></span>

That dost inhabit Dibon - This was anciently a city of the Reubenites,
afterwards inhabited by the Moabites, about two leagues north of the
river Arnon, and about six to the east of the Dead Sea. - Dahler.

[Jeremiah 48:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 48:19</span></span>

O inhabitant of Aroer - See the note on [Jer
48:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#006) (note). This place, being at a
greater distance, is counselled to watch for its own safety, and inquire
of every passenger, What is done? that it may know when to pack up and
be gone.

[Jeremiah 48:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 48:20</span></span>

Tell ye it in Arnon - Apprize the inhabitants there that the territories
of Moab are invaded, and the country about to be destroyed, that they
may provide for their own safety.

[Jeremiah 48:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 48:21</span></span>

Upon Holon, etc. - All these were cities of the Moabites, but several of
them are mentioned in no other place.

[Jeremiah 48:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 48:25</span></span>

The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken - His political and
physical powers are no more.

[Jeremiah 48:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 48:27</span></span>

Was not Israel a derision unto thee? - Didst thou not mock my people,
and say their God was no better than the gods of other nations? See [Eze
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#008).

Was he found among thieves? - Did the Israelites come to rob and plunder
you? Why then mock them, and rejoice at their desolation, when their
enemies prevailed over them? This the Lord particularly resents.

[Jeremiah 48:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 48:28</span></span>

Dwell in the rock - Go to the most inaccessible places in the mountains.

The hole's mouth - And into the most secret eaves and holes of the
earth.

[Jeremiah 48:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 48:29</span></span>

The pride of Moab - See on [Isa 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)
(note).

[Jeremiah 48:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 48:32</span></span>

O vine of Sibmah - See on [Isa 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008)
(note).

[Jeremiah 48:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 48:34</span></span>

As a heifer of three years old - Which runs lowing from place to place
in search of her calf, which is lost or taken from her.

[Jeremiah 48:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jer 48:37</span></span>

For every head shall be bald - These, as we have seen before, were signs
of the deepest distress and desolation.

[Jeremiah 48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">jer 48:40</span></span>

He shall fly as an eagle - The enemy will pounce upon him, carry him
off, and tear him to pieces.

[Jeremiah 48:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">jer 48:42</span></span>

Moab shall be destroyed from being a people - They shall not have a king
or civil governor: and I doubt whether there be any evidence that they
were ever reinstated in their national character. They were captivated
by the Chaldeans; and probably many returned with the Jews on the edict
of Cyrus: but as to their being an independent nation after this, where
is the positive proof?

[Jeremiah 48:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">jer 48:43</span></span>

Fear, and the pit, and the snare - See the note on [Isa
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#017), [Isa
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#018).

[Jeremiah 48:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">jer 48:45</span></span>

They that fled stood under the shadow of Heshbon - Heshbon being a
fortified place, they who were worsted in the fight fled to it, and
rallied under its walls; but, instead of safety, they found themselves
disappointed, betrayed, and ruined. See [Jer
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#002) (note), and the note there.

But a fire shall come forth out of Heshbon - Jeremiah has borrowed this
part of his discourse from an ancient poet quoted by Moses, [Num
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#028) (note); where see the notes.

The crown of the head - The choicest persons of the whole nation.

[Jeremiah 48:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">jer 48:46</span></span>

The people of Chemosh - The Moabites, who worshipped Chemosh as their
supreme god.

[Jeremiah 48:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">jer 48:47</span></span>

Will I bring again the captivity of Moab in the latter days - I have
already expressed doubts (see [Jer
48:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#042)) whether the Moabites were ever
restored to their national distinction. The expressions in this chapter,
relative to their total destruction as a people, are so strong and so
frequent, that they leave little room for a limited interpretation. That
many of them returned on the edict of Cyrus by virtue of which the Jews
were restored, I doubt not; but neither the Ammonites, Moabites,
Philistines, nor even the Jews themselves were ever restored to their
national consequence. Perhaps the restoration spoken of here which was
to take place in the latter days, may mean the conversion of these
people, in their existing remnants, to the faith of the Gospel. Several
judicious interpreters are of this opinion. The Moabites were partially
restored; but never, as far as I have been able to learn, to their
national consequence. Their conversion to the Christian faith must be
the main end designed by this prophecy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 49](jer049)

</div>
