<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer003)  [Next](jer005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 4:0</span></span>

Sequel of the exhortations and promises addressed to Israel in the
preceding chapter, [Jer 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001), [Jer
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#002). The prophet then addresses the
people of Judah and Jerusalem, exhorting to repentance and reformation,
that the dreadful visitation with which they were threatened might be
averted, [Jer 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003), [Jer
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004). He then sounds the alarm of war,
[Jer 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005), [Jer
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#006). Nebuchadnezzar, like a fierce
lion, is, from the certainty of the prophecy, represented to be on his
march; and the disastrous event to have been already declared, [Jer
4:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007). And as the lying prophets had
flattered the people with the hopes of peace and safety, they are now
introduced, (when their predictions are falsified by the event),
excusing themselves; and, with matchless effrontery, laying the blame of
the deception upon God, ("And they said," etc., so the text is corrected
by Kennicott), [Jer 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#010). The prophet
immediately resumes his subject; and, in the person of God, denounces
again those judgments which were shortly to be inflicted by
Nebuchadnezzar, [Jer 4:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#011). The
approaching desolation of Jerusalem lamented in language amazingly
energetic and exquisitely tender, [Jer
4:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019). The incorrigible wickedness
of the people the sole cause of these calamities, [Jer
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#022). In the remaining verses the
prophet describes the sad catastrophe of Jerusalem by such a beautiful
assemblage of the most striking and afflictive circumstances as form a
picture of a land "swept with the besom of destruction." The earth seems
ready to return to its original chaos; every ray of light is
extinguished, and succeeded by a frightful gloom; the mountains tremble,
and the hills shake, under the dreadful apprehension of the wrath of
Jehovah; all is one awful solitude, where not a vestige of the human
race is to be seen. Even the fowls of heaven, finding no longer whereon
to subsist, are compelled to migrate; the most fruitful places are
become a dark and dreary desert, and every city is a ruinous heap. To
complete the whole, the dolorous shrieks of Jerusalem, as of a woman in
peculiar agony, break through the frightful gloom; and the appalled
prophet pauses, leaving the reader to reflect on the dreadful effects of
apostasy and idolatry, [Jer 4:23-31](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#023).

[Jeremiah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 4:1</span></span>

Shalt thou not remove - This was spoken before the Babylonish captivity;
and here is a promise that if they will return from their idolatry, they
shall not be led into captivity. So, even that positively threatened
judgment would have been averted had they returned to the Lord.

[Jeremiah 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 4:2</span></span>

Thou shalt swear, The Lord liveth - Thou shalt not bind thyself by any
false god; thou shalt acknowledge Me as the Supreme. Bind thyself By me,
and To me; and do this in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness.

The nations shall bless themselves in him - They shall be so fully
convinced of the power and goodness of Jehovah in seeing the change
wrought on thee, and the mercies heaped upon thee, that their usual mode
of benediction shall be, May the God of Israel bless thee!

[Jeremiah 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 4:3</span></span>

Break up your fallow ground - Fallow ground is either that which, having
been once tilled, has lain long uncultivated; or, ground slightly
ploughed, in order to be ploughed again previously to its being sown. Ye
have been long uncultivated in righteousness; let true repentance break
up your fruitless and hardened hearts; and when the seed of the word of
life is sown in them, take heed that worldly cares and concerns do not
arise, and, like thorns, choke the good seed.

[Jeremiah 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 4:4</span></span>

Circumcise yourselves - Put away every thing that has a tendency to
grieve the Spirit of God, or to render your present holy resolutions
unfruitful.

[Jeremiah 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 4:5</span></span>

Blow ye the trumpet - Give full information to all parts of the land,
that the people may assemble together and defend themselves against
their invaders.

[Jeremiah 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 4:6</span></span>

I will bring evil from the north - From the land of Chaldea.

[Jeremiah 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 4:7</span></span>

The lion is come up - Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon. "The king
(Nebuchadnezzar) is come up from his tower." - Targum.

The destroyer of the Gentiles - Of the nations: of all the people who
resisted his authority. He destroyed them all.

[Jeremiah 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 4:8</span></span>

Lament and howl - הילילו heililu. The aboriginal Irish had a funeral
song called the Caoinian, still continued among their descendants, one
part of which is termed the ulaloo: this is sung responsively or
alternately, and is accompanied with a full chorus of sighs and groans.
It has been thought that Ireland was originally peopled by the
Phoenicians: if so, this will account for the similarity of many words
and customs among both these people.

[Jeremiah 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 4:9</span></span>

The heart of the king shall perish - Shall lose all courage.

[Jeremiah 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 4:10</span></span>

Ah, Lord God! surely thou hast greatly deceived this people - The Targum
paraphrases this verse thus: "And I said, Receive my supplication, O
Lord God; for, behold, the false prophets deceive this people and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall have peace." The prophet
could not reconcile this devastation of the country with the promises
already made; and he appears to ask the question, Hast thou not then
deceived this people in saying there shall be peace, i.e., prosperity?

Whereas the sword reacheth unto the soul - That is, the life; the people
being generally destroyed.

[Jeremiah 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 4:11</span></span>

A dry wind - a fall wind - as clouds - as a whirlwind - All these
expressions appear to refer to the pestilential winds, suffocating
vapors, and clouds and pillars of sand collected by whirlwinds, which
are so common and destructive in the east, (see on [Isa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001) (note)); and these images are
employed here to show the overwhelming effect of the invasion of the
land by the Chaldeans.

[Jeremiah 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 4:13</span></span>

Wo unto us! - The people, deeply affected with these threatened
judgments, interrupt the prophet with the lamentation - Wo unto us, for
we are spoiled! The prophet then resumes: -

[Jeremiah 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 4:14</span></span>

O Jerusalem, wash thine heart - Why do ye not put away your wickedness,
that ye may be saved from these tremendous judgments? How long shall thy
vain thoughts of safety and prosperity lodge within thee? Whilst thou
continuest a rebel against God, and provokest him daily by thy
abominations!

[Jeremiah 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 4:15</span></span>

For a voice declareth from Dan - Dan was a city in the tribe of Dan,
north of Jerusalem; the first city in Palestine, which occurs in the way
from Babylon to Jerusalem.

Affliction from Mount Ephraim - Between Dan and Jerusalem are the
mountains of Ephraim. These would be the first places attacked by the
Chaldeans; and the rumor from thence would show that the land was
invaded.

[Jeremiah 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 4:16</span></span>

Watchers come from a far country - Persons to besiege fortified places.

[Jeremiah 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 4:17</span></span>

As keepers of a field - In the eastern countries grain is often sown in
the open country; and, when nearly ripe, guards are placed at different
distances round about it to preserve it from being plundered. Jerusalem
was watched, like one of these fields, by guards all round about it; so
that none could enter to give assistance, and none who wished to escape
were permitted to go out.

[Jeremiah 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 4:19</span></span>

My bowels - From this to the twenty-ninth verse the prophet describes
the ruin of Jerusalem and the desolation of Judea by the Chaldeans in
language and imagery scarcely paralleled in the whole Bible. At the
sight of misery the bowels are first affected; pain is next felt by a
sort of stricture in the pericardium; and then, the heart becoming
strongly affected by irregular palpitations, a gush of tears,
accompanied with wailings, is the issue. - "My bowels, my bowels! I am
pained at my very heart, (the walls of my heart); my heart maketh a
noise in me; I cannot hold my peace." Here is nature, and fact also.

[Jeremiah 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 4:20</span></span>

Destruction upon destruction - Cities burnt, and their inhabitants
destroyed.

My tents spoiled - Even the solitary dwellings in the fields and open
country do not escape.

[Jeremiah 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 4:23</span></span>

I beheld the earth, (the land), and lo it was without form and void -
תהו ובהו tohu vabohu; the very words used in Genesis to denote the
formless state of the chaotic mass before God had brought it into order.

[Jeremiah 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 4:24</span></span>

The mountains - hills - Princes, rulers, etc., were astonished and fled.

[Jeremiah 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 4:25</span></span>

The birds of the heavens were fled - The land was so desolated that even
the fowls of heaven could not find meat, and therefore fled away to
another region. How powerfully energetic is this description!

See [Zep 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003).

[Jeremiah 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 4:30</span></span>

Though thou rentest thy face with painting - This probably refers to the
custom of introducing stibium a preparation of antimony, between the eye
and the lids, in order to produce a fine lustre, which occasions a
distension of the eye-lid in the time of the operation. In order to
heighten the effect from this some may have introduced a more than
ordinary quantity, so as nearly to rend the eye-lid itself. Though thou
make use of every means of address, of cunning, and of solicitation, to
get assistance from the neighboring states, it will be all in vain.
Reference is here particularly made to the practice of harlots to allure
men.

[Jeremiah 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 4:31</span></span>

Bringeth forth her first child - In such a case the fear, danger, and
pain were naturally the greatest.

Spreadeth her hands - The gesture indicated by nature to signify
distress, and implore help. We have met with this figure in other parts,
and among the classic writers it is frequent.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 5](jer005)

</div>
