<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 John Index](jo2)  
  [Previous](jo2000)  [Next](jo3000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001)

The apostle's address to a Christian matron and her children, [Jo2
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001). He rejoices to find that
certain of her family had received, and continued to adorn, the truth;
and he exhorts them to continue to love one another according to the
commandment of Christ, [Jo2 1:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#004), And
particularly cautions them against deceivers, and to so watch, that they
might not lose the benefit of what they had received, [Jo2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#007), [Jo2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#008). The necessity of abiding in the
doctrine of Christ, [Jo2 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#009). He
cautions them against receiving, or in any way forwarding, those who did
not bring the true doctrine of Christ, [Jo2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010), [Jo2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#011). Excuses himself from writing
more largely, and purposes to pay her and family a visit shortly, [Jo2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#012), [Jo2
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#013).

[2 John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo2 1:1</span></span>

The elder - John the apostle, who was now a very old man, generally
supposed to be about ninety, and therefore he uses the term ὁ
πρεσβυτερος, presbyter or elder, not as the name of an office, but as
designating his advanced age. He is allowed to have been the oldest of
all the apostles, and to have been the only one who died a natural
death.

This title led some of the ancients to attribute this epistle to a
person called John the Presbyter, a member of the Church at Ephesus; and
not to John the apostle. But this is a groundless supposition.

The elect lady - Εκλεκτῃ Κυρια· As Κυρια, kuria, may be the feminine of
Κυριος, kurios, lord, therefore it may signify lady; and so several,
both ancients and moderns, have understood it. But others have
considered it the proper name of a woman, Kyria; and that this is a very
ancient opinion is evident from the Peshito Syriac, the oldest version
we have, which uses it as a proper name koureea, as does also the Arabic
kooreea.

Some have thought that Eclecta was the name of this matron, from the
word εκλεκτη, which we translate elect, and which here signifies the
same as excellent, eminent, honorable, or the like. Others think that a
particular Church is intended, which some suppose to be the Church at
Jerusalem, and that the elect sister, [Jo2
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#013), means the Church at Ephesus; but
these are conjectures which appear to me to have no good ground. I am
satisfied that no metaphor is here intended; that the epistle was sent
to some eminent Christian matron, not far from Ephesus, who was probably
deaconess of the Church, who, it is likely, had a Church at her house,
or at whose house the apostles and traveling evangelists frequently
preached, and were entertained. This will appear more probable in the
course of the notes.

Whom I love in the truth - Whom I love as the Christian religion
requires us to love one another.

And not I only - She was well known in the Churches; many had witnessed
or heard of her fidelity, and partook of her hospitality; so that she
had a good report of all Christians in that quarter.

[2 John 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo2 1:2</span></span>

For the truth's sake - On account of the Gospel.

Which dwelleth in us - By the grace which it has proclaimed.

And shall be with us - For God will preserve not only the Christian
religion but its truth, all its essential doctrines for ever. And they
that abide in the truth shall go whither that truth leads, i.e. to
glory. The Armenian has a strange reading here: "For the truth's sake
which dwelleth in us, because it is also with you; and ye shall be with
us for ever." But this is supported by no other version, nor by any MS.

[2 John 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo2 1:3</span></span>

Grace be with you - This is addressed to her, her household, and
probably that part of the Church which was more immediately under her
care.

The Son of the Father - The apostle still keeps in view the miraculous
conception of Christ; a thing which the Gnostics absolutely denied; a
doctrine which is at the ground work of our salvation.

[2 John 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo2 1:4</span></span>

That I found of thy children walking in truth - I have already supposed
this Christian matron to be mother of a family, probably a widow, for no
mention is made of her husband; and that she was also a deaconess in the
church, and one in those house the traveling evangelists preached, and
there they were entertained. The children mentioned here may either be
her own children, or those members of the Church which were under her
care, or some of both. The apostle was glad to find, probably by an
epistle sent from herself to him, or from the information of some of the
itinerant evangelists, that the work of God was prospering in the place
where she lived, and also in her own household. He does not say that all
were walking in the truth, but εκ των τεκνων, some of her children;
there was a growing and spreading work, and there were many adversaries
who strove to pervert them who had already believed, and perhaps were
successful in drawing several away from their simplicity.

[2 John 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo2 1:5</span></span>

That which we had from the beginning - The commandment to love one
another was what they had heard from the first publication of
Christianity, and what he wishes this excellent woman to inculcate on
all those under her care. The mode of address here shows that it was a
person, not a Church, to which the apostle wrote.

[2 John 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo2 1:6</span></span>

And this is love - That is, our love is shown and proved by our walking
according to the commandments of God; for love is the principle of
obedience.

[2 John 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo2 1:7</span></span>

For many deceivers, etc. - Of these he had spoken before, see [Jo1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001), etc. And these appear to have
been Gnostics, for they denied that Jesus was come in the flesh. And
this doctrine, so essential to salvation, none could deny but a deceiver
and an antichrist. Instead of εισηλθον are entered in, many excellent
MSS. and versions have εξηλθον, are gone out. The sense is nearly the
same.

[2 John 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo2 1:8</span></span>

Look to yourselves - Be on your guard against these seducers; watch,
pray, love God and each other, and walk in newness of life.

That we lose not those things which we have wrought - That we apostles,
who have been the means of your conversion, may not be deprived of you
as our crown of rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Instead of the first person plural, απολεσωμεν, etc., We lose, etc.,
many MSS., versions, and fathers, read the whole clause in the second
person plural, απολεσητε, Ye lose, etc. Take heed to yourselves that Ye
lose not the things which Ye have wrought, but that Ye receive a full
reward. This reading is more consistent and likely, and is supported by
at least as good evidence as the other. We find that if these persons
did not keep on their guard they might lose their salvation, and the
apostles their rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus. Even this
intimation might put them on their guard. Had the apostle said ye cannot
finally fall, what a different effect would it have produced! Griesbach
has placed these readings in the margin as being very probable.

[2 John 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo2 1:9</span></span>

Whosoever transgresseth - Παραβαινων· He who passes over the sacred
enclosure, or goes beyond the prescribed limits; and abideth not in the
doctrine - does not remain within these holy limits, but indulges
himself either in excesses of action or passion; hath not God for his
Father, nor the love of God in his heart.

Hath both the father and the Son - He who abideth in the doctrine of
Christ, his body is a temple of the Holy Trinity, and he has communion
with the Father as his Father, and with the Son as his Savior and
Redeemer.

[2 John 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jo2 1:10</span></span>

If there come any unto you - Under the character of an apostle or
evangelist, to preach in your house; and bring not this doctrine, that
Jesus is come in the flesh, and has died for the redemption of the
world.

Receive him not unto your house - Give him no entertainment as an
evangelical teacher. Let him not preach under your roof.

Neither bid him God speed - Και χαιρειν αυτῳ μη λεγερε· And do not say,
Health to him - do not salute him with Peace be to thee! The usual
salutation among friends and those of the same religion in the east is,
Salam aleekum, "Peace be to you;" which those of the same religion will
use among themselves, but never to strangers, except in very rare cases.
This is the case to the present day; and, from what John says here, it
was a very ancient custom. We have often seen that peace among the
Hebrews comprehended every spiritual and temporal blessing. The words
mean, according to the eastern use of them, "Have no religious
connection with him, nor act towards him so as to induce others to
believe you acknowledge him as a brother."

[2 John 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jo2 1:11</span></span>

Is partaker of his evil deeds - He that acts towards him as if he
considered him a Christian brother, and sound in the faith, puts it in
his power to deceive others, by thus apparently accrediting his
ministry. No sound Christian should countenance any man as a Gospel
minister, who holds and preaches erroneous doctrines; especially
concerning the Lord Jesus. Nor can any Christian attend the ministry of
such teachers without being criminal in the sight of God. He who attends
their ministry is, in effect, bidding them God speed; no matter whether
such belong to an established Church, or to any congregation of
dissenters from it. But what St. John says here does not mean that we
should deny such the common offices of humanity, charity, and mercy. No.
In these offices we are equally bound to all men; far less does it
intimate that we should persecute such on account of their heretical or
heterodox sentiments. No. This right has God given to no man, to no
Church, to no state. They who persecute others, even for the worst
heretical opinions, may expect the heaviest judgments of Almighty God.

There is a remarkable addition here in several MSS. Of the Vulgate, and
in some printed editions. Ecce praedixi vobis, ut in diem Domini nostri
Jesu Christi non confundamini. "Behold, I have foretold this to you,
that ye may not be confounded in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ."

This addition is found in the edition of Pope Sixtus the Fifth, and in
the Complutensian Polyglot; but it is not acknowledged by any of the
versions, nor by any Greek MSS.

[2 John 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jo2 1:12</span></span>

Having many things to write - That is, I have many things that I might
write to thee, but I think it best not to commit them to paper, because
I hope to visit thee shortly, and speak fully of those matters, which
will be a means of increasing the comfort both of thee and thy family,
as well as my own. There is more comfort in mutual interviews among
friends than in epistolaty correspondence,

[2 John 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jo2 1:13</span></span>

The children of thy elect sister - Probably her own sister, who lived at
Ephesus; and, being acquainted with the apostle's writing, desired to be
thus remembered to her. Elect, both in this and the first verse,
signifies excellent, eminent, or honorable. See on [Jo2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001) (note).

Amen is wanting in the most ancient MSS., and in most of the versions;
but ἡ χαρις μετα σου and μεθ' ὑμων, Grace be with thee, or with you, is
found in several MSS. and versions.

Subscriptions in the Versions: -

The end of the Second Epistle. - Syriac.

The Second Epistle of John is ended. - Philox. Syriac.

Praise be to God for ever, Amen! - Arabic.

In the Manuscripts: -

The Second of John. - Codex Alexandrinus and Codex Vaticanus.

The Second of John to the Parthians. - One of Colbert's MSS.

The Second catholic Epistle of St. John the apostle and divine.

There are other subscriptions, but, like the above, they are worthy of
little regard.

This epistle is more remarkable for the spirit of Christian love which
it breathes than for any thing else. It contains scarcely any thing that
is not found in the preceding; and out of the thirteen verses there are
at least eight which are found, either in so many words or in sentiment,
precisely the same with those of the first epistle. The most remarkable
part of it is the tenth and eleventh verses, ([Jo2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010), [Jo2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#011)) relative to the orders
concerning the heretical teacher; and from them we see how such teachers
were treated in the apostolic Church. They held no communion with them,
afforded them no support, as teachers; but did not persecute them.

On this model the conduct of all Christians should be formed, relative
to the teachers of false doctrine in general. To go thus far, we have
apostolical authority, to go farther, we have none. And let us still
remember, in all cases it is our duty to love even our enemies, and
consequently to do them any act of humanity and mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 John Introduction](jo3000)

</div>
