<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job011)  [Next](job013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 12:0</span></span>

Job reproves the boasting of his friends, and shows their
uncharitableness towards himself, [Job
12:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#001); asserts that even the
tabernacles of robbers prosper; and that, notwithstanding, God is the
Governor of the world; a truth which is proclaimed by all parts of the
creation whether animate or inanimate, and by the revolutions which take
place in states, vv. 6-25.

[Job 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 12:2</span></span>

No doubt but ye are the people - Doubtless ye are the wisest men in the
world; all wisdom is concentrated in you; and when ye die, there will no
more be found on the face of the earth! This is a strong irony.

[Job 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 12:3</span></span>

I am not inferior to you - I do not fall short of any of you in
understanding, wisdom, learning, and experience.

Who knoweth not such things as these? - All your boasted wisdom consists
only in strings of proverbs which are in every person's mouth, and are
no proof of wisdom and experience in them that use them.

[Job 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 12:4</span></span>

I am as one mocked of his neighbor - Though I am invoking God for help
and salvation, yet my friends mock me in this most solemn and sacred
work. But God answereth me.

The just upright man is laughed to scorn - This is a very difficult
verse, on which no two critics seem to be agreed. Mr. Good translates
the fourth and fifth verses thus: -

"Thus brother is become a laughing-stock to his companions,

While calling upon God that he would succor him.

The just, the perfect man, is a laughing-stock to the proud,

A derision amidst the sunshine of the prosperous,

While ready to slip with his foot.

For a vindication of this version, I must refer to his notes. Coverdale
gives at least a good sense. Thus he that calleth upon God, and whom God
heareth, is mocked of his neighboure: the godly and innocent man is
laughed to scorne. Godlynesse is a light despysed in the hertes of the
rich; and is set for them to stomble upon. The fifth verse is thus
rendered by Mr. Parkhurst: "A torch of contempt, or contemptible link,
(see [Isa 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004); [Isa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002), [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)), לעשתות leashtoth, to the
splendours of the prosperous (is he who is) ready (נכון nachon, [Job
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#023); [Job
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#012); [Psa
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#017)) to slip with his foot." The
general sense is tolerably plain; but to emendations and conjectures
there is no end.

[Job 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 12:6</span></span>

The tabernacles of robbers prosper - Those who live by the plunder of
their neighbors are often found in great secular prosperity; and they
that provoke God by impiety and blasphemy live in a state of security
and affluence. These are administrations of Providence which cannot be
accounted for; yet the Judge of all the earth does right. Therefore
prosperity and adversity are no evidences of a man's spiritual state,
nor of the place he holds in the approbation or disapprobation of God.

[Job 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 12:7</span></span>

But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee - Mr. Good's
paraphrase here is very just: "Why tell ye me that the Almighty hath
brought this calamity upon me? Every thing in nature, the beasts of the
field, the fowls of the heaven, every inhabitant of earth and sea, and
every thing that befalls them, are the work of his hands; and every
thing feels and acknowledges him to be the universal Creator and
Controller. It is the common doctrine of all nature; but to apply it as
ye would apply it to me, and to assert that I am suffering from being
guilty of hypocrisy, is equally impertinent. He ordains every thing in
wisdom as well as in power; but why events happen as they happen, why
good and evil are promiscuously scattered throughout nature or human
life, ye are as ignorant of as myself."

[Job 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 12:10</span></span>

In whose hand is the soul of every living thing - נפש כל חי nephesh col
chai, "the soul of all life."

And the breath of all mankind - ורוח כל בשר veruach col besar, "and the
spirit or breath of all flesh." Does not the first refer to the immortal
soul, the principle of all intellectual life; and the latter to the
breath, respiration, the grand means by which animal existence is
continued? See [Job 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001).

[Job 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 12:11</span></span>

Doth not the ear try words? - All these are common-place sayings. Ye
have advanced nothing new; ye have cast no light upon the dispensations
of Providence.

[Job 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 12:12</span></span>

With the ancient is wisdom - Men who have lived in those primitive
times, when the great facts of nature were recent, such as the creation,
fall, flood, confusion of tongues, migration of families, and consequent
settlement of nations, had much knowledge from those facts; and their
length of days - the many hundreds of years to which they lived, gave
them such an opportunity of accumulating wisdom by experience, that they
are deservedly considered as oracles.

[Job 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 12:13</span></span>

With him is wisdom and strength - But all these things come from God; he
is the Fountain of wisdom and the Source of power. He alone can give us
unerring counsel, and understanding to comprehend and act profitably by
it. See on [Job 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#016) (note).

[Job 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 12:14</span></span>

He breaketh down - He alone can create, and he alone can destroy.
Nothing can be annihilated but by the same Power that created it. This
is a most remarkable fact. No power, skill, or cunning of man can
annihilate the smallest particle of matter. Man, by chemical agency, may
change its form; but to reduce it to nothing belongs to God alone. In
the course of his providence God breaks down, so that it cannot be built
up again. See proofs of this in the total political destruction of
Nineveh, Babylon, Persepolis, Tyre, and other cities, which have broken
down never to be rebuilt; as well as the Assyrian, Babylonian, Grecian,
and Roman empires, which have been dismembered and almost annihilated,
never more to be regenerated.

He shutteth up a man - He often frustrates the best laid purposes, so
that they can never be brought to good effect.

[Job 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 12:15</span></span>

He withholdeth the waters - This is, I think, an allusion to the third
day's work of the creation, [Gen 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009) :
And God said, Let the waters be gathered together unto one place, and
let the dry land appear. Thus the earth was drained, and the waters
collected into seas, and bound to their particular places.

Also he sendeth them out - Here is also an allusion to the flood, for
when he broke up the fountains of the great deep, then the earth was
overturned.

[Job 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 12:16</span></span>

With him is strength and wisdom - עז ותושיה oz vethushiyah, strength and
sufficiency. Strength or power, springing from an exhaustless and
infinite source of potency. In the thirteenth verse it is said, With him
is wisdom and strength; but the expressions are not the same, חכמה
וגבורה chochmah ugeburah, intelligence and fortitude, or strength in
action, the wisdom ever guiding the exertions of power; but here is
strength or power in essence, and an eternal potentiality. With him is
every excellence, in potentia and in esse. He borrows nothing, he
derives nothing. As he is self-existent, so is he self-sufficient. We
have had the word tushiyah before. See the note on [Job
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#006).

The deceived and the deceiver are his - Some think this refers to the
fall; even Satan the deceiver or beguiler, and Adam and Eve, the
deceived or beguiled, are his. Satan, as this book shows, cannot act
without especial permission; and man, whom the seducer thought to make
his own property for ever, is claimed as the peculium or especial
property of God, for the seed of the woman was then appointed to bruise
the head of the serpent; and Jesus Christ has assumed the nature of man,
and thus brought human nature into a state of fellowship with himself.
Thus he who sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one, for
which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren; [Heb
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011).

[Job 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 12:17</span></span>

He leadeth counsellors away spoiled - The events of war are also in his
hand. It is he who gives victory; through him even the counsellors - the
great men and chief men, are often led into captivity, and found among
the spoils.

And maketh the judges fools - He infatuates the judges. Does this refer
to the foolish conduct of some of the Israelitish judges, such as
Samson?

[Job 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 12:18</span></span>

He looseth the bond of kings - He takes away their splendid robes, and
clothes them with sackcloth; or, he dissolves their authority, permits
their subjects to rebel and overthrow the state, to bind them as
captives, and despoil them of all power, authority, and liberty. Many
proofs of this occur in the Israelitish history and in the history of
the principal nations of the earth, and not a few in the history of
Britain.

[Job 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 12:19</span></span>

He leadeth princes away spoiled, and overthroweth the mighty - What
multitudes of proofs of this does the history of the world present! Even
the late disastrous war with the French republic and empire, which began
in 1793, and continued without intermission till 1814, was afterwards
renewed, and had a catastrophe that went nearly to ruin Europe. How many
princes, or rather priests, כהנים cohanim, have been spoiled of their
power, influence, and authority; and how many mighty men - captains,
generals, admirals, etc., have been overthrown! But supposing that the
writer of the Book of Job lived, as some think, after the captivity, how
many priests were led away spoiled, both from Israel and Judah; and how
many kings and mighty men were overthrown in the disastrous wars between
the Assyrians, Babylonians, and Jews!

[Job 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 12:20</span></span>

He removeth away the speech of the trusty - The faithful counsellor and
the eloquent orator avail nothing: Quos Deus vult perdere, prius
dementat; "God infatuates those whom he is determined to destroy." The
writer might have had his eyes on [Isa
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001), which the reader will do well
to consult.

The understanding of the aged - זקנים zekenim signifies the same here as
our word elders or elder-men; which includes in itself the two ideas of
seniority, or considerably advanced age, and official authority. These
can do no more to save a state which God designs to destroy,
notwithstanding their great political wisdom and knowledge, than the
child who can neither reason nor speak.

[Job 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 12:21</span></span>

He poureth contempt upon princes - נדיבים nedibim, "those of royal
extraction;" widely different from the כהנים cohanim mentioned [Job
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#019).

Weakeneth the strength of the mighty - אפיקים aphikim, the compact; the
well-strung together; the nervous and sinewy. Perhaps there is a
reference here to the crocodile, as the same term is applied, [Job
40:13](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#013), to the compactness of his
bones: and as רפה מזיח rippah meziach, which we translate weakeneth the
strength, signifies more properly looseth the girdle, as the margin has
properly rendered it, the reference seems still more pointed; for it is
known that "the crocodile, from the shoulders to the extremity of the
tail, is covered with large square scales, disposed like parallel
girdles, fifty-two in number. In the middle of each girdle are four
protuberances, which become higher as they approach the end of the tail,
and compose four rows." See the quotation in Parkhurst, under the word
אפק drow eh aphak. What is human strength against this? We may say as
the Lord said, [Job 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#019) : He that
made him can make his sword to approach unto him. He alone can loose the
girdles of this mighty one.

[Job 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 12:22</span></span>

He discovereth deep things out of darkness - This may refer either to
God's works in the great deep, or to the plots and stratagems of wicked
men, conspiracies that were deeply laid, well digested, and about to be
produced into existence, when death, whose shadow had hitherto concealed
them, is to glut himself with carnage.

[Job 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 12:23</span></span>

He increaseth the nations - Mr. Good translates, He letteth the nations
grow licentious. Pride, fullness of bread, with extensive trade and
commerce, produce luxury; and this is ever accompanied with profligacy
of manners. When, then, the cup of this iniquity is full, God destroys
the nation, by bringing or permitting to come against it a nation less
pampered, more necessitous, and inured to toil.

He enlargeth the nations - Often permits a nation to acquire an
accession of territory, and afterwards shuts them up within their
ancient boundaries, and often contracts even those. All these things
seem to occur as natural events, and the consequences of state
intrigues, and such like causes; but when Divine inspiration comes to
pronounce upon them, they are shown to be the consequence of God's
acting in his judgment and mercy; for it is by him that kings reign; it
is he who putteth down one and raiseth up another.

[Job 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 12:24</span></span>

He taketh away the heart of the chief - Suddenly deprives the leaders of
great counsels, or mighty armies of courage; so that, panic-struck, they
flee when none pursueth, or are confounded when about to enter on the
accomplishment of important designs.

And causeth them to wander in a wilderness - A plain allusion to the
journeyings of the Israelites in the deserts of Arabia, on their way to
the promised land. Their chief, Aaron, had his courage all taken away by
the clamors of the people; and so made them a molten calf to be the
object of their worship, which defection from God was the cause of their
wandering nearly forty years in the trackless wilderness. The reference
is so marked, that it scarcely admits of a doubt; yet Houbigant and some
others have called it in question, and suppose that those chiefs or
heads of families which led out colonies into distant parts are
principally intended. It answers too well to the case of the Israelites
in the wilderness to admit of any other interpretation.

[Job 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 12:25</span></span>

They grope in the dark - The writer seems to have had his eye on those
words of Moses, [Deu 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#028), [Deu
28:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#029) : The Lord shall smite thee with
madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart; and thou shalt Grope
At Noonday, as the Blind Gropeth In Darkness. And this also may refer to
the unaccountable errors, transgressions, and judicial blindness of the
Israelites in their journeying to the promised land: but it will apply
also to the state of wicked nations under judicial blindness. The writer
is principally indebted for his imagery, and indeed for the chief
expressions used here, to [Psa 107:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#027)
: They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man. [Psa
107:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#039), [Psa
107:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#040) : Again, they are minished and
brought low through oppression, affliction, and sorrow. He Poureth
Contempt Upon Princes, and Causeth Them To Wonder In The Wilderness,
where there is No Way. Mr. Good has some judicious reflections on this
chapter, particularly on [Job 12:13-22](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#013)
: "It should be observed," says he, "that the entire passage has a
reference to the machinery of a regular and political government; and
that its general drift is to imprint on the mind of the hearer the
important doctrine that the whole of the constituent principles of such
a government, its officers and institutions; its monarchs and princes;
its privy-counselors, judges, and ministers of state; its chieftains,
public orators, and assembly of elders; its nobles, or men of hereditary
rank; and its stout robust peasantry, as we should express it in the
present day; nay, the deep designing villains that plot in secret its
destruction; - that the nations themselves, and the heads or sovereigns
of the nations, are all and equally in the hands of the Almighty: that
with him human pomp is poverty; human excellence, turpitude; human
judgment, error; human wisdom, folly; human dignity, contempt; human
strength, weakness."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 13](job013)

</div>
