<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job001)  [Next](job003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 2:0</span></span>

The sons of God once more present themselves before him; and Satan comes
also, accusing Job as a person whose steadfastness would be soon shaken,
provided his body were to be subjected to sore afflictions, [Job
2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001). He receives permission to
afflict Job, and smites him with sore boils, [Job
2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#006). His wife reviles him, [Job
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#009). His pious reproof, [Job
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010). His three friends come to visit
and mourn with him, [Job 2:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011).

[Job 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 2:1</span></span>

Again there was a day - How long this was after the former trial, we
know not: probably one whole year, when, as the Targum intimates, it was
the time of the annual atonement; which, if so, must have been at least
one whole year after the former; and during which period the patience
and resignation of Job had sufficient scope to show themselves. This
appearance of the sons of God and Satan is to be understood
metaphorically - there could be nothing real in it - but it is intended
to instruct us in the doctrine of the existence of good and evil
spirits; that Satan pursues man with implacable enmity, and that he can
do no man hurt, either in his person or property, but by the especial
permission of God; and that God gives him permission only when he
purposes to overrule it for the greater manifestation of his own glory,
and the greater good of his tempted followers.

[Job 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 2:3</span></span>

To destroy him without cause - Thou wishedst me to permit thee to
destroy a man whose sins have not called for so heavy a judgment. This
seems to be the meaning of this saying. The original word, לבלעו
leballeo, signifies to swallow down or devour; and this word St. Peter
had no doubt in view in the place quoted on [Job
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007) of the preceding chapter: "Your
adversary the devil goeth about as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may
Devour; ζητων, τινα καταπιῃ, seeking whom he may Swallow or Gulp Down.
See the note on [Pe1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008).

[Job 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 2:4</span></span>

Skin for skin - That is, A man will part with all he has in the world to
save his life; and he will part with all by piecemeal, till he has
nothing left on earth, and even be thankful, provided his life be
spared. Thou hast only destroyed his property; thou hast left him his
life and his health. Thou hast not touched his flesh nor his bone;
therefore he is patient and resigned. Man, through the love of life,
will go much farther: he will give up one member to save the rest; yea,
limb after limb as long as there is hope that, by such sacrifices, life
may be spared or prolonged. This is the meaning given to the passage by
the Targum; and, I believe, the true one; hence, [Job
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#006), the Lord says, Save his life.

[Job 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 2:5</span></span>

He will curse thee to thy face - Literally, If he will not bless thee to
thy face or appearances. His piety to thee will be always regulated by
thy bounty to him. See the note on [Job
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011).

[Job 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 2:6</span></span>

But save his life - His body thou shalt have permission to afflict, but
against his life thou shalt have no power; therefore take care of his
life. The original, נפשו שמר naphsho shemor, may be translated, keep his
soul; but the word also signifies life; yet in the hands of the
destroyer the life of this holy man is placed! How astonishing is the
economy of salvation! It is so managed, by the unlimited power and skill
of God, that the grand adversary of souls becomes himself, by the order
of God, the preserver of that which the evil of his nature incessantly
prompts him to destroy!

[Job 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 2:7</span></span>

Sore boils - בשחין רע bischin ra, "with an evil inflammation." What this
diabolical disorder was, interpreters are not agreed. Some think it was
the leprosy, and this is the reason why he dwelt by himself, and had his
habitation in an unclean place, without the city, (Septuagint, εξω της
πωλεως), or in the open air: and the reason why his friends beheld him
afar off, [Job 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#012), was because they
knew that the disorder was infectious.

His scraping himself with a potsherd indicates a disease accompanied
with intolerable itching, one of the characteristics of the smallpox.
Query, Was it not this disorder? And in order to save his life (for that
he had in especial command) did not Satan himself direct him to the cool
regimen, without which, humanly speaking, the disease must have proved
fatal? In the elephantiasis and leprosy there is, properly speaking, no
boil or detached inflammation, or swelling, but one uniform disordered
state of the whole surface, so that the whole body is covered with
loathsome scales, and the skin appears like that of the elephant, thick
and wrinkled, from which appearance the disorder has its name. In the
smallpox it is different; each pock or pustule is a separate
inflammation, tending to suppuration; and during this process, the fever
is in general very high, and the anguish and distress of the patient
intolerable. When the suppuration is pretty far advanced, the itching is
extreme; and the hands are often obliged to be confined to prevent the
patient from literally tearing his own flesh.

[Job 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 2:9</span></span>

Then said his wife - To this verse the Septuagint adds the following
words: "Much time having elapsed, his wife said unto him, How long dost
thou stand steadfast, saying, 'Behold, I wait yet a little longer
looking for the hope of my Salvation?' Behold thy memorial is already
blotted out from the earth, together with thy sons and thy daughters,
the fruits of my pains and labors, for whom with anxiety I have labored
in vain. Thyself also sittest in the rottenness of worms night and day,
while I am a wanderer from place to place, and from house to house,
waiting for the setting of the sun, that I may rest from my labors, and
from the griefs which oppress me. Speak therefore some word against God,
and die." We translate ברך אלהים ומת barech Elohim vamuth, Curse God,
and die. The verb ברך barach is supposed to include in it the ideas of
cursing and blessing; but it is not clear that it has the former meaning
in any part of the sacred writings, though we sometimes translate it so.
Here it seems to be a strong irony. Job was exceedingly afflicted, and
apparently dying through sore disease; yet his soul was filled with
gratitude to God. His wife, destitute of the salvation which her husband
possessed, gave him this ironical reproof. Bless God, and die - What!
bless him for his goodness, while he is destroying all that thou hast!
bless him for his support, while he is casting thee down and destroying
thee! Bless on, and die. The Targum says that Job's wife's name was
Dinah, and that the words which she spake to him on this occasion were
בריך מימרא דיי ומית berich meymera dayai umith. Bless the word of the
Lord, and die. \\\\\\ppar Ovid has such an irony as I suppose this to
have been: -

Quid vos sacra juvant? quid nunc Aegyptia prosuntSistra? -

Cum rapiant mala fata bonos, ignoscite fasso,Sollicitor nullos esse
putare deos.

Vive plus, moriere pius; cole sacra, colentemMors gravis a templis in
cava busta trahet.

Amor. lib. iii., Eleg. ix. ver. 33.

"In vain to gods (if gods there are) we pray,

And needless victims prodigally pay;

Worship their sleeping deities: yet death

Scorns votaries, and stops the praying breath.

To hallow'd shrines intruding fate will come,

And drag you from the altar to the tomb."

Stepney.

[Job 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 2:10</span></span>

Thou speakest as one of the foolish - Thou speakest like an infidel;
like one who has no knowledge of God, of religion, or of a future state.
The Targum, who calls this woman Dinah, translates thus: "Thou speakest
like one of those women who have wrought folly in the house of their
father." This is in reference to an ancient rabbinical opinion, that Job
lived in the days of the patriarch Jacob, whose daughter Dinah he had
married.

Shall we receive good - This we have received in great abundance for
many years:

And shall we not receive evil? - Shall we murmur when He afflicts us for
a day, who has given us health for so many years? Shall we blaspheme his
name for momentary privations, who has given us such a long succession
or enjoyments? His blessings are his own: he never gave them to us; they
were only lent. We have had the long, the free, the unmerited use of
them; and shall we be offended at the Owner, when he comes to reclaim
his own property? This would be foolish, ungrateful, and wicked. So may
every one reason who is suffering from adversity. But who, besides Job,
reasons thus? Man is naturally discontented and ungrateful.

In all this did not Job sin with his lips - The Chaldee adds, But in his
heart he thought words. He had surmisings of heart, though he let
nothing escape from his lips.

[Job 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 2:11</span></span>

Job's three friends - The first was Eliphaz the Temanite; or, as the
Septuagint has it, Ελιφαζ ὁ Θαιμανων βασιλευς, Eliphaz the king on the
Thaimanites. Eliphaz was one of the sons of Esau; and Teman, of Eliphaz,
[Gen 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#010), [Gen
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#011). Teman was a city of Edom, [Jer
49:7-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007); [Eze
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#013); [Amo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011), [Amo
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#012).

Bildad the Shuhite - Or, as the Septuagint, Βαλδαδ ὁ Συχεων τυραννος,
Baldad, tyrant of the Suchites. Shuah was the son of Abraham by Keturah:
and his posterity is reckoned among the Easterns. It is supposed he
should be placed with his brother Midian, and his brother's sons Sheba
and Dedan. See [Gen 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#002), [Gen
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#003). Dedan was a city of Edom, see
[Jer 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#008), and seems to have been
situated in its southern boundary, as Teman was in its western. [Eze
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#013).

Zophar the Naamathite - Or, according to the Septuagint, Σωφαρ Μιναιων
Βασιλευς, Sophar king of the Minaites. He most probably came from that
Naamah, which was bordering upon the Edomites to the south and fell by
lot to the tribe of Judah, Joshua 15:21-41. These circumstances, which
have already been mentioned in the introduction, prove that Job must
have dwelt in the land of Edom, and that all his friends dwelt in Arabia
Petraea, or in the countries immediately adjacent. That some of those
Eastern people were highly cultivated, we have at least indirect proof
in the case of the Temanites, [Jer
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007) : Concerning Edom thus saith the
Lord of hosts, Is wisdom no more in Teman? Is counsel perished from the
prudent? Is their wisdom vanished? They are celebrated also in Baruch
3:22, 23. Speaking of wisdom he says: It hath not been heard of in
Chanaan; neither hath it been seen in Theman. The Agarenes that seek
wisdom upon earth, the merchants of Meran and of Theman, the expounders
of fables, and searchers out of understanding, none of these have known
the way of wisdom. It is evident enough from these quotations that the
inhabitants of those districts were celebrated for their knowledge; and
the sayings of Job's three friends are proofs that their reputation for
wisdom stood on a very solid foundation.

[Job 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 2:12</span></span>

They rent every one his mantle - I have already had frequent occasions
to point out and illustrate, by quotations from the ancients, the
actions that were used in order to express profound grief; such as
wrapping themselves in sackcloth, covering the face, strewing dust or
ashes upon the head, sitting upon the bare ground, etc., etc.;
significant actions which were in use among all nations.

[Job 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 2:13</span></span>

They sat down with him upon the ground seven days - They were astonished
at the unprecedented change which had taken place in the circumstances
of this most eminent man; they could not reconcile his present situation
with any thing they had met with in the history of Divine providence.
The seven days mentioned here were the period appointed for mourning.
The Israelites mourned for Jacob seven days, [Gen
50:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#010). And the men of Jabesh mourned
so long for the death of Saul, [Sa1
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#013); [Ch1
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#012). And Ezekiel sat on the ground
with the captives at Chebar, and mourned with and for them seven days.
[Eze 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#015). The wise son of Sirach
says, "Seven days do men mourn for him that is dead;" Sirach 22:12. So
calamitous was the state of Job, that they considered him as a dead man:
and went through the prescribed period of mourning for him.

They saw that his grief was very great - This is the reason why they did
not speak to him: they believed him to be suffering for heavy crimes,
and, seeing him suffer so much, they were not willing to add to his
distresses by invectives or reproach. Job himself first broke silence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 3](job003)

</div>
