<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job014)  [Next](job016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 15:0</span></span>

Eliphaz charges Job with impiety in attempting to justify himself, [Job
15:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#001); asserts the utter corruption
and abominable state of man, [Job
15:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#014); and, from his own knowledge
and the observations of the ancients, shows the desolation to which the
wicked are exposed, and insinuates that Job has such calamities to
dread, vv. 17-35.

[Job 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 15:2</span></span>

Should a wise man utter vain knowledge - Or rather, Should a wise man
utter the science of wind? A science without solidity or certainty.

And fill his belly with the east wind? - בטן beten, which we translate
belly, is used to signify any part of the cavity of the body, whether
the region of the thorax or abdomen; here it evidently refers to the
lungs, and may include the cheeks and fauces. The east wind, קדים kadim,
is a very stormy wind in the Levant, or the eastern part of the
Mediterranean Sea, supposed to be the same with that called by the
Greeks ευροκλυδων, euroclydon, the east storm, mentioned [Act
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#014). Eliphaz, by these words, seems
to intimate that Job's speech was a perfect storm or tempest of words.

[Job 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 15:3</span></span>

Should he reason with unprofitable talk? - Should a man talk
disrespectfully of his Maker, or speak to him without reverence? and
should he suppose that he has proved any thing, when he has uttered
words of little meaning, and used sound instead of sense?

[Job 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 15:4</span></span>

Thou castest off fear - Thou hast no reverence for God.

And restrainest prayer - Instead of humbling thyself, and making
supplication to thy Judge, thou spendest thy time in arraigning his
providence and justifying thyself. When a man has any doubts whether he
has grieved God's Spirit, and his mind feels troubled, it is much better
for him to go immediately to God, and ask forgiveness, than spend any
time in finding excuses for his conduct, or laboring to divest it of its
seeming obliquity. Restraining or suppressing prayer, in order to find
excuses or palliations for infirmities, indiscretions, or improprieties
of any kind, which appear to trench on the sacred limits of morality and
godliness, may be to a man the worst of evils: humiliation and prayer
for mercy and pardon can never be out of their place to any soul of man
who, surrounded with evils, is ever liable to offend.

[Job 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 15:5</span></span>

For thy mouth uttereth - In attempting to justify thyself, thou hast
added iniquity to sin, and hast endeavored to impute blame to thy Maker.

The tongue of the crafty - Thou hast varnished thy own conduct, and used
sophistical arguments to defend thyself. Thou resemblest those cunning
persons, ערומים arumim, who derive their skill and dexterity from the
old serpent, "the nachash, who was ערום arum, subtle, or crafty, beyond
all the beasts of the field;" [Gen
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001). Thy wisdom is not from above, but
from beneath.

[Job 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 15:7</span></span>

Art thou the first man that was born? - Literally, "Wert thou born
before Adam?" Art thou in the pristine state of purity and innocence? Or
art thou like Adam in his first state? It does not become the fallen
descendant of a fallen parent to talk as thou dost.

Made before the hills? - Did God create thee the beginning of his ways?
or wert thou the first intelligent creature which his hands have formed?

[Job 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 15:8</span></span>

Hast thou heard the secret of God? - "Hast thou hearkened in God's
council?" Wert thou one of the celestial cabinet, when God said, Let Us
make man in Our image, and in Our likeness?

Dost thou restrain wisdom to thyself? - Dost thou wish us to understand
that God's counsels were revealed to none but thyself? And dost thou
desire that we should give implicit credence to whatsoever thou art
pleased to speak? These are all strong sarcastic questions, and
apparently uttered with great contempt.

[Job 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 15:9</span></span>

What knowest thou - Is it likely that thy intellect is greater than
ours; and that thou hast cultivated it better than we have done ours?

What understandest thou - Or, Dost thou understand any thing, and it is
not with us? Show us any point of knowledge possessed by thyself, of
which we are ignorant.

[Job 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 15:10</span></span>

With us are both the gray-headed - One copy of the Chaldee Targum
paraphrases the verse thus: "Truly Eliphaz the hoary-headed, and Bildad
the long-lived, are among us; and Zophar, who in age surpasseth thy
father." It is very likely that Eliphaz refers to himself and his
friends in this verse, and not either to the old men of their tribes, or
to the masters by whom they themselves were instructed. Eliphaz seems to
have been the eldest of these sages; and, therefore, he takes the lead
in each part of this dramatic poem.

[Job 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 15:11</span></span>

Are the consolations of God small with thee? - Various are the
renderings of this verse. Mr. Good translates the verse thus: "Are then
the mercies of God of no account with thee?" or, "the addresses of
kindness before thee?"

The Vulgate thus: - "Can it be a difficult thing for God to comfort
thee? But thou hinderest this by thy intemperate speeches."

The Syriac and Arabic thus: - "Remove from thee the threatenings
(Arabic, reproaches) of God, and speak tranquilly with thy own spirit."

The Septuagint thus: - "Thou hast been scourged lightly for the sins
which thou hast committed; and thou hast spoken greatly beyond measure;
or, with excessive insolence."

Houbigant thus: - "Dost thou not regard the threatenings of God; or, has
there been any thing darkly revealed to thee."

Coverdale: - Dost thou no more regarde the comforte of God? But thy
wicked wordes wil not suffre the.

Scarcely any two translators or interpreters agree in the translation,
or even meaning of this verse. The sense, as expressed in the Vulgate,
or in our own version, or that of Coverdale, is plain enough: - "Hast
thou been so unfaithful to God, that he has withdrawn his consolations
from thy heart? And is there any secret thing, any bosom sin, which thou
wilt not give up, that has thus provoked thy Maker?" This is the sense
of our version: and I believe it to be as near the original as any yet
offered. I may just add the Chaldee - "Are the consolations of God few
to thee? And has a word in secret been spoken unto thee?" And I shall
close all these with the Hebrew text, and the literal version of Arius
Montanus: -

המעט ממך ינחומות אל

hameat mimmecha tanchumoth el.

ודבר לאט עמך

vedabar laat immak.

Nonne parum a te consolationes Dei? Et verbum latet tecum?

"Are not the consolations of God small to thee? And does a word (or
thing) lie hidden with thee?"

Now, let the reader choose for himself.

[Job 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 15:12</span></span>

Why doth thine heart carry thee away? - Why is it that thou dost
conceive and entertain such high sentiments of thyself?

And what do thy eyes wink at - With what splendid opinion of thyself is
thine eye dazzled? Perhaps there is an allusion here to that sparkling
in the eye which is excited by sensations of joy and pleasing objects of
sight, or to that furious rolling of the eyes observed in deranged
persons. Rosenmuller translates thus: -

Quo te tuus animus rapit?

Quid occuli tui vibrantes?

"Whither does thy soul hurry thee?

What mean thy rolling eyes?"

Thou seemest transported beyond thyself; thou art actuated by a furious
spirit. Thou art beside thyself; thy words and thy eyes show it. None
but a madman could speak and act as thou dost; for thou turnest thy
spirit against God, and lettest such words go out of thy mouth, [Job
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#013). This latter sense seems to
agree best with the words of the text, and with the context.

[Job 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 15:13</span></span>

That thou turnest thy spirit against God - The ideas here seem to be
taken from an archer, who turns his eye and his spirit - his desire -
against the object which he wishes to hit; and then lets loose his arrow
that it may attain the mark.

[Job 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 15:14</span></span>

What is man, that he should be clean? - מה אנוש mah enosh; what is weak,
sickly, dying, miserable man, that he should be clean? This is the
import of the original word enosh.

And - born of a woman, that he should be righteous? - It appears, from
many passages in the sacred writings, that natural birth was supposed to
be a defilement; and that every man born into the world was in a state
of moral pollution. Perhaps the word יצדק yitsdak should be translated,
that he should justify himself, and not that he should be righteous.

[Job 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 15:15</span></span>

Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea, the heavens are not
clean in his sight - The Vulgate has, "Behold, among his saints, none is
immutable; and the heavens are not clean in his sight."

Coverdale - Beholde, he hath found unfaithfulnesse amonge his owne
sanctes, yea the very heavens are unclene in his sight.

Eliphaz uses the same mode of speech, [Job
4:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#017) (note); where see the notes.
Nothing is immutable but God: saints may fall; angels may fall; all
their goodness is derived and dependent. The heavens themselves have no
purity compared with his.

[Job 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 15:16</span></span>

How much more abominable and filthy is man - As in the preceding verse
it is said, he putteth no trust in his saints, it has appeared both to
translators and commentators that the original words, אף כי aph ki,
should be rendered how much Less, not how much More: How much less would
he put confidence in man, who is filthy and abominable in his natures
and profligate in his practice, as he drinks down iniquity like water? A
man who is under the power of sinful propensities commits sin as
greedily as the thirsty man or camel drinks down water. He thinks he can
never have enough. This is a finished character of a Bad man; he hungers
and thirsts after Sin: on the contrary, the Good man hungers and thirsts
after Righteousness.

[Job 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 15:17</span></span>

I will show thee, hear me; and that which I have seen I will declare -
Eliphaz is now about to quote a whole collection of wise sayings from
the ancients; all good enough in themselves, but sinfully misapplied to
the case of Job.

[Job 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 15:19</span></span>

Unto whom alone the earth was given - He very likely refers to the
Israelites, who got possession of the promised land from God himself; no
stranger being permitted to dwell in it, as the old inhabitants were to
be exterminated. Some think that Noah and his sons may be intended; as
it is certain that the whole earth was given to them, when there were no
strangers - no other family of mankind - in being. But, system apart,
the words seem to apply more clearly to the Israelites.

[Job 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 15:20</span></span>

The wicked man travaileth with pain - This is a most forcible truth: a
life of sin is a life of misery; and he that Will sin Must suffer. One
of the Targums gives it a strange turn: - "All the days of the ungodly
Esau, he was expected to repent, but he did not repent; and the number
of years was hidden from the sturdy Ishmael." The sense of the original,
מתחולל mithcholel, is he torments himself: he is a true
heautontimoreumenos, or self-tormentor; and he alone is author of his
own sufferings, and of his own ruin.

[Job 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 15:21</span></span>

A dreadful sound is in his ears - If he be an oppressor or tyrant, he
can have no rest: he is full of suspicions that the cruelties he has
exercised on others shall be one day exercised on himself; for even in
his prosperity he may expect the destroyer to rush upon him.

[Job 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 15:22</span></span>

That he shall return out of darkness - If he take but a few steps in the
dark, he expects the dagger of the assassin. This appears to be the only
meaning of the place. Some think the passage should be understood to
signify that he has no hope of a resurrection; he can never escape from
the tomb. This I doubt: in the days of the writer of this book, the
doctrine of a future judgment was understood in every part of the East
where the knowledge of the true God was diffused.

[Job 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 15:23</span></span>

He wandereth abroad for bread - He is reduced to a state of the utmost
indigence, he who was once in affluence requires a morsel of bread, and
can scarcely by begging procure enough to sustain life.

Is ready at his hand - Is בידו beyado, in his hand - in his possession.
As he cannot get bread, he must soon meet death.

[Job 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 15:24</span></span>

Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid - He shall be in continual
fear of death; being now brought down by adversity, and stripped of all
the goods which he had got by oppression, his life is a mark for the
meanest assassin.

As a king ready to the battle - The acts of his wickedness and
oppression are as numerous as the troops he commands; and when he comes
to meet his enemy in the field, he is not only deserted but slain by his
troops. How true are the words of the poet: -

Ad generum Cereris sine caede et vulnere pauci

Descendunt reges, et sicca morte tyranni.

Juv. Sat., ver. 112.

"For few usurpers to the shades descend

By a dry death, or with a quiet end."

[Job 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 15:25</span></span>

He stretcheth out his hand against God - While in power he thought
himself supreme. He not only did not acknowledge God, by whom kings
reign, but stretched out his hand - used his power, not to protect, but
to oppress those over whom he had supreme rule; and thus strengthened
himself against the Almighty.

[Job 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 15:26</span></span>

He runneth upon him - Calmet has properly observed that this refers to
God, who, like a mighty conquering hero, marches against the ungodly,
rushes upon him, seizes him by the throat, which the mail by which it is
encompassed cannot protect; neither his shield nor spear can save him
when the Lord of hosts comes against him.

[Job 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 15:27</span></span>

Because he covereth his face - He has lived in luxury and excess; and
like a man overloaded with flesh, he cannot defend himself against the
strong gripe of his adversary. The Arabic, for maketh collops of fat on
his flanks, has (Arabic) He lays the Pleiades upon the Hyades, or, He
places Surreea upon aiyuk, a proverbial expression for, His ambition is
boundless; He aspires as high as heaven; His head touches the stars; or,
is like the giants of old, who were fabled to have attempted to scale
heaven by placing one high mountain upon another: -

Ter sunt conati imponere Pelio Ossam

Scilicet, atque Ossae frondosum involvere Olympum

Ter Pater extructos disjecit fulmine montes.

Virg. Geor. i., ver. 281.

"With mountains piled on mountains, thrice they strove

To scale the steepy battlements of Jove;

And thrice his lightning and red thunder play'd,

And their demolished works in ruins laid."

Dryden.

To the lust of power and the schemes of ambition there are no bounds;
but see the end of such persons: the haughty spirit precedes a fall;
their palaces become desolate; and their heaven is reduced to a chaos.

[Job 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 15:28</span></span>

He dwelleth in desolate cities - It is sometimes the fate of a tyrant to
be obliged to take up his habitation in some of those cities which have
been ruined by his wars, and in a house so ruinous as to be ready to
fall into heaps. Ancient and modern history afford abundance of examples
to illustrate this.

[Job 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 15:29</span></span>

He shall not be rich - The whole of what follows, to the end of the
chapter, seems to be directed against Job himself, whom Eliphaz
indirectly accuses of having been a tyrant and oppressor. The threatened
evils are,

1\. He shall not be rich, though he labors greatly to acquire riches.

2\. His substance shall not continue - God will blast it, and deprive
him of power to preserve it.

3\. Neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof - all his works
shall perish, for God will blot out his remembrance from under heaven.

[Job 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 15:30</span></span>

He shall not depart out of darkness -

4\. He shall be in continual afflictions and distress.

5\. The flame shall dry up his branches - his children shall be cut off
by sudden judgments.

6\. He shall pass away by the breath of his mouth; for by the breath of
his mouth doth God slay the wicked.

[Job 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 15:31</span></span>

Let not him that is deceived -

7\. He has many vain imaginations of obtaining wealth, power, pleasure,
and happiness; but he is deceived; and he finds that he has trusted בשוא
bashshav, in a lie; and this lie is his recompense.

[Job 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">job 15:32</span></span>

It shall be accomplished before his time - I believe the Vulgate gives
the true sense: Antequam dies ejus impleantur, peribit; "He shall perish
before his time; before his days are completed."

8\. He shall be removed by a violent death, and not live out half his
days.

9\. And his branch shall not be green - there shall be no scion from his
roots; all his posterity shall fail.

[Job 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 15:33</span></span>

He shall shake off his unripe grape -

10\. Whatever children he may have, they shall never survive him, nor
come to mature age. They shall be like wind-fall grapes and blasted
olive blossoms. As the vine and olive, which are among the most useful
trees, affording wine and oil, so necessary for the worship of God and
the comfort of man, are mentioned here, they may be intended to refer to
the hopeful progeny of the oppressor; but who fell, like the untimely
grape or the blasted olive flower, without having the opportunity of
realizing the public expectation.

[Job 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">job 15:34</span></span>

The congregation of hypocrites -

11\. Job is here classed with hypocrites, or rather the impious of all
kinds. The congregation, or עדת adath, society, of such, shall be
desolate, or a barren rock, גלמוד galmud. See this Arabic word explained
in the note on [Job 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#007) (note).

Fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery -

12\. Another insinuation against Job, that he had perverted justice and
judgment, and had taken bribes.

[Job 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">job 15:35</span></span>

They conceive mischief - The figure here is both elegant and impressive.
The wicked conceive mischief, from the seed which Satan sows in their
hearts; in producing which they travail with many pangs, (for sin is a
sore labor), and at last their womb produces fraud or deception. This is
an accursed birth, from an iniquitous conception. St. James gives the
figure at full length, most beautifully touched in all its parts: When
lust hath conceived it bringeth forth sin; and sin, when it is finished,
bringeth forth death; [Jam 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#015)
(note), where see the note. Poor Job! what a fight of affliction had he
to contend with! His body wasted and tortured with sore disease; his
mind harassed by Satan; and his heart wrung with the unkindness, and
false accusations of his friends. No wonder he was greatly agitated,
often distracted, and sometimes even thrown off his guard. However, all
his enemies were chained; and beyond that chain they could not go. God
was his unseen Protector, and did not suffer his faithful servant to be
greatly moved.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 16](job016)

</div>
