<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job007)  [Next](job009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 8:0</span></span>

Bildad answers, and reproves Job for his justifying himself, [Job
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#001), [Job
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#002). Shows that God is just, and never
punishes but for iniquity; and intimates that it was on account of their
sins that his children were cut off, [Job
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#003), [Job
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#004). States that, if Job would humble
himself to the Almighty, provided he were innocent, his captivity would
soon be turned, and his latter end be abundantly prosperous, [Job
8:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#005). Appeals to the ancients for the
truth of what he says; and draws examples from the vegetable world, to
show how soon the wicked may be cut off, and the hope of the hypocrite
perish, [Job 8:8-19](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008). Asserts that God
never did cast of a perfect man nor help the wicked; and that, if Job be
innocent, his end shall be crowned with prosperity, [Job
8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#020).

[Job 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 8:1</span></span>

Bildad the Shuhite - Supposed to be a descendant of Shuah, one of the
sons of Abraham, by Keturah, who dwelt in Arabia Deserta, called in
Scripture the east country. See [Gen
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001), [Gen
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#002), [Gen
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#006).

[Job 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 8:2</span></span>

How long wilt thou speak these things? - Wilt thou still go on to charge
God foolishly? Thy heavy affliction proves that thou art under his
wrath; and his wrath, thus manifested, proves that it is for thy sins
that he punisheth thee.

Be like a strong wind? - The Arabic, with which the Syriac agrees, is
(Syriac) rucholazomati, the spirit of pride. Wilt thou continue to
breathe forth a tempest of words? This is more literal.

[Job 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 8:3</span></span>

Doth God pervert judgment! - God afflicts thee; can he afflict thee for
naught? As he is just, his judgment is just; and he could not inflict
punishment unless there be a cause.

[Job 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 8:4</span></span>

If thy children have sinned - I know thy children have been cut off by a
terrible judgment; but was it not because by transgression they had
filled up the measure of their iniquity?

And he have cast them away - Has sent them off, says the Targum, to the
place of their transgression - to that punishment due to their sins.

[Job 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 8:5</span></span>

If thou wouldest seek unto God - Though God has so severely afflicted
thee, and removed thy children by a terrible judgment; yet if thou wilt
now humble thyself before him, and implore his mercy, thou shalt be
saved. He cut them off in their sins, but he spares thee; and this is a
proof that he waits to be gracious to thee.

[Job 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 8:6</span></span>

If thou wert pure and upright - Concerning thy guilt there can be no
doubt; for if thou hadst been a holy man, and these calamities had
occurred through accident, or merely by the malice of thy enemies, would
not God, long ere this, have manifested his power and justice in thy
behalf, punished thy enemies, and restored thee to affluence?

The habitation of thy righteousness - Strongly ironical. If thy house
had been as a temple of God, in which his worship had been performed,
and his commandments obeyed, would it now be in a state of ruin and
desolation?

[Job 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 8:7</span></span>

Though thy beginning was small - Thy former state, compared to that into
which God would have brought thee, would be small; for to show his
respect for thy piety, because thou hadst, through thy faithful
attachment to him, suffered the loss of all things, he would have
greatly multiplied thy former prosperity, so that thou shouldest now
have vastly more than thou didst ever before possess.

[Job 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 8:8</span></span>

Inquire - of the former age - לדור רישון ledor rishon, of the first age;
of the patriarchs; the first generation of men that dwelt upon the
earth: not of the age that was just past, as Mr. Peters and several
others have imagined, in order to keep up the presumption of Job's high
antiquity. Bildad most evidently refers to an antiquity exceedingly
remote.

[Job 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 8:9</span></span>

For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing - It is evident that
Bildad refers to those times in which human life was protracted to a
much longer date than that in which Job lived; when men, from the long
period of eight or nine hundred years, had the opportunity of making
many observations, and treasuring up a vast fund of knowledge and
experience. In comparison with them, he considers that age as nothing,
and that generation as being only of yesterday, not having had
opportunity of laying up knowledge: nor could they expect it, as their
days upon earth would be but a shadow, compared with that substantial
time in which the fathers had lived. Perhaps there may be an allusion
here to the shadow projected by the gnomon of a dial, during the time
the sun is above the horizon. As is a single solar day, so is our life.
The following beautiful motto I have seen on a sundial: Umbrae Sumus!
"We are shadows!" referring to the different shadows by which the gnomon
marked the hours, during the course of the day; and all intended to
convey this moral lesson to the passengers: Your life is composed of
time, marked out by such shadows as these. Such as time is, such are
you; as fleeting, as transitory, as unsubstantial. These shadows lost,
time is lost; time lost, soul lost! Reader take heed! The writer of this
book probably had before his eyes these words of David, in his last
prayer, [Ch1 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#015) : "For we are
strangers before thee, and sojourners, as all our fathers were; our days
upon earth are as a Shadow, and there is no expectation. There is no
reason to hope that they shall be prolonged; for our lives are limited
down to threescore years and ten, as the average of the life even of old
men.

[Job 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 8:10</span></span>

Shall not they teach thee - Wilt thou not treat their maxims with the
utmost deference and respect? They utter words from their heart - what
they say is the fruit of long and careful experience.

[Job 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 8:11</span></span>

Can the rush grow - The word גמא gome, which we translate rush, is,
without doubt, the Egyptian flag papyrus, on which the ancients wrote,
and from which our paper derives its name. The Septuagint, who made
their Greek translation in Egypt, (if this book made a part of it), and
knew well the import of each word in both languages, render גמא gome by
παπυρος papyrus, thus: Μη θαλλει παπυρος ανευ ὑδατος; Can the Papyrus
flourish without water? Their translation leaves no doubt concerning the
meaning of the original. They were probably writing on the very
substance in question, while making their translation. The technical
language of no science is so thoroughly barbarous as that of botany: the
description of this plant by Linnaeus, shall be a proof. The plant he
calls "Cyperus Papyrus; Class Triandria; Order Monogynia; Culm
three-sided, naked; umbel longer than the involucres; involucels
three-leaved, setaceous, longer; spikelets in threes - Egypt, etc.
Involucre eight-leaved; general umbel copious, the rays sheathing at the
base; partial on very short peduncles; spikelets alternate, sessile;
culm leafy at the base; leaves hollow, ensiform." Hear our plain
countryman John Gerarde, who describes the same plant: "Papyrus
Nilotica, Paper Reed, hath many large flaggie leaves, somewhat
triangular and smooth, not much unlike those of cats-taile, rising
immediately from a tuft of roots, compact of many strings; amongst the
which it shooteth up two or three naked stalkes, square, and rising some
six or seven cubits high above the water; at the top whereof there
stands a tuft or bundle off chaffie threds, set in comely order,
resembling a tuft of floures, but barren and void of seed;" Gerarde's
Herbal, p. 40. Which of the two descriptions is easiest to be understood
by common sense, either with or without a knowledge of the Latin
language? This plant grows in the muddy banks of the Nile, as it
requires an abundance of water for its nourishment.

Can the flag grow without water? - Parkhurst supposes that the word אחו
achu, which we render flag, is the same with that species of reed which
Mr. Hasselquist found growing near the river Nile. He describes it (p.
97) as "having scarcely any branches, but numerous leaves, which are
narrow, smooth, channelled on the upper surface; and the plant about
eleven feet high. The Egyptians make ropes of the leaves. They lay the
plant in water, like hemp, and then make good and strong cables of
them." As אח ach signifies to join, connect, associate, hence אחי achi,
a brother, אחו achu may come from the same root, and have its name from
its usefulness in making ropes, cables, etc., which are composed of
associated threads, and serve to tie, bind together, etc.

[Job 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 8:12</span></span>

Whilst it is yet in his greenness - We do not know enough of the natural
history of this plant to be able to discern the strength of this
allusion; but we learn from it that, although this plant be very
succulent, and grow to a great size, yet it is short-lived, and speedily
withers; and this we may suppose to be in the dry season, or on the
retreat of the waters of the Nile. However, Soon Ripe, soon Rotten, is a
maxim in horticulture.

[Job 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 8:13</span></span>

So are the paths - The papyrus and the rush flourish while they have a
plentiful supply of ooze and water; but take these away, and their
prosperity is speedily at an end; so it is with the wicked and profane;
their prosperity is of short duration, however great it may appear to be
in the beginning. Thou also, O thou enemy of God, hast flourished for a
time; but the blast of God is come upon thee, and now thou art dried up
from the very roots.

The hypocrite's hope shall perish - A hypocrite, or rather profligate,
has no inward religion, for his heart is not right with God; he has only
hope, and that perishes when he gives up the ghost. This is the first
place in which the word hypocrite occurs, or the noun חנף chaneph, which
rather conveys the idea of pollution and defilement than of hypocrisy. A
hypocrite is one who only carries the mask of godliness, to serve
secular purposes; who wishes to be taken for a religionist, though he is
conscious he has no religion. Such a person cannot have hope of any
good, because he knows he is insincere: but the person in the text has
hope; therefore hypocrite cannot be the meaning of the original word.
But all the vile, the polluted, and the profligate have hope; they hope
to end their iniquities before they end life; and they hope to get at
last to the kingdom of heaven. Hypocrite is a very improper translation
of the Hebrew.

[Job 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 8:14</span></span>

Whose hope shall be cut off - Such persons, subdued by the strong habits
of sin, hope on fruitlessly, till the last thread of the web of life is
cut off from the beam; and then they find no more strength in their hope
than is in the threads of the spider's web. Mr. Good renders, Thus shall
their support rot away. The foundation on which they trust is rotten,
and by and by the whole superstructure of their confidence shall tumble
into ruin.

[Job 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 8:15</span></span>

He shall lean upon his house - This is all allusion to the spider. When
he suspects his web, here called his house, to be frail or unsure, he
leans upon it in different parts, propping himself on his hinder legs,
and pulling with his fore claws, to see if all be safe. If he find any
part of it injured, he immediately adds new cordage to that part, and
attaches it strongly to the wall. When he finds all safe and strong, he
retires into his hole at one corner, supposing himself to be in a state
of complete security, when in a moment the brush or the besom sweeps
away both himself, his house, and his confidence. This I have several
times observed; and it is in this that the strength and point of the
comparison consist. The wicked, whose hope is in his temporal
possessions strengthens and keeps his house in repair; and thus leans on
his earthly supports; in a moment, as in the case of the spider, his
house is overwhelmed by the blast of God's judgments, and himself
probably buried in its ruins. This is a very fine and expressive
metaphor, which not one of the commentators that I have seen has ever
discovered.

[Job 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 8:16</span></span>

He is green before the sun - This is another metaphor. The wicked is
represented as a luxuriant plant, in a good soil, with all the
advantages of a good situation; well exposed to the sun; the roots
intervolving themselves with stones, so as to render the tree more
stable; but suddenly a blast comes, and the tree begins to die. The
sudden fading of its leaves, etc., shows that its root is become as
rottenness, and its vegetable life destroyed. I have often observed
sound and healthy trees, which were flourishing in all the pride of
vegetative health, suddenly struck by some unknown and incomprehensible
blast, begin to die away, and perish from the roots. I have seen also
the prosperous wicked, in the inscrutable dispensations of the Divine
providence, blasted, stripped, made bare, and despoiled, in the same
way.

[Job 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 8:18</span></span>

If he destroy him from his place - Is not this a plain reference to the
alienation of his inheritance? God destroys him from it; it becomes the
property of another; and on his revisiting it, the place, by a striking
prosopopoeia, says, "I know thee not; I have never seen thee." This also
have I witnessed; I looked on it, felt regret, received instruction, and
hasted away.

[Job 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 8:19</span></span>

Behold this is the joy of his way - A strong irony. Here is the issue of
all his mirth, of his sports, games, and pastimes! See the unfeeling,
domineering, polluting and polluted scape-grace, levelled with those
whom he had despised, a servant of servants, or unable to work through
his debaucheries, cringing for a morsel of bread, or ingloriously ending
his days in that bane of any well-ordered and civilized state, a parish
workhouse. This also I have most literally witnessed.

Out of the earth shall others gross - As in the preceding case, when one
plant or tree is blasted or cut down, another may be planted in the same
place; so, when a spendthrift has run through his property, another
possesses his inheritance, and grows up from that soil in which he
himself might have continued to flourish, had it not been for his
extravagance and folly. This verse Mr. Good applies to God himself, with
no advantage to the argument, nor elucidation of the sense, that I can
see. I shall give his translation, and refer to his learned notes for
his vindication of the version he has given: -

"Behold the Eternal (הוא) exulting in his course;

Even over his dust shall raise up another."

In this way none of the ancient versions have understood the passage. I
believe it to be a strong irony, similar to that which some think flowed
from the pen of the same writer: Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and
let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth; and walk in the ways
of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. But know thou, that for
all these God will bring thee into judgment; [Ecc
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#009). These two places illustrate each
other.

[Job 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 8:20</span></span>

Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man - This is another of the
maxims of the ancients, which Bildad produces: "As sure as he will
punish and root out the wicked, so surely will he defend and save the
righteous."

[Job 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 8:21</span></span>

Till he fill thy mouth with laughing - Perhaps it may be well to
translate after Mr. Good "Even yet may he fill thy mouth with laughter!"
The two verses may be read as a prayer; and probably they were thus
expressed by Bildad, who speaks with less virulence than his
predecessor, though with equal positiveness in respect to the grand
charge, viz., If thou wert not a sinner of no mean magnitude, God would
not have inflicted such unprecedented calamities upon thee. This most
exceptionable position, which is so contrary to matter of fact, was
founded upon maxims which they derived from the ancients. Surely
observation must have, in numberless instances, corrected this mistake.
They must have seen many worthless men in high prosperity, and many of
the excellent of the earth in deep adversity and affliction; but the
opposite was an article of their creed, and all appearances and facts
must take its colouring. Job's friends must have been acquainted, at
least, with the history of the ancient patriarchs; and most certainly
they contained facts of an opposite nature. Righteous Abel was
persecuted and murdered by his wicked brother, Cain. Abram was obliged
to leave his own country on account of worshipping the true God; so all
tradition has said. Jacob was persecuted by his brother Esau; Joseph was
sold into slavery by his brothers; Moses was obliged to flee from Egypt,
and was variously tried and afflicted, even by his own brethren. Not to
mention David, and almost all the prophets. All these were proofs that
the best of men were frequently exposed to sore afflictions and heavy
calamities; and it is not by the prosperity or adversity of men in this
world, that we are to judge of the approbation or disapprobation of God
towards them. In every case our Lord's rule is infallible: By their
fruits ye shall know them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 9](job009)

</div>
