<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job033)  [Next](job035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 34:0</span></span>

Elihu begins with an exhortation to Job's friends, [Job
34:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#001); charges Job with accusing God
of acting unrighteously, which he shows is impossible, [Job
34:5-12](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#005); points out the power and
judgments of the Almighty, vv. 13-30; shows how men should address God,
and how irreverently Job has acted, [Job
34:31-37](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#031).

[Job 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 34:3</span></span>

The ear trieth words - I do not think, with Calmet, that the inward ear,
or judgment, is meant simply. The Asiatics valued themselves on the nice
and harmonious collection of words, both in speaking and in writing; and
perhaps it will be found here that Elihu labors as much for harmonious
versification as for pious and weighty sentiments. To connect sense with
sound was an object of general pursuit among the Hebrew, Arabic, and
Persian poets; and so fond are the latter of euphony, that they often
sacrifice both sense and sentiment to it; and some of the Greek poets
are not exempt from this fault.

[Job 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 34:4</span></span>

Let us choose to us judgment - Let us not seek the applause of men, nor
contend for victory. Let our aim be to obtain correct views and notions
of all things; and let us labor to find out what is good.

[Job 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 34:5</span></span>

Job hath said, I am righteous - Job had certainly said the words
attributed to him by Elihu, particularly in [Job
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#002), etc., but it was in vindication
of his aspersed character that he had asserted his own righteousness,
and in a different sense to that in which Elihu appears to take it up.
He asserted that he was righteous quoad the charges his friends had
brought against him. And he never intimated that he had at all times a
pure heart, and had never transgressed the laws of his Maker. It is true
also that he said, God hath taken away my judgment; but he most
obviously does not mean to charge God with injustice, but to show that
he had dealt with him in a way wholly mysterious, and not according to
the ordinary dispensations of his providence; and that he did not
interpose in his behalf, while his friends were overwhelming him with
obloquy and reproach.

[Job 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 34:6</span></span>

Should I lie against my right? - Should I acknowledge myself the sinner
which they paint me, and thus lie against my right to assert and
maintain my innocence?

My wound is incurable without transgression - If this translation is
correct, the meaning of the place is sufficiently evident. In the
tribulation which I endure, I am treated as if I were the worst of
culprits; and I labor under incurable maladies and privations, though
without any cause on my part for such treatment. This was all most
perfectly true; it is the testimony which God himself gives of Job, that
"he was a perfect and upright man, fearing God and eschewing evil;" and
that "Satan had moved the Lord against him, to destroy him, Without a
Cause. See [Job 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001); [Job
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#003).

The Chaldee translates thus: -

"On account of my judgment, I will make the son of man a liar, who sends
forth arrows without sin."

Mr. Good thus: -

"Concerning my cause I am slandered;

He hath reversed my lot without a trespass."

The latter clause is the most deficient, אנוש חצי בלי פשע; Miss Smith's
translation of which is the best I have met with: "A man cut off,
without transgression." The word חצי chitstsi, which we translate my
wound, signifies more literally, my arrow; and if we take it as a
contracted noun, חצי chitstsey for חצים chitstsim, it means calamities.
אנוש anush, which we translate incurable, may be the noun enosh, wicked,
miserable man; and then the whole may be read thus: "A man of calamities
without transgression." I suffer the punishment of an enemy to God,
while free from transgression of this kind.

[Job 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 34:7</span></span>

Drinketh up scorning like water? - This is a repetition of the charge
made against Job by Eliphaz, [Job
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#016). It is a proverbial expression,
and seems to be formed, as a metaphor, from a camel drinking, who takes
in a large draught of water, even the most turbid, on its setting out on
a journey in a caravan, that it may serve it for a long time. Job deals
largely in scorning; he fills his heart with it.

[Job 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 34:8</span></span>

Which goeth in company with the workers of iniquity - This is an
allusion to a caravan: all kinds of persons are found there; but yet a
holy and respectable man might be found in that part of the company
where profligates assembled. But surely this assertion of Elihu was not
strictly true; and the words literally translated, will bear a less evil
meaning: "Job makes a track ארח arach, to join fellowship, לחברה
lechebrah, with the workers of iniquity;" i.e., Job's present mode of
reasoning, when he says, "I am righteous, yet God hath taken away my
judgment," is according to the assertion of sinners, who say, "There is
no profit in serving God; for, if a man be righteous, he is not
benefited by it, for God does not vindicate a just man's cause against
his oppressors." By adopting so much of their creed, he intimates that
Job is taking the steps that lead to fellowship with them. See [Job
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#009).

[Job 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 34:10</span></span>

Far be it from God - Rather, Wickedness, far be that from God; and from
iniquity, the Almighty. The sense is sufficiently evident without the
paraphrase in our version.

[Job 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 34:11</span></span>

For the work of a man shall he render - God ever will do justice; the
righteous shall never be forsaken, nor shall the wicked ultimately
prosper.

[Job 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 34:13</span></span>

Who hath given him a charge - Who is it that governs the world? Is it
not God? Who disposes of all things in it? Is it not the Almighty, by
his just and merciful providence? The government of the world shows the
care, the justice, and the mercy of God.

[Job 34:14](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 34:14</span></span>

If he set his heart upon man - I think this and the following verse
should be read thus: - "If he set his heart upon man, he will gather his
soul and breath to himself; for all flesh shall perish together, and man
shall turn again unto dust." On whomsoever God sets his heart, that is,
his love, though his body shall perish and turn to dust, like the rest
of men, yet his soul will God gather to himself.

[Job 34:17](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 34:17</span></span>

Shall - he that hateth right govern? - Or, Shall he who hateth judgment,
lie under obligation? It is preposterous to suppose that he who lives by
no rule, should impose rules upon others. God, who is the fountain of
all justice and righteousness, binds man by his laws; and wilt thou,
therefore, pretend to condemn him who is the sum of righteousness?

[Job 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 34:18</span></span>

Is it fit to say to a king, Thou art wicked? - The sentence is very
short, and is thus translated by the Vulgate: Qui dicit regi, Apostata?
Qui vocat duces impios? "Who says to a king, Apostate? Who calls leaders
impious?" Literally, Who calls a king Belial? Who calls princes wicked?
Civil governors should be treated with respect; no man should speak evil
of the ruler of the people. This should never be permitted. Even where
the man cannot be respected, because his moral conduct is improper, even
there the office is sacred, and should be reverenced. He who permits
himself to talk against the man, would destroy the office and authority,
if he could.

[Job 34:19](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 34:19</span></span>

That accepteth not - If it be utterly improper to speak against a king
or civil governor, how much more so to speak disrespectfully of God, who
is not influenced by human caprices or considerations, and who regards
the rich and the poor alike, being equally his creatures, and equally
dependent on his providence and mercy for their support and salvation.

[Job 34:20](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 34:20</span></span>

In a moment shall they die - Both are equally dependent on the Almighty
for their breath and being; the mighty as well as the poor. If the great
men of the earth have abused their power, he sometimes cuts them off by
the most sudden and unexpected death; and even at midnight, when in
security, and least capable of defense, they are cut off by the people
whom they have oppressed, or by the invisible hand of the angel of
death. This appears to be spoken in reference to Eastern tyrants, who
seldom die a natural death.

[Job 34:22](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 34:22</span></span>

There is no darkness - In this life; and no shadow of death in the other
world - no annihilation in which the workers of iniquity may hide
themselves, or take refuge.

[Job 34:23](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 34:23</span></span>

For he will not lay upon man - The meaning appears to be this: He will
not call man a second time into judgment; he does not try a cause twice;
his decisions are just, and his sentence without appeal. Mr. Good
translates: -

"Behold, not to man hath he intrusted the time

Of coming into judgment with God."

Man's time is not in his own hand; nor is his lot cast or ruled by his
own wisdom and power. When God thinks best, he will judge for him; and,
if oppressed or calumniated, he will bring forth his righteousness as
the light, and do him justice on his adversaries.

[Job 34:24](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 34:24</span></span>

He shall break in pieces - In multitudes of cases God depresses the
proud, and raises up the humble and meek. Neither their strength nor
number can afford them security.

[Job 34:25](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 34:25</span></span>

He knoweth their works - He knows what they have done, and what they are
plotting to do.

He overturneth them in the night - In the revolution of a single night
the plenitude of power on which the day closed is annihilated. See the
cases of Belshazzar and Babylon.

[Job 34:26](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 34:26</span></span>

He striketh them as wicked men - At other times he executes his
judgments more openly; and they are suddenly destroyed in the sight of
the people.

[Job 34:27](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 34:27</span></span>

Because they turned back - This is the reason why he has dealt with them
in judgment. They had departed from him in their hearts, their moral
conduct, and their civil government. He is speaking of corrupt and
tyrannical rulers. And they did not, would not, understand any of his
ways.

[Job 34:28](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 34:28</span></span>

So that they cause the cry of the poor - They were cruel and oppressive:
the poor cried through their distresses, and against their oppressors;
and God heard the cry of the poor. Nothing so dreadful appears in the
court of heaven against an unfeeling, hardhearted, and cruel man of
power, as the prayers, tears, and groans of the poor. In times of little
liberality, when some men thought they did God service by persecuting
those who did not exactly receive their creed, nor worship God in their
way, a certain great man in Scotland grievously persecuted his tenants,
because they had religious meetings in private houses out of the order
of the establishment; though he never molested them when they spent
their time and their money in the alehouse. A holy, simple woman, one of
those people, went one morning to the house of the great persecutor, and
desired to speak with him. The servant desired to know her message, and
he would deliver it; for she could not be admitted. She told him she
could deliver her message to none but his master; said it was a matter
of great importance, and concerned himself intimately, and alone. The
servant having delivered this message, and stated that the woman
appeared to have something particular on her mind, his worship
condescended to see her. "What is your business with me?" said he, in a
haughty, overbearing tone. To which she answered, "Sir, we are a hantle
o' puir folk at - , who are strivin' to sairve God accordin' to our ain
conscience, and to get our sauls sav'd: yee persecute us; and I am come
to beg yee to let us alane, and in ye dinna, we'll pray yee dead." This
rhetoric was irresistible. His lordship did not know what influence such
people might have in heaven; he did not like to put such prayers to the
proof; wisely took the old woman's advice, and e'en let them alane. He
was safe; they were satisfied; and God had the glory. When the poor
refer their cause to God, he is a terrible avenger. Let the potsherds
strive with the potsherds of the earth; but wo to the man that
contendeth with his Maker.

[Job 34:29](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 34:29</span></span>

When he giveth quietness, who then can make trouble? - How beautiful is
this sentiment, and how true! He ever acts as a sovereign, but his
actions are all wise and just. If he give quietness, who dares to give
trouble? And if he give to every human being the right to worship
himself according to their conscience, for the director of which he
gives both his word and his Spirit, who shall dare to say to another,
"Thou shalt worship God in my way, or not at all;" or, through a
pretended liberality, say, "Thou shalt be tolerated to worship him so
and so;" and even that toleration be shackled and limited? Reader, thou
hast as much right to tolerate another's mode of worship as he has to
tolerate thine: or, in other words, neither of you have any such right
at all; the pretension is as absurd as it is wicked. If, however, there
be any thing in the religious practice of any particular people that is
inimical, by fair construction, to the peace of the country, then the
civil power may interfere, as they ought to do in all cases of
insurrection; but let no such inference be drawn when not most obviously
flowing from the practice of the people, and the principles they
profess; and when solemnly disclaimed by the persons in question.
Whatever converts sinners from the error of their ways must be good to
society and profitable to the state.

Whether it be done against a nation - He defends and supports nations or
individuals howsoever weak, against their enemies, howsoever numerous
and powerful. He destroys nations or individuals who have filled up the
measure of their political or moral iniquity, though all other nations
and individuals stand up in their support.

[Job 34:30](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 34:30</span></span>

That the hypocrite reign not - The Vulgate translates, Who causes a
wicked man to reign because of the sins of the people. This was
precisely the defense which Hegiage, the oppressive ruler of the
Babylonian Irak, under the caliph Abdul Malec, made when he found the
people in a state of insurrection. See at the end of the chapter, [Job
34:37](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#037) (note).

[Job 34:31](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 34:31</span></span>

Surely it is meet to be said unto God - This is Elihu's exhortation to
Job: Humble thyself before God, and say, "I have suffered - I will not
offend."

[Job 34:32](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">job 34:32</span></span>

That which I see not - "What I do not know, teach thou me; wherein I
have done iniquity, I will do so no more."

[Job 34:33](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 34:33</span></span>

According to thy mind? he will recompense it - Mr. Good renders the
whole passage thus: -

"Then in the presence of thy tribes

According as thou art bruised shall he make it whole.

But it is thine to choose, and not mine;

So, what thou determinest, say."

This may at least be considered a paraphrase on the very obscure
original. If thou wilt not thus come unto him, he will act according to
justice, whether that be for or against thee. Choose what part thou wilt
take, to humble thyself under the mighty hand of God, or still persist
in thy supposed integrity. Speak, therefore; the matter concerns thee,
not me; but let me know what thou art determined to do.

[Job 34:34](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">job 34:34</span></span>

Let men of understanding tell me - I wish to converse with wise men; and
by men of wisdom I wish what I have said to be judged.

[Job 34:35](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">job 34:35</span></span>

Job hath spoken without knowledge - There is no good in arguing with a
self-willed, self-conceited man. Job has spoken like a man destitute of
wisdom and discretion.

[Job 34:36](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">job 34:36</span></span>

My desire is that Job may be tried unto the end - אבי יבחן איוב abi
yibbachen Aiyob, "My father, let Job be tried." So the Vulgate, Pater
mi, probetur Job. But it may be as in the common translation, I wish Job
to be tried; or, as Mr. Good renders it, Verily, let Job be pursued to
conquest for replying like wicked men. This is a very harsh wish: but
the whole chapter is in the same spirit; nearly destitute of mildness
and compassion. Who could suppose that such arguings could come out of
the mouth of the loving Savior of mankind? The reader will recollect
that a very pious divine has supposed Elihu to be Jesus Christ!

[Job 34:37](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">job 34:37</span></span>

He addeth rebellion unto his sin - An ill-natured, cruel, and unfounded
assertion, borne out by nothing which Job had ever said or intended; and
indeed, more severe than the most inveterate of his friends (so called)
had ever spoken. Mr. Good makes this virulent conclusion still more
virulent and uncharitable, by translating thus: -

"For he would add to his transgressions apostasy;

He would clap his hands in the midst of us:

Yea, he would tempest his words up to God."

There was no need of adding a caustic here; the words in the tamest
translation are tart enough. Though Elihu began well and tolerantly, he
soon got into the spirit, and under the mistake, of those who had
preceded him in this "tempest of words."

On [Job 34:30](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#030) I have referred to the
case of Hegiage, governor of the Babylonian Irak, under the caliph Abdul
Malec. When Hegiage was informed that the people were in a state of
mutiny because of his oppressive government, before they broke out into
open acts of hostility, he mounted on an eminence, and thus harangued
them: - "God has given me dominion over you; if I exercise it with
severity, think not that by putting me to death your condition will be
mended. From the manner in which you live you must be always
ill-treated, for God has many executors of his justice; and when I am
dead he will send you another, who will probably execute his orders
against you with more rigour. Do you wish your prince to be moderate and
merciful? Then exercise righteousness, and be obedient to the laws.
Consider that your own conduct is the cause of the good or evil
treatment which you receive from him. A prince may be compared to a
mirror; all that you see in him is the reflection of the objects which
you present before him." The people immediately dropped their weapons,
and quietly returned to their respective avocations. This man was one of
the most valiant, eloquent, and cruel rulers of his time; he lived
towards the close of the 7th century of the Christian era. He is said to
have put to death 120,000 people; and to have had 50,000 in his prisons
at the time of his decease. Yet this man was capable of generous
actions. The following anecdote is given by the celebrated Persian poet
Jami, in his Baharistan: - Hegiage, having been separated from his
attendants one day in the chase, came to a place where he found an Arab
feeding his camels. The camels starting at his sudden approach, the Arab
lifted up his head, and seeing a man splendidly arrayed, became
incensed, and said, Who is this who with his fine clothes comes into the
desert to frighten my camels? The curse of Good light upon him! The
governor, approaching the Arab, saluted him very civilly, with the
salaam, Peace be unto thee! The Arab, far from returning the salutation,
said, I wish thee neither peace, nor any other blessing of God. Hegiage,
without seeming to heed what he had said, asked him very civilly "to
give him a little water to drink." The Arab in a surly tone, answered,
If thou desirest to drink, take the pains to alight, and draw for
thyself; for I am neither thy companion nor thy slave. The governor
accordingly alighted, and having drank, asked the Arab, "Whom dost thou
think the greatest and most excellent of men?" The prophet sent by God,
said the Arab, and thou mayest burst with spleen. "And what thinkest
thou of Aaly?" returned Hegiage. No tongue can declare his excellence,
said the Arab. "What," asked Hegiage, "is thy opinion of the caliph
Abdul Malec?" I believe him to be a very bad prince, replied the Arab.
"For what reason?" said Hegiage. Because, said the Arab, he hath sent us
for governor the most execrable wretch under heaven. Hegiage, finding
himself thus characterized, was silent; but his attendants coming up, he
rejoined them, and ordered them to bring the Arab with them. The next
day Hegiage ordered him to be set at table with himself, and bade him
"eat freely." The Arab, ere he tasted, said his usual grace, "God grant
that the end of this repast may be no worse than the beginning!" While
at meat the governor asked him, "Dost thou recollect the discourse we
had together yesterday?" The Arab replied, God prosper thee in all
things! but as to the secret of yesterday, take heed that thou disclose
it not to-day. "I will not," said Hegiage; "but thou must choose one of
these two things; either acknowledge me for thy master, and I will
retain thee about my person; or else I will send thee to Abdul Malec,
and tell him what thou hast said of him." There is a third course,
replied the Arab, preferable to those two. "Well, what is that?" said
the governor. Why, send me back to the desert, and pray God that we may
never see each other's face again. Cruel and vindictive as Hegiage was,
he could not help being pleased with the frankness and courage of the
man; and not only forgave him the preceding insults but ordered him
10,000 pieces of silver, and sent him back to the desert, according to
his wish.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 35](job035)

</div>
