<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job005)  [Next](job007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 6:0</span></span>

Job answers, and vindicates himself; and shows that the great affliction
which he suffered was the cause of his complaining, by which life was
rendered burdensome to him, [Job
6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#001). He complains that, whereas he
expected consolation from his friends, he had received nothing but the
bitterest reproaches, on the assumed ground that he must be a wicked
man, else God would not so grievously afflict him, [Job
6:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#014). He shows them that they knew
nothing of his case, and that they had no compassion, [Job
6:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#021). And then entreats them, if
they can, to show him in what he has offended, as he is ready to
acknowledge and correct every trespass, [Job
6:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#024).

[Job 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 6:2</span></span>

O that my grief were thoroughly weighed - Job wished to be dealt with
according to justice; as he was willing that his sins, if they could be
proved, should be weighed against his sufferings; and if this could not
be done, he wished that his sufferings and his complainings might be
weighed together; and it would then be seen that, bitter as his
complaint had been, it was little when compared with the distress which
occasioned it.

[Job 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 6:3</span></span>

Heavier than the sand of the sea - This includes two ideas: their number
was too great to be counted; their weight was too great to be estimated.

[Job 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 6:4</span></span>

The arrows of the Almighty - There is an evident reference here to
wounds inflicted by poisoned arrows; and to the burning fever occasioned
by such wounds, producing such an intense parching thirst as to dry up
all the moisture in the system, stop all the salivary ducts, thicken and
inflame the blood, induce putrescency, and terminate in raging mania,
producing the most terrifying images, from which the patient is relieved
only by death. This is strongly expressed in the fine figure: The Poison
Drinketh Up my Spirit; the Terrors of God Set Themselves in Array
against me. That calamities are represented among the Eastern writers as
the arrows of the Almighty, we have abundant proofs. In reference to
this, I shall adduce that fine saying attributed to Aaly, the son-in-law
of Mohammed in the Toozuki Teemour; which I have spoken of elsewhere.
"It was once demanded of the fourth califf (Aaly), 'If the canopy of
heaven were a bow; and if the earth were the cord thereof; and if
calamities were the arrows; if mankind were the mark for those arrows;
and if Almighty God, the tremendous and glorious, were the unerring
Archer; to whom could the sons of Adam flee for protection?' The califf
answered, 'The sons of Adam must flee unto the Lord.'" This fine image
Job keeps in view in the eighth and ninth verses, wishing that the
unerring marksman may let fly these arrows, let loose his hand, to
destroy and cut him off.

[Job 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 6:5</span></span>

Doth the wild ass - פרא pere, translated onager, by the Vulgate, from
the ονος αγριος of the Septuagint, which we properly enough, translate
wild ass. It is the same with the tame ass; only in a wild state it
grows to a larger size, is stronger, and more fleet. The meaning of Job
appears to be this: You condemn me for complaining; do I complain
without a cause? The wild ass will not bray, and the ox will not low,
unless in want. If they have plenty of provender, they are silent. Were
I at rest, at ease, and happy, I would not complain.

[Job 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 6:6</span></span>

Can that which is unsavoury - Mr. Good renders this verse as follows:
Doth insipid food without a mixture of salt, yea, doth the white of the
egg give forth pungency? Which he thus illustrates: "Doth that which
hath nothing of seasoning, nothing of a pungent or irritable power
within it, produce pungency or irritation? I too should be quiet and
complain not, if I had nothing provocative or acrimonious, but, alas!
the food I am doomed to partake of is the very calamity which is most
acute to my soul - that which I most loathe, and which is most grievous
or trying to my palate." Some render the original, Is there any
dependence on the drivel of dreams? There have been a great variety of
interpretations given of this verse. I could add another; but that of
Mr. Good is as likely to be correct as that of any other critic.

[Job 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 6:8</span></span>

O that I might have - As Job had no hope that he should ever be redeemed
from his present helpless state, he earnestly begs God to shorten it by
taking away his life.

[Job 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 6:9</span></span>

Let loose his hand - A metaphor taken from an archer drawing his arrow
to the head, and then loosing his hold, that the arrow may fly to the
mark. See on [Job 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004) (note).

[Job 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 6:10</span></span>

Then should I yet have comfort - Instead of עוד od, Yet, three of
Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS. have זאת zoth, This. And This should be
my comfort. The expectation that he will speedily make an end of me
would cause me to rejoice with great joy. This reading is supported by
the Vulgate and the Chaldee.

I would harden myself in sorrow - To know that I should shortly have an
end put to my miseries would cause me to endure the present with
determinate resolution. Let him not spare - let him use whatever means
he chooses, for I will not resist his decree; he is holy, and his
decrees must be just.

[Job 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 6:11</span></span>

What is my strength - I can never suppose that my strength will be
restored; and, were that possible, have I any comfortable prospect of a
happy termination of my life? Had I any prospect of future happiness, I
might well bear my present ills; but the state of my body and the state
of my circumstances preclude all hope.

[Job 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 6:12</span></span>

Is my strength the strength of stones? - I am neither a rock, nor is my
flesh brass, that I can endure all these calamities. This is a
proverbial saying, and exists in all countries. Cicero says, Non enim
est e saxo sculptus, aut e Robore dolatus Homo; habet corpus, habet
animum; movetur mente, movetur sensibus. "For man is not chiselled out
of the rock, nor hewn out of the oak; he has a body, and he has a soul;
the one is actuated by intellect, the other by the senses." Quaest.
Acad. iv. 31. So Homer, where he represents Apollo urging the Trojans to
attack the Greeks: -

Νεμεσησε δ' Απολλων,

Περγαμου εκκατιδων· Τρωεσσι δε κεκλετ' αυσας·

Ορνυσθ', ἱπποδαμοι Τρωες, μηδ' εικετε χαρμης

Αργειοις· επει ου σφιλιθος χρως, ουδε σιδηρος,

Χαλκον ανασχεσθαι ταμεσιχροα βαλλομενοισιν.

Illiad, lib. iv., ver. 507.

But Phoebus now from Ilion's towering height

Shines forth reveal'd, and animates the fight.

Trojans, be bold, and force to force oppose;

Your foaming steeds urge headlong on the foes!

Nor are their bodies rocks, nor ribb'd with steel;

Your weapons enter, and your strokes they feel.

Pope.

These are almost the same expressions as those in Job.

[Job 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 6:13</span></span>

Is not my help in me? - My help is all in myself; and, alas! that is
perfect weakness: and my subsistence, תושיה tushiyah, all that is real,
stable, and permanent, is driven quite from me. My friends have forsaken
me, and I am abandoned to myself; my property is all taken away, and I
have no resources left. I believe Job neither said, nor intended to say,
as some interpreters have it, Reason is utterly driven from me. Surely
there is no mark in this chapter of his being deranged, or at all
impaired in his intellect.

[Job 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 6:14</span></span>

To him that is afflicted pity should be showed from his friend; but he
forsaketh the fear of the Almighty - The Vulgate gives a better sense,
Qui tollit ab amico suo misericordiam, timorem Domini dereliquit, "He
who takes away mercy from his friend, hath cast off the fear of the
Lord." The word למס lammas, which we render to him who is Afflicted,
from מסה masah, to dissolve, or waste away, is in thirty-two of Dr.
Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS. למאס lemoes, "to him that despiseth his
friend;" and hence the passage may be read: To him who despiseth his
friend, it is a reproach; and he will forsake the fear of the Almighty:
or, as Mr. Good translates,

"Shame to the man who despiseth his friend!

He indeed hath departed from the fear of the Almighty."

Eliphaz had, in effect, despised Job; and on this ground had acted any
thing but the part of a friend towards him; and he well deserved the
severe stroke which he here receives. A heathen said, Amicus certus in
re incerta cernitur; the full sense of which we have in our common
adage: -

A Friend in Need is a Friend Indeed.

Job's friends, so called, supported each other in their attempts to
blacken the character of this worthy man; and their hand became the
heavier, because they supposed the hand of God was upon him. To each of
them, individually, might be applied the words of another heathen: -

\- Absentem qui rodit amicum,

Qui non defendit alio culpante; solutos

Qui captat risus hominum, famamque dicacis,

Fingere qui non visa potest; commissa tacere

Qui nequit; hic niger est; hunc tu, Romane, caveto.

Hor. Satyr. lib. i., s. iv., ver. 81.

He who, malignant, tears an absent friend;

Or, when attack'd by others, don't defend;

Who trivial bursts of laughter strives to raise,

And courts, of prating petulance, the praise;

Of things he never saw who tells his tale,

And friendship's secrets knows not to conceal; -

This man is vile; here, Roman, fix your mark;

His soul's as black as his complexion's dark.

Francis.

[Job 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 6:15</span></span>

Have dealt deceitfully as a brook - There is probably an allusion here
to those land torrents which make a sudden appearance, and as suddenly
vanish; being produced by the rains that fall upon the mountains during
the rainy season, and are soon absorbed by the thirsty sands over which
they run. At first they seem to promise a permanent stream, and are
noticed with delight by the people, who fill their tanks or reservoirs
from their waters; but sometimes they are so large and rapid as to carry
every thing before them: and then suddenly fail, so that there is no
time to fill the tanks. The approach of Job's friends promised much of
sympathy and compassion; his expectations were raised: but their conduct
soon convinced him that they were physicians of no value; therefore he
compares them to the deceitful torrents that soon pass away.

[Job 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 6:16</span></span>

Blackish by reason of the ice - He represents the waters as being
sometimes suddenly frozen, their foam being turned into the semblance of
snow or hoar-frost: when the heat comes, they are speedily liquefied;
and the evaporation is so strong from the heat, and the absorption so
powerful from the sand, that they soon disappear.

[Job 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 6:18</span></span>

The paths of their way - They sometimes forsake their ancient channels,
which is a frequent case with the river Ganges; and growing smaller and
smaller from being divided into numerous streams, they go to nothing and
perish - are at last utterly lost in the sands.

[Job 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 6:19</span></span>

The troops of Tema looked - The caravans coming from Tema are
represented as arriving at those places where it was well known torrents
did descend from the mountains, and they were full of expectation that
here they could not only slake their thirst, but fill their girbas or
water-skins; but when they arrive, they find the waters totally
dissipated and lost. In vain did the caravans of Sheba wait for them;
they did not reappear: and they were confounded, because they had hoped
to find here refreshment and rest.

[Job 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 6:21</span></span>

For now ye are nothing - Ye are just to me as those deceitful torrents
to the caravans of Tema and Sheba; they were nothing to them; ye are
nothing to me. Ye see my casting down - Ye see that I have been hurried
from my eminence into want and misery, as the flood from the top of the
mountains, which is divided, evaporated, and lost in the desert.

And are afraid - Ye are terrified at the calamity that has come upon me;
and instead of drawing near to comfort me, ye start back at my
appearance.

[Job 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 6:22</span></span>

Did I say, Bring unto me? - Why do you stand aloof? Have I asked you to
bring me any presents? or to supply my wants out of your stores?

[Job 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 6:23</span></span>

Or, Deliver me - Did I send to you to come and avenge me of the
destroyers of my property, or to rescue my substance out of the hands of
my enemies?

[Job 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 6:24</span></span>

Teach me - Show me where I am mistaken. Bring proper arguments to
convince me of my errors; and you will soon find that I shall gladly
receive your counsels, and abandon the errors of which I may be
convicted.

[Job 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 6:25</span></span>

How forcible are right words - A well-constructed argument, that has
truth for its basis, is irresistible.

But what doth your arguing reprove? - Your reasoning is defective,
because your premises are false; and your conclusions prove nothing,
because of the falsity of the premises whence they are drawn. The last
clause, literally rendered, is, What reproof, in a reproof from you? As
you have proved no fault you have consequently reproved no vice. Instead
of מה נמרצו mah nimretsu, "how forcible," מה נמלצו mah nimletsu, "how
savoury or pleasant," is the reading of two MSS., the Chaldee, and some
of the rabbins. Both senses are good, but the common reading is to be
preferred.

[Job 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 6:26</span></span>

Do ye imagine to reprove words - Is it some expressions which in my
hurry, and under the pressure of unprecedented affliction, I have
uttered, that ye catch at? You can find no flaw in my conduct; would ye
make me an Offender for a Word? Why endeavor to take such advantage of a
man who complains in the bitterness of his heart, through despair of
life and happiness?

[Job 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 6:27</span></span>

Ye overwhelm the fatherless - Ye see that I am as destitute as the most
miserable orphan; would ye overwhelm such a one? and would you dig a pit
for your friend - do ye lay wait for me, and endeavor to entangle me in
my talk? I believe this to be the spirit of Job's words.

[Job 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 6:28</span></span>

Look upon me - View me; consider my circumstances; compare my words; and
you must be convinced that I have spoken nothing but truth.

[Job 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 6:29</span></span>

Return, I pray you - Reconsider the whole subject. Do not be offended.
Yea, reconsider the subject; my righteousness is in it - my
argumentation is a sufficient proof of my innocence.

[Job 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 6:30</span></span>

Is there iniquity in my tongue? - Am I not an honest man? and if in my
haste my tongue had uttered falsity, would not my conscience discern it?
and do you think that such a man as your friend is would defend what he
knew to be wrong?

I Have done what I could to make this chapter plain, to preserve the
connection, and show the dependence of the several parts on each other;
without which many of the sayings would have been very obscure. The
whole chapter is an inimitable apology for what he had uttered, and a
defense of his conduct. This might have ended the controversy, had not
his friends been determined to bring him in guilty. They had prejudged
his cause, and assumed a certain position, from which they were
determined not to be driven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 7](job007)

</div>
