<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job039)  [Next](job041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 40:0</span></span>

Job humbles himself before the Lord, [Job
40:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001). And God again challenges him
by a display of his power and judgments, [Job
40:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#006). A description of behemoth,
[Job 40:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#015).

[Job 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 40:1</span></span>

Moreover the Lord answered - That is, the Lord continued his discourse
with Job. Answered does not refer to any thing said by Job, or any
question asked. I think it very likely that this whole piece, from the
beginning of this first verse to the end of the fourteenth, was
originally the ending of the poem. Mr. Heath has noticed this, and I
shall lay his words before the reader: "The former part of this chapter
is evidently the conclusion of the poem; the latter part whereof seems
to be in great disorder; whether it has happened from the carelessness
of the transcriber, or, which appears most probable, from the skins of
parchment composing the roll having by some accident changed their
places. It is plain from the seventh verse of the forty-second chapter
([Job 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#007)) that Jehovah is the last
speaker in the poem. If, then, immediately after the end of the
thirty-ninth chapter, we subjoin the fifteenth verse of the forty-second
chapter, and place the fourteen first verses of the fortieth chapter
immediately after the sixth verse of the forty-second chapter, and by
that means make them the conclusion of the poem, all will be right; and
this seventh verse of the forty-second chapter will be in its natural
order. The action will be complete by the judgment of the Almighty; and
the catastrophe of the poem will be grand and solemn." To these reasons
of Mr. Heath, Dr. Kennicott has added others, which the reader may find
at the end of the chapter. ([Job
40:24](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#024)) Without taking any farther
notice of the transposition in this place, I will continue the notes in
the present order of the verses.

[Job 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 40:2</span></span>

He that reproveth God, let him answer it - Let the man who has made so
free with God and his government, answer to what he has now heard.

[Job 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 40:4</span></span>

Behold, I am vile - I acknowledge my inward defilement. I cannot answer
thee.

I will lay mine hand upon my mouth - I cannot excuse myself, and I must
be dumb before thee.

[Job 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 40:5</span></span>

Once have I spoken - See on [Job 42:3](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#003)
(note), etc.

I will proceed no farther - I shall attempt to justify myself no longer;
I have spoken repeatedly; and am confounded at my want of respect for my
Maker, and at the high thoughts which I have entertained of my own
righteousness. All is impurity in the presence of thy Majesty.

[Job 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 40:7</span></span>

Gird up thy loins - See [Job 38:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001).
Some think that this and the preceding verse have been repeated here
from [Job 38:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001), and that several of
the words there, here, and [Job 42:3](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#003),
have been repeated, in after times, to connect some false gatherings of
the sheets of parchment, on which the end of this poem was originally
written. See on [Job 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001) (note), and
at the end of the chapter.

[Job 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 40:8</span></span>

Wilt thou condemn me - Rather than submit to be thought in the wrong,
wilt thou condemn My conduct, in order to justify thyself? Some men will
never acknowledge themselves in the wrong. "God may err, but we cannot,"
seems to be their impious maxim. Unwillingness to acknowledge a fault
frequently leads men, directly or indirectly, to this sort of blasphemy.
There are three words most difficult to be pronounced in all languages,
- I Am Wrong.

[Job 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 40:9</span></span>

Hast thou an arm like God? - Every word, from this to the end of [Job
40:14](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#014), has a wonderful tendency to
humble the soul; and it is no wonder that at the conclusion of these
sayings Job fell in the dust confounded, and ascribed righteousness to
his Maker.

[Job 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 40:10</span></span>

Deck thyself now with majesty - Act like God, seeing thou hast been
assuming to thyself perfections that belong to him alone.

[Job 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 40:13</span></span>

Hide them in the dust together - Blend the high and the low, the rich
and the poor, in one common ruin. Show them that thou art supreme, and
canst do whatsoever thou pleasest.

Bind their faces in secret - This seems to refer to the custom of
preserving mummies: the whole body is wrapped round with strong
swathings of linen or cotton cloth. Not only the limbs, but the very
head, face, and all, are rolled round with strong filleting, so that not
one feature can be seen, not even the protuberance of the nose. On the
outside of these involutions a human face is ordinarily painted; but as
to the real face itself, it is emphatically bound in secret, for those
rollers are never intended to be removed.

[Job 40:14](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 40:14</span></span>

Thine own right hand can save thee - It is the prerogative of God alone
to save the human soul. Nothing less than unlimited power, exerted under
the direction and impulse of unbounded mercy, can save a sinner. This is
most clearly asserted in this speech of Jehovah: When thou canst extend
an arm like God, i.e., an uncontrollable power - when thou canst arm
thyself with the lightning of heaven, and thunder with a voice like God
- when thou canst deck thyself with the ineffable glory, beauty, and
splendor of the supreme majesty of Jehovah - when thou canst dispense
thy judgments over all the earth, to abase the proud, and tread down the
wicked - when thou canst as having the keys of hell and death, blend the
high and the low in the dust together; then I will acknowledge to thee
that thy own right hand can save thee. In other words: Salvation
belongeth unto the Lord; no man can save his own soul by works of
righteousness which he has done, is doing, or can possibly do, to all
eternity. Without Jesus every human spirit must have perished
everlastingly. Glory be to God for his unspeakable gift!

[Job 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 40:15</span></span>

Behold now behemoth - The word בהמות behemoth is the plural of בהמה
behemah, which signifies cattle in general, or graminivorous animals, as
distinguished from חיתו chayetho, all wild or carnivorous animals. See
[Gen 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024). The former seems to mean
kine, horses, asses, sheep, etc., and all employed in domestic or
agricultural matters; the latter, all wild and savage beasts, such as
lions, bears, tigers, etc.: but the words are not always taken in these
senses.

In this place it has been supposed to mean some animal of the beeve
kind. The Vulgate retains the Hebrew name; so do the Syriac and Arabic.
The Chaldee is indefinite, translating creature or animal. And the
Septuagint is not more explicit, translating by θηρια, beasts or wild
beasts; and old Coverdale, the cruell beaste, perhaps as near to the
truth as any of them. From the name, therefore, or the understanding had
of it by the ancient versions, we can derive no assistance relative to
the individuality of the animal in question; and can only hope to find
what it is by the characteristics it bears in the description here given
of it.

These, having been carefully considered and deeply investigated both by
critics and naturalists, have led to the conclusion that either the
elephant, or the hippopotamus or river-horse, is the animal in question;
and on comparing the characteristics between these two, the balance is
considerably in favor of the hippopotamus. But even here there are still
some difficulties, as there are some parts of the description which do
not well suit even the hippopotamus; and therefore I have my doubts
whether either of the animals above is that in question, or whether any
animal now in existence be that described by the Almighty.

Mr. Good supposes, and I am of the same opinion, that the animal here
described is now extinct. The skeletons of three lost genera have
actually been found out: these have been termed palaeotherium,
anoplotherium, and mastodon or mammoth. From an actual examination of a
part of the skeleton of what is termed the mammoth, I have described it
in my note on [Gen 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024).

As I do not believe that either the elephant or the river-horse is
intended here, I shall not take up the reader's time with any detailed
description. The elephant is well known; and, though not an inhabitant
of these countries, has been so often imported in a tame state, and so
frequently occurs in exhibitions of wild beasts, that multitudes, even
of the common people, have seen this tremendous, docile, and sagacious
animal. Of the hippopotamus or river-horse, little is generally known
but by description, as the habits of this animal will not permit him to
be tamed. His amphibious nature prevents his becoming a constant
resident on dry land.

The hippopotamus inhabits the rivers of Africa and the lakes of
Ethiopia: feeds generally by night; wanders only a few miles from water;
feeds on vegetables and roots of trees, but never on fish; lays waste
whole plantations of the sugar-cane, rice, and other grain. When
irritated or wounded, it will attack boats and men with much fury. It
moves slowly and heavily: swims dexterously; walks deliberately and
leisurely over head into the water; and pursues his way, even on all
fours, on the bottom; but cannot remain long under the water without
rising to take in air. It sleeps in reedy places; has a tremendous
voice, between the lowing of an ox and the roaring of the elephant. Its
head is large; its mouth, very wide; its skin, thick and almost devoid
of hair; and its tail, naked and about a foot long. It is nearly as
large as the elephant, and some have been found seventeen feet long. Mr.
Good observes: "Both the elephant and hippopotamus are naturally quiet
animals; and never interfere with the grazing of others of different
kinds unless they be irritated. The behemoth, on the contrary, is
represented as a quadruped of a ferocious nature, and formed for
tyranny, if not rapacity; equally lord of the floods and of the
mountains; rushing with rapidity of foot, instead of slowness or
stateliness; and possessing a rigid and enormous tail, like a cedar
tree, instead of a short naked tail of about a foot long, as the
hippopotamus; or a weak, slender, hog-shaped tail, as the elephant."

The mammoth, for size, will answer the description in this place,
especially [Job 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#019) : He is the
chief of the ways of God. That to which the part of a skeleton belonged
which I examined, must have been, by computation, not less than
twenty-five feet high, and sixty feet in length! The bones of one toe I
measured, and found them three feet in length! One of the very smallest
grinders of an animal of this extinct species, full of processes on the
surface more than an inch in depth, which shows that the animal had
lived on flesh, I have just now weighed, and found it, in its very dry
state, four pounds eight ounces, avoirdupois: the same grinder of an
elephant I have weighed also, and found it just two pounds. The mammoth,
therefore, from this proportion, must have been as large as two
elephants and a quarter. We may judge by this of its size: elephants are
frequently ten and eleven feet high; this will make the mammoth at least
twenty-five or twenty-six feet high; and as it appears to have been a
many-toed animal, the springs which such a creature could make must have
been almost incredible: nothing by swiftness could have escaped its
pursuit. God seems to have made it as the proof of his power; and had it
been prolific, and not become extinct, it would have depopulated the
earth. Creatures of this kind must have been living in the days of Job;
the behemoth is referred to here, as if perfectly and commonly known.

He eateth grass as an ox - This seems to be mentioned as something
remarkable in this animal: that though from the form of his teeth he
must have been carnivorous, yet he ate grass as an ox; he lived both on
animal and vegetable food.

[Job 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 40:16</span></span>

His strength is in his loins - This refers to his great agility,
notwithstanding his bulk; by the strength of his loins he was able to
take vast springs, and make astonishing bounds.

[Job 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 40:17</span></span>

He moveth his tail like a cedar - Therefore it was neither the elephant,
who has a tail like that of the hog, nor the hippopotamus, whose tail is
only about a foot long.

The sinews of his stones - I translate with Mr. Good, and for the same
reasons, the sinews of his haunches, which is still more characteristic;
as the animal must have excelled in leaping.

[Job 40:18](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 40:18</span></span>

His bones are as strong pieces of brass-bars of iron - The tusk I have
mentioned above is uncommonly hard, solid, and weighty for its size.

[Job 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 40:19</span></span>

He is the chief of the ways of God - The largest, strongest, and
swiftest quadruped that God has formed.

He that made him - No power of man or beast can overcome him. God alone
can overcome him, and God alone could make his sword (of extinction)
approach to him.

[Job 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 40:20</span></span>

The mountains bring him forth food - It cannot therefore be the
hippopotamus, as he is seldom found far from the rivers where he has his
chief residence.

Where all the beasts of the field play - He frequents those places where
he can have most prey. He makes a mock of all the beasts of the field.
They can neither resist his power, nor escape from his agility. All this
answers to what we know of the mammoth, but not at all to the
hippopotamus.

[Job 40:21](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 40:21</span></span>

He lieth under the shady trees - This and the following verses refer to
certain habits of the behemoth, with which we are and must be
unacquainted,

[Job 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 40:22</span></span>

The willows of the brook compass him - This would agree well enough with
the hippopotamus.

[Job 40:23](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 40:23</span></span>

Behold, he drinketh up a river - A similar mode of expression, and of
precisely the same meaning, as that in [Job
39:24](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#024) : "He swalloweth the ground with
fierceness." No river can stop his course: he wades through all; stems
every tide and torrent; and hurries not as though he were in danger.

He trusteth that he can draw up Jordan - Even when the river overflows
its banks, it is no stoppage to him: though the whole impetuosity of its
stream rush against his mouth, he is not afraid. Mr. Good has seized the
true idea in his translation of this verse: -

"If the stream rage, he revileth not:

He is unmoved, though Jordan rush against his mouth."

From this mention of Jordan it is probable that the behemoth was once an
inhabitant of the mountains, marshes, and woods, of the land of
Palestine.

[Job 40:24](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 40:24</span></span>

He taketh it with his eyes - He looks at the sweeping tide, and defies
it.

His nose pierceth through snares - If fences of strong stakes be made in
order to restrain him, or prevent him from passing certain boundaries,
he tears them in pieces with his teeth; or, by pressing his nose against
them, breaks them off. If other parts of the description would answer,
this might well apply to the elephant, the nose here meaning the
proboscis, with which he can split trees, or even tear them up from the
roots! Thus ends the description of the behemoth; what I suppose to be
the mastodon or mammoth, or some creature of this kind, that God made as
the chief of his works, exhibited in various countries for a time, cut
them off from the earth, but by his providence preserved many of their
skeletons, that succeeding ages might behold the mighty power which
produced this chief of the ways of God, and admire the providence that
rendered that race extinct which would otherwise, in all probability,
have extinguished every other race of animals! I am not unapprized of
the strong arguments produced by learned men to prove, on the one hand,
that behemoth is the elephant; and, on the other, that he is the
hippopotamus or river-horse, and I have carefully read all that Bochart,
that chief of learned men, has said on the subject. But I am convinced
that an animal now extinct, probably of the kind already mentioned, is
the creature pointed out and described by the inspiration of God in this
chapter.

On [Job 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001) of this chapter we have
seen, from Mr. Heath's remarks, that the fourteen first verses were
probably transposed. In the following observations Dr. Kennicott appears
to prove the point. "It will be here objected, that the poem could not
possibly end with this question from Job; and, among other reasons, for
this in particular; because we read in the very next verse, That after
the Lord had spoken these words unto Job, etc. If, therefore, the last
speaker was not Job, but the Lord, Job could not originally have
concluded this poem, as he does at present. "This objection I hold to be
exceedingly important; and, indeed, to prove decisively that the poem
must have ended at first with some speech from God. "And this remark
leads directly to a very interesting inquiry: What was at first the
conclusion of this poem? This may, I presume, be pointed out and
determined, not by the alteration of any one word, but only by allowing
a dislocation of the fourteen verses which now begin the fortieth
chapter. Chapters 38, 39, 40, and 41, contain a magnificent display of
the Divine power and wisdom in the works of the Creator; specifying the
lion, raven, wild goat, wild ass, unicorn, peacock, ostrich, horse,
hawk, eagle, behemoth, and leviathan. "Now, it must have surprised most
readers to find that the description of these creatures is strangely
interrupted at [Job 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001), and as
strangely resumed afterwards at [Job
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#015); and therefore, if these
fourteen verses will connect with and regularly follow what now ends the
poem, we cannot much doubt that these fourteen verses have again found
their true station, and should be restored to it. "The greatness of the
supposed transposition is no objection: because so many verses as would
fill one piece of vellum in an ancient roll, might be easily sewed in
before or after its proper place. In the case before us, the twenty-five
lines in the first fourteen verses of chapter xl. seem to have been
sewed in improperly after [Job 39:30](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#030),
instead of after [Job 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#006). That such
large parts have been transposed in rolls to make which the parts are
sewed together is absolutely certain; and that this has been the case
here, is still more probable for the following reason: - "The lines here
supposed to be out of place are twenty-five, and contain ninety-two
words; which might be written on one piece or page of vellum. But the
MS. in which these twenty-five lines made one page, must be supposed to
have the same, or nearly the same, number of lines in each of the pages
adjoining. And it would greatly strengthen this presumption if these
twenty-five lines would fall in regularly at the end of any other set of
lines, nearly of the same number; if they would fall in after the next
set of twenty-five, or the second set, or the third, or the fourth, etc.
Now, this is actually the case here; for the lines after these
twenty-five, being one hundred or one hundred and one, make just four
times twenty-five. And, therefore, if we consider these one hundred and
twenty-five lines as written on five equal pieces of vellum, it follows
that the fifth piece might be carelessly sewed up before the other four.
"Let us also observe that present disorder of the speeches, which is
this. In chapters 38 and 39, God first speaks to Job. The end of chapter
39 is followed by, 'And the Lord answered Job and said,' whilst yet Job
had not replied. At [Job 40:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#003), Job
answers; but he says, he had then spoken Twice, and he would add no
more; whereas, this was his first reply, and he speaks afterwards. From
Job 40:15-41:34 are now the descriptions of behemoth and leviathan,
which would regularly follow the descriptions of the horse, hawk, and
eagle. And from [Job 42:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#001) is now
Job's speech, after which we read in [Job
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#007), 'After the Lord had spoken these
words unto Job!' "Now, all these confusions are removed at once if we
only allow that a piece of vellum containing the twenty-five lines,
([Job 40:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001)), originally followed
[Job 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#006). For then, after God's first
speech, ending with leviathan, Job replies: then God, to whom Job
replies the second time, when he added no more; and then God addresses
him the third, when Job is silent, and the poem concludes: upon which
the narrative opens regularly, with saying, 'After the Lord had spoken
these words unto Job,' etc. [Job
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#007)." - Kennicott's Remarks, p. 161.
The reader will find much more satisfaction if he read the places as
above directed. Having ended chapter 29, proceed immediately to [Job
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#015); go on regularly to the end of
[Job 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#006), and immediately after that
add [Job 40:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#001). We shall find then
that the poem has a consistent and proper ending, and that the
concluding speech was spoken by Jehovah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 41](job041)

</div>
