<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job003)  [Next](job005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 4:0</span></span>

Eliphaz answers; and accuses Job of impatience, and of despondence in
the time of adversity, [Job 4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#001);
asserts that no innocent man ever perished, and that the wicked are
afflicted for their sins, [Job 4:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007);
relates a vision that he had, [Job
4:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012), and what was said to him on
the occasion, [Job 4:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#017).

[Job 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 4:1</span></span>

Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered - For seven days this person and his
two friends had observed a profound silence, being awed and confounded
at the sight of Job's unprecedented affliction. Having now sufficiently
contemplated his afflicted state, and heard his bitter complaint,
forgetting that he came as a comforter, and not as a reprover, he loses
the feeling of the friend in the haughtiness of the censor, endeavoring
to strip him of his only consolation, - the testimony of his conscience,
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom, but by
the grace of God, he had his conversation among men, - by insinuating
that if his ways had been upright, he would not have been abandoned to
such distress and affliction; and if his heart possessed that
righteousness of which he boasted, he would not have been so suddenly
cast down by adversity.

[Job 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 4:2</span></span>

If we assay to commune with thee - As if he had said, Should I and my
friends endeavor to reason with thee ever so mildly, because we shall
have many things to say by way of reprehension, thou wilt be grieved and
faint; and this we may reasonably infer from the manner in which thou
bearest thy present afflictions. Yet as thou hast uttered words which
are injurious to thy Maker, who can forbear speaking? It is our duty to
rise up on the part of God, though thereby we shall grieve him who is
our friend. This was a plausible beginning, and certainly was far from
being insincere.

[Job 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 4:3</span></span>

Thou hast instructed many - Thou hast seen many in affliction and
distress, and thou hast given them such advice as was suitable to their
state, and effectual to their relief; and by this means thou hast
strengthened the weak hands, and the feeble knees - the desponding have
been encouraged, and the irresolute confirmed and excited to prompt and
proper actions, by thy counsel and example.

[Job 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 4:5</span></span>

But now it is come upon thee - Now it is thy turn to suffer, and give an
example of the efficacy of thy own principles; but instead of this,
behold, thou faintest. Either, therefore, thou didst pretend to what
thou hadst not; or thou art not making a proper use of the principles
which thou didst recommend to others.

[Job 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 4:6</span></span>

Is not this thy fear - I think Coverdale hits the true meaning: Where is
now thy feare of God, thy stedfastnesse, thy pacience, and the
perfectnesse of thy life? If these be genuine, surely there is no cause
for all this complaint, vexation, and despair. That this is the meaning,
the next words show.

[Job 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 4:7</span></span>

Remember, I pray thee - Recollect, if thou canst, a single instance
where God abandoned an innocent man, or suffered him to perish. Didst
thou ever hear of a case in which God abandoned a righteous man to
destruction? Wert thou a righteous man, and innocent of all hidden
crimes, would God abandon thee thus to the malice of Satan? or let loose
the plagues of affliction and adversity against thee?

[Job 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 4:8</span></span>

They that plough iniquity - A proverbial form of speech drawn from
nature. Whatever seed a man sows in the ground, he reaps the same kind;
for every seed produces its like. Thus Solomon, [Pro
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#008) : "He that soweth iniquity shall
reap vanity." And St. Paul, [Gal 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007),
[Gal 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#008) : "Be not deceived, God is
not mocked; for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he
that soweth to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he who
soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting." And of
the same nature is that other saying of the apostle, He that soweth
sparingly, shall reap sparingly, [Co2
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006). The same figure is employed by
the Prophet Hosea [Hos 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007) : They have
sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind; and [Hos
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012), [Hos
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#013) : Sow to yourselves in
righteousness; reap in mercy. Ye have ploughed wickedness; ye have
reaped iniquity. The last sentence contains, not only the same image,
but almost the same words as those used by Eliphaz. Our Lord expresses
the same thing, in the following words: [Mat
7:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016) : Do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles? Every good tree bringeth forth good fruit,
but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. So the Greeks: -

Ατης αρουρα θανατον εκκαρπιζεται.

Aesch. Ἑπτα επι Θηβαις, ver. 607.

"The field of iniquity produces the fruit of death."

Ὑβρις γαρ εξανθους εκαρπωσε σταχυν

Ατης, ὁθεν παγκλαυτον εξαμᾳ θερος.

IB. Περσαι, ver. 823.

"For oppression, when it springs,

Puts forth the blade of vengeance; and its fruit

Yields a ripe harvest of repentant wo."

\- Potter.

The image is common every where because it is a universal law of nature.

[Job 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 4:9</span></span>

By the blast of God they perish - As the noxious and parching east wind
blasts and destroys vegetation, so the wicked perish under the
indignation of the Almighty.

[Job 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 4:10</span></span>

The roaring of the lion - By the roaring lion, fierce lion, old lion,
stout lion, and lion's whelps, tyrannous rulers of all kinds are
intended. The design of Eliphaz in using these figures is to show that
even those who are possessed of the greatest authority and power - the
kings, rulers, and princes of the earth - when they become wicked and
oppressive to their subjects are cast down, broken to pieces, and
destroyed, by the incensed justice of the Lord; and their whelps - their
children and intended successors, scattered without possessions over the
face of the earth.

[Job 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 4:11</span></span>

The old lion perisheth - In this and the preceding verse the word lion
occurs five times; and in the original the words are all different: -

1\. אריה aryeh, from ארה arah, to tear off.

2\. שחל shachal, which as it appears to signify black or dark, may mean
the black lion, which is said to be found in Ethiopia and India.

3\. כפיר kephir, a young lion, from כפר caphar, to cover, because he is
said to hide himself in order to surprise his prey, which the old one
does not.

4\. ליש lavish, from לש lash, to knead, trample upon; because of his
method of seizing his prey.

5\. לביא labi, from לבא laba, to suckle with the first milk; a lioness
giving suck; at which time they are peculiarly fierce.

All these words may point out some quality of the lion; and this was
probably the cause why they were originally given: but it is likely
that, in process of time, they served only to designate the beast,
without any particular reference to any of his properties. We have one
and the same idea when we say the lion, the king of beasts, the monarch
of the forest, the most noble of quadrupeds, etc.

[Job 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 4:12</span></span>

Now a thing was secretly brought to me - To give himself the more
authority, he professes to have received a vision from God, by which he
was taught the secret of the Divine dispensations in providence; and a
confirmation of the doctrine which he was now stating to Job; and which
he applied in a different way to what was designed in the Divine
communication.

Mine ear received a little thereof - Mr. Good translates, "And mine ear
received a whisper along with it." The apparition was the general
subject; and the words related [Job
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#017), etc., were the whispers which he
heard when the apparition stood still.

[Job 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 4:13</span></span>

From the visions of the night - "It is in vain," says Mr. Good, "to
search through ancient or modern poetry for a description that has any
pretensions to rival that upon which we are now entering.
Midnight-solitude - the deep sleep of all around - the dreadful chill
and horripilation or erection of the hair over the whole body - the
shivering, not of the muscles only, but of the bones themselves - the
gliding approach of the spectre - the abruptness of his pause - his
undefined and indescribable form - are all powerful and original
characters, which have never been given with equal effect by any other
writer."

Mr. Hervey's illustration is also striking and natural. "'Twas in the
dead of night; all nature lay shrouded in darkness; every creature was
buried in sleep. The most profound silence reigned through the universe.
In these solemn moments Eliphaz, alone, all wakeful and solitary, was
musing on sublime subjects. When, lo! an awful being burst into his
apartment. A spirit passed before his face. Astonishment seized the
beholder. His bones shivered within him; his flesh trembled all over
him; and the hair of his head stood erect with horror. Sudden and
unexpected was its appearance; not such its departure. It stood still,
to present itself more fully to his view. It made a solemn pause, to
prepare his mind for some momentous message. After which a voice was
heard. A voice, for the importance of its meaning, worthy to be had in
everlasting remembrance. It spoke, and these were its words:"

[Job 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 4:17</span></span>

Shall mortal man - אנוש enosh; Greek βροτος poor, weak, dying man.

Be more just than God? - Or, האנוש מאלוה יצדק haenosh meeloah yitsdak;
shall poor, weak, sinful man be justified before God?

Shall a man - גבר gaber, shall even the strong and mighty man, be pure
before his Maker? Is any man, considered merely in and of himself,
either holy in his conduct, or pure in his heart? No. He must be
justified by the mercy of God, through an atoning sacrifice; he must be
sanctified by the Holy Spirit of God, and thus made a partaker of the
Divine nature. Then he is justified before God, and pure in the sight of
his Maker: and this is a work which God himself alone can do; so the
work is not man's work, but God's. It is false to infer, from the words
of this spectre, (whether it came from heaven or hell, we know not, for
its communication shows and rankles a wound, without providing a cure),
that no man can be justified, and that no man can be purified, when God
both justifies the ungodly, and sanctifies the unholy. The meaning can
be no more than this: no man can make an atonement for his own sins, nor
purify his own heart. Hence all boasting is for ever excluded. Of this
Eliphaz believed Job to be guilty, as he appeared to talk of his
righteousness and purity, as if they had been his own acquisition.

[Job 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 4:18</span></span>

Behold, he put no trust in his servants - This verse is generally
understood to refer to the fall of angels; for there were some of those
heavenly beings who kept not their first estate: they did not persevere
to the end of their probation, and therefore fell into condemnation, and
are reserved in chains of darkness unto the judgment of the great day;
[Jde 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006). It is said he put no trust
in them - he knew that nothing could be absolutely immutable but
himself; and that no intelligent beings could subsist in a state of
purity, unless continually dependent on himself, and deriving constant
supplies of grace, power, and light, from him who gave them their being.

And his angels he charged with folly - Not chargeth, as many quote the
passage. He charged those with folly who kept not their first estate. It
does not appear that he is charging the others in the same way, who
continue steadfast.

The several translations of this verse, both ancient and modern, are
different from each other. Here are the chief: -

In angelis suis reperit pravitatem, "In his angels he found
perverseness," Vulgate. The Septuagint is nearly the same. II met la
lumiere dans ses anges, "He puts light into his angels," French Bible.
Even those pure intelligences have continual need of being irradiated by
the Almighty; wa-bemalakui neshim temcho, "And he hath put amazement in
his angels," Syriac. The Arabic is the same. In angelis suis ponet
gloriationem, "In his angels he will put exultation," Montanus. The
Hebrew is תהלה toholah, irradiation, from הלה halah, to irradiate,
glister, or shine. In this place we may consider angels (מלאכים
malachim) as heavenly or earthly messengers or angels of the Lord; and
the glory, influence, and honor of their office as being put in them by
the Most High. They are as planets which shine with a borrowed light.
They have nothing but what they have received. Coverdale translates the
whole verse thus: Beholde he hath founde unfaythfulnesse amonge his owne
servaunts and proude disobedience amonge his angels. The sense is among
all these interpreters; and if the fallen angels are meant, the passage
is plain enough.

[Job 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 4:19</span></span>

How much less - Rather, with the Vulgate, How much more? If angels may
be unstable, how can man arrogate stability to himself who dwells in an
earthly tabernacle, and who must shortly return to dust? Crushed before
the moth? The slightest accident oftentimes destroys. "A fly, a
grape-stone, or a hair can kill." Great men have fallen by all these.
This is the general idea in the text, and it is useless to sift for
meanings.

[Job 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 4:20</span></span>

They are destroyed from morning to evening - In almost every moment of
time some human being comes into the world, and some one departs from
it. Thus are they "destroyed from morning to evening."

They perish for ever - יאבדו yobedu; peribunt, they pass by; they go out
of sight; they moulder with the dust, and are soon forgotten. Who
regards the past generation now among the dead? Isaiah has a similar
thought, [Isa 57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001) : "The righteous
perisheth, and No Man Layeth It to Heart: and merciful men are taken
away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to
come." Some think that Isaiah borrowed from Job; this will appear
possible when it has been proved, which has never yet been done, that
the writer of this book flourished before Isaiah. If, however, he
borrowed the above thought, it must be allowed that it has been
wondrously improved by coming through his hands.

[Job 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 4:21</span></span>

Doth not their excellency - go away! - Personal beauty, corporeal
strength, powerful eloquence, and various mental endowments, pass away,
or are plucked up by the roots; they are no more seen or heard among
men, and their memory soon perisheth.

They die, even without wisdom - If wisdom means the pursuit of the best
end, by the most legitimate and appropriate means, the great mass of
mankind appear to perish without it. But, if we consider the subject
more closely, we shall find that all men die in a state of comparative
ignorance. With all our boasted science and arts, how little do we know!
Do we know any thing to perfection that belongs either to the material
or spiritual world? Do we understand even what matter is? What is its
essence? Do we understand what spirit is? Then, what is its essence?
Almost all the phenomena of nature, its grandest operations, and the
laws of the heavenly bodies, have been explained on the principle of
gravitation or attraction; but in what does this consist? Who can
answer? We can traverse every part of the huge and trackless ocean by
means of the compass; but who understands the nature of magnetism on
which all this depends? We eat and drink in order to maintain life; but
what is nutrition, and how is it effected? This has never been
explained. Life depends on respiration for its continuance; but by what
kind of action is it, that in a moment the lungs separate the oxygen,
which is friendly to life, from the nitrogen, which would destroy it;
suddenly absorbing the one, and expelling the other? Who, among the
generation of hypothesis-framers, has guessed this out? Life is
continued by the circulation of the blood; but by what power and law
does it circulate? Have the systole and diastole of the heart, on which
this circulation depends, ever been satisfactorily explained? Most
certainly not. Alas, we die without wisdom; and must die, to know these,
and ten thousand other matters equally unknown, and equally important.
To be safe, in reference to eternity, we must know the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent; whom to know is life eternal. This
knowledge, obtained and retained, will entitle us to all the rest in the
eternal world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 5](job005)

</div>
