<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job028)  [Next](job030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 29:0</span></span>

Job laments his present condition, and gives an affecting account of his
former prosperity, having property in abundance, being surrounded by a
numerous family, and enjoying every mark of the approbation of God, [Job
29:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#001). Speaks of the respect he had
from the young, [Job 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007), [Job
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#008); and from the nobles, [Job
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#009), [Job
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#010). Details his conduct as a
magistrate and judge in supporting the poor, and repressing the wicked,
[Job 29:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#011); his confidence, general
prosperity, and respect, [Job
29:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#018).

[Job 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 29:2</span></span>

O that I were as in months past - Job seems here to make an apology for
his complaints, by taking a view of his former prosperity, which was
very great, but was now entirely at an end. He shows that it was not
removed because of any bad use he had made of it; and describes how he
behaved himself before God and man, and how much, for justice,
benevolence, and mercy, he was esteemed and honored by the wise and
good.

Preserved me - Kept, guarded, and watched over me.

[Job 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 29:3</span></span>

When his candle shined upon my head - Alluding most probably to the
custom of illuminating festival or assembly rooms by lamps pendant from
the ceiling. These shone literally on the heads of the guests.

By his light I walked through darkness - His light - prosperity and
peace - continued to illuminate my way. If adversity came, I had always
the light of God to direct me. Almost all the nations of the world have
represented their great men as having a nimbus or Divine glory about
their heads, which not only signified the honor they had, but was also
an emblem of the inspiration of the Almighty.

[Job 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 29:4</span></span>

The days of my youth - The original word rather means in the days of my
winter, חרפי charpi, from חרף charaph, "to strip or make bare." Mr.
Harmer supposes the rainy season is intended, when the fields, etc.,
parched up by long drought, are revived by the plentiful showers. Mr.
Good thinks the word as found in the Arabic, which means top or summit,
and which he translates perfection, is that which should be preferred.
Others think the autumnal state is meant, when he was loaded with
prosperity, as the trees are with ripe fruit.

The secret of God was upon my tabernacle - בסוד אלוה besod Eloah, "the
secret assembly of God," meaning probably the same thing that is spoken
of in the beginning of this book, the sons of God, the devout people,
presenting themselves before God. It is not unlikely that such a secret
assembly of God Job had in his own house; where he tells us, in the next
verse, "The Almighty was with him, and his children were about him." Mr.
Good translates differently: When God fortified my tent over me;
supposing that the Hebrew סוד sod is the Arabic sud, "a barrier or
fortification." Either will make a good sense.

[Job 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 29:6</span></span>

Washed my steps with butter - See the note on [Job
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#017).

[Job 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 29:7</span></span>

When I went out to the gate - Courts of justice were held at the gates
or entrances of the cities of the East; and Job, being an emir, was
supreme magistrate: and here he speaks of his going to the gate to
administer justice.

I prepared my seat in the street - I administered judgment openly, in
the most public manner, and none could say that I, in any case,
perverted justice. Mr. Good translates: - "As I went forth the city
rejoiced at me, as I took my seat abroad."

[Job 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 29:8</span></span>

The young men saw me, and hid themselves - From all classes of persons I
had the most marked respect. The Young, through modesty and bashfulness,
shrunk back, and were afraid to meet the eye of their prince; and the
Aged rose from their seats when I entered the place of judgment. These
were the elders of the people, who also sat with the judge, and assisted
in all legal cases.

[Job 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 29:9</span></span>

The princes refrained talking - They never ventured an opinion in
opposition to mine; so fully were they persuaded of the justice and
integrity of my decision.

[Job 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 29:10</span></span>

The nobles held their peace - Princes שרים sarim, and Nobles, נגידים
negidim, must have been two different classes of the great men of
Idumea. שר sar, Prince, director, or ruler, was probably the head of a
township, or what we would call a magistrate of a particular district.
נגיד nagid, a Noble, or one of those who had the privilege of standing
before, or in the presence of, the chief ruler. The participle נגד neged
is frequently used to signify before, in the presence of, publicly,
openly. And on this account, it is most likely that the noun means one
of those nobles or counsellors who were always admitted to the royal
presence. Mr. Good thinks that renowned speakers or eminent orators are
meant: and others have embraced the same opinion. Job here intimates
that his judgment was so sound, his decisions so accredited, and his
reasoning power so great, that every person paid him the utmost
deference.

[Job 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 29:11</span></span>

When the ear heard me - This and the six following verses present us
with a fine exhibition of a man full of benevolence and charity, acting
up to the highest dictates of those principles, and rendering the
miserable of all descriptions happy, by the constant exercise of his
unconfined philanthropy.

[Job 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 29:12</span></span>

Because I delivered the poor that cried - This appears to be intended as
a refutation of the charges produced by Eliphaz, [Job
22:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#005), to confute which Job appeals
to facts, and to public testimony.

[Job 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 29:15</span></span>

I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame - Alluding probably
to the difficulty of travelling in the Arabian deserts. I was eyes to
the blind - those who did not know the way, I furnished with guides. I
was feet to the lame - those who were worn out, and incapable of
walking, I set forward on my camels, etc.

[Job 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 29:16</span></span>

The cause which I knew not I searched out - When any thing difficult
occurred, I did not give it a slight consideration; I examined it to the
bottom, whatever pain, time, and trouble it cost me, that I might not
pronounce a hasty judgment.

[Job 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 29:17</span></span>

I brake the jaws of the wicked - A metaphor taken from hunting. A beast
of prey had entered into the fold, and carried off a sheep. "The
huntsman comes, assails the wicked beast, breaks his jaws, and delivers
the spoil out of his teeth. See the case [Sa1
17:34-37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#034) (note).

[Job 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 29:18</span></span>

I shall die in my nest - As I endeavored to live soberly and
temperately, fearing God, and departing from evil, endeavoring to
promote the welfare of all around me, it was natural for me to conclude
that I should live long, be very prosperous, and see my posterity
multiply as the sands on the seashore.

[Job 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 29:19</span></span>

My root was spread out by the waters - A metaphor taken from a healthy
tree growing beside a rivulet where there is plenty of water; which in
consequence flourishes in all seasons; its leaf does not wither, nor its
fruit fall off. See [Psa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003); [Jer
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008).

[Job 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 29:20</span></span>

My glory was fresh in me - My vegetative power was great; my glory - my
splendid blossom, large and mellow fruit, was always in season, and in
every season.

My bow was renewed - I was never without means to accomplish all my
wishes. I had prosperity everywhere.

[Job 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 29:21</span></span>

Unto me men gave ear - The same idea as in [Job
29:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#009).

[Job 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 29:22</span></span>

My speech dropped upon them - It descended as refreshing dew; they were
encouraged, comforted, and strengthened by it.

[Job 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 29:23</span></span>

They waited for me as for the rain - The idea continued. They longed as
much to hear me speak, to receive my counsel and my decisions, as the
thirsty land does for refreshing waters.

They opened their mouth wide - A metaphor taken from ground chapped with
long drought.

The latter rain - The rain that falls a little before harvest, in order
to fill and perfect the grain. The former rain is that which falls about
seed-time, or in spring, in order to impregnate and swell the seed, and
moisten the earth to produce its nourishment.

[Job 29:24](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 29:24</span></span>

I laughed on them, they believed it not - Similar to that expression in
the Gospel, [Luk 24:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#041) : And while
they believed not for joy, and wondered, he said - . Our version is
sufficiently perspicuous, and gives the true sense of the original, only
it should be read in the indicative and not in the subjunctive mood: I
laughed on them - they believed it not. We have a similar phrase: The
news was too good to be true.

The light of my countenance - This evidence of my benevolence and
regard. A smile is, metaphorically, the light of the countenance.

They cast not down - They gave me no occasion to change my sentiments or
feelings towards them. I could still smile upon them, and they were then
worthy of my approbation. Their change he refers to in the beginning of
the next chapter.

[Job 29:25](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 29:25</span></span>

I chose out their way, and sat chief - as a king in the army - I cannot
see, with some learned men, that our version of the original is wrong. I
have not seen it mended, and I am sure I cannot improve it. The whole
verse seems to me to point out Job in his civil, military, and domestic
life. As supreme magistrate he chose out their way, adjusted their
differences, and sat chief, presiding in all their civil assemblies. As
captain general he dwelt as a king in the midst of his troops,
preserving order and discipline, and seeing that his fellow soldiers
were provided with requisites for their warfare, and the necessaries of
life. As a man he did not think himself superior to the meanest offices
in domestic life, to relieve or support his fellow creatures; he went
about comforting the mourners - visiting the sick and afflicted, and
ministering to their wants, and seeing that the wounded were properly
attended. Noble Job! Look at him, ye nobles of the earth, ye lieutenants
of counties, ye generals of armies, and ye lords of provinces. Look at
Job! Imitate his active benevolence, and be healthy and happy. Be as
guardian angels in your particular districts, blessing all by your
example and your bounty. Send your hunting horses to the plough, your
game cocks to the dunghill; and at last live like men and Christians.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 30](job030)

</div>
