<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job018)  [Next](job020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 19:0</span></span>

Job complains of the cruelty of his friends, [Job
19:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#001). Pathetically laments his
sufferings, [Job 19:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#006). Complains of
his being forsaken by all his domestics, friends, relatives, and even
his wife, [Job 19:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013). Details his
sufferings in an affecting manner, calls upon his friends to pity him,
and earnestly wishes that his speeches may be recorded, [Job
19:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020). Expresses his hope in a
future resurrection, [Job 19:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025).
And warns his persecutors to desist, lest they fall under God's
judgments, [Job 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#028), [Job
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#029).

[Job 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 19:2</span></span>

How long will ye vex my soul - Every thing that was irritating,
vexatious, and opprobrious, his friends had recourse to, in order to
support their own system, and overwhelm him. Not one of them seems to
have been touched with a feeling of tenderness towards him, nor does a
kind expression drop at any time from their lips! They were called
friends; but this term, in reference to them, must be taken in the sense
of cold-blooded acquaintances. However, there are many in the world that
go under the sacred name of friends, who, in times of difficulty, act a
similar part. Job's friends have been, by the general consent of
posterity, consigned to endless infamy. May all those who follow their
steps be equally enrolled in the annals of bad fame!

[Job 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 19:3</span></span>

These ten times - The exact arithmetical number is not to be regarded;
ten times being put for many times, as we have already seen. See
particularly the note on [Gen 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#007)
(note).

Ye make yourselves strange to me - When I was in affluence and
prosperity, ye were my intimates, and appeared to rejoice in my
happiness; but now ye scarcely know me, or ye profess to consider me a
wicked man because I am in adversity. Of this you had no suspicion when
I was in prosperity! Circumstances change men's minds.

[Job 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 19:4</span></span>

And be it indeed that I have erred - Suppose indeed that I have been
mistaken in any thing, that in the simplicity of my heart I have gone
astray, and that this matter remains with myself, (for most certainly
there is no public stain on my life), you must grant that this error,
whatsoever it is, has hurt no person except myself. Why then do ye treat
me as a person whose life has been a general blot, and whose example
must be a public curse?

[Job 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 19:6</span></span>

Know now that God hath overthrown me - The matter is between him and me,
and he has not commissioned you to add reproaches to his chastisements.

And hath compassed me with his net - There may be an allusion here to
the different modes of hunting which have been already referred to in
the preceding chapter. But if we take the whole verse together, and read
the latter clause before the former, thus, "Know, therefore, that God
hath encompassed me with his net, and overthrown me;" the allusion may
be to an ancient mode of combat practiced among the ancient Persians,
ancient Goths, and among the Romans. The custom among the Romans was
this: "One of the combatants was armed with a sword and shield, the
other with a trident and net. The net he endeavored to cast over the
head of his adversary, in which, when he succeeded, the entangled person
was soon pulled down by a noose that fastened round the neck, and then
despatched. The person who carried the net and trident was called
Retiarius, and the other who carried the sword and shield was termed
Secutor, or the pursuer, because, when the Retiarius missed his throw,
he was obliged to run about the ground till he got his net in order for
a second throw, while the Secutor followed hard to prevent and despatch
him." The Persians in old times used what was called (Persic) kumund,
the noose. It was not a net, but a sort of running loop, which horsemen
endeavored to cast over the heads of their enemies that they might pull
them off their horses. That the Goths used a hoop net fastened to a
pole, which they endeavored to throw over the heads of their foes, is
attested by Olaus Magnus, Hist. de Gentibus Septentrionalibus, Rom.
1555, lib. xi., cap. 13, De diversis Modis praeliandi Finnorum. His
words are, Quidam restibus instar retium ferinorum ductilibus sublimi
jactatione utuntur: ubi enim cum hoste congressi sunt, injiciunt eos
restes quasi laqueos in caput resistentis, ut equum aut hominem ad se
trahant. "Some use elastic ropes, formed like hunting nets, which they
throw aloft; and when they come in contact with the enemy, they throw
these ropes over the head of their opponent, and by this means they can
then drag either man or horse to themselves." At the head of the page he
gives a wood-cut representing the net, and the manner of throwing it
over the head of the enemy. To such a device Job might allude, God hath
encompassed me with his Net, and overthrown me.

[Job 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 19:7</span></span>

I cry out of wrong - I complain of violence and of injustice; but no one
comes to my help.

[Job 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 19:8</span></span>

He hath fenced up my way - This may allude to the mode of hunting the
elephant, described at the conclusion of the preceding chapter; or to
the operations of an invading army. See under [Job
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#011) (note).

[Job 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 19:9</span></span>

He hath stripped me of my glory - I am reduced to such circumstances,
that I have lost all my honor and respect.

[Job 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 19:10</span></span>

Mine hope hath he removed like a tree - There is no more hope of my
restoration to affluence, authority, and respect, than there is that a
tree shall grow and flourish, whose roots are extracted from the earth.
I am pulled up by the roots, withered, and gone.

[Job 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 19:11</span></span>

And he counteth me unto him as one of his enemies - From the seventh to
the thirteenth verse there seems to be an allusion to a hostile
invasion, battles, sieges, etc.

1\. A neighboring chief, without provocation, invades his neighbor's
territories, and none of his friends will come to his help. "I cry out
of wrong, but I am not heard," [Job
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#007).

2\. The foe has seized on all the passes, and he is hemmed up. "He hath
fenced up my way that I cannot pass," [Job
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#008).

3\. He has surprised and carried by assault the regal city, seized and
possessed the treasures. "He hath stripped me of my glory, and taken the
crown from my head," [Job 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#009).

4\. All his armies are routed in the field, and his strong places
carried. "He hath destroyed me on every side," [Job
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#010).

5\. The enemy proceeds to the greatest length of outrage, wasting every
thing with fire and sword. "He hath kindled his wrath against me, and
treateth me like one of his adversaries, [Job
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#011).

6\. He is cooped up in a small camp with the wrecks of his army; and in
this he is closely besieged by all the power of his foes, who encompass
the place, and raise forts against it. "His troops come together, and
raise up their way against me, and encamp round about my tabernacle."

7\. Not receiving any assistance from friends or neighbors, he abandons
all hope of being able to keep the field, escapes with the utmost
difficulty, and is despised and neglected by his friends and domestics
because he has been unfortunate. "I am escaped with the skin of my
teeth," [Job 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020). "My kinsfolk have
failed-all my intimate friends abhorred me," [Job
19:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#014).

[Job 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 19:14</span></span>

My kinsfolk have failed - Literally, departed: they have all left my
house, now there is no more hope of gain.

[Job 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 19:15</span></span>

They that dwell in mine house - In this and the following verses the
disregard and contempt usually shown to men who have fallen from
affluence and authority into poverty and dependence, are very forcibly
described: formerly reverenced by all, now esteemed by none. Pity to
those who have fallen into adversity is rarely shown; the rich have many
friends, and to him who appears to be gaining worldly substance much
court is paid; for many worship the rising sun, who think little of that
which is gone down. Some are even reproached with that eminence which
they have lost, though not culpable for the loss. A bishop, perhaps
Bale, of Ossory, being obliged to leave his country and fly for his
life, in the days of bloody Queen Mary, and who never regained his
bishopric, was met one morning by one like those whom Job describes,
who, intending to be witty at the expense of the venerable prelate,
accosted him thus: "Good morrow, Bishop quondam." To which the bishop
smartly replied, "Adieu, Knave semper."

[Job 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 19:17</span></span>

Though I entreated for the children's sake of mine own body - This may
imply no more than adjuring her by the tenderest ties, by their
affectionate intercourse, and consequently by the children which had
been the seals of their mutual affection, though these children were no
more. But the mention of his children in this place may intimate that he
had still some remaining; that there might have been young ones, who,
not being of a proper age to attend the festival of their elder brothers
and sisters, escaped that sad catastrophe. The Septuagint have,
Προσεκαλουμην δε κολακευων υἰους παλλακιδων μου, "I affectionately
entreated the children of my concubines." But there is no ground in the
Hebrew text for such a strange exceptionable rendering. Coverdale has, I
am fayne to speake fayre to the children of myne own body.

[Job 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 19:19</span></span>

My inward friends - Those who were my greatest intimates.

[Job 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 19:20</span></span>

My bone cleaveth to my skin - My flesh is entirely wasted away, and
nothing but skin and bone left.

I am escaped with the skin of my teeth - I have had the most narrow
escape. If I still live, it is a thing to be wondered at, my sufferings
and privations have been so great. To escape with the skin of the teeth
seems to have been a proverbial expression, signifying great difficulty.
I had as narrow an escape from death, as the thickness of the enamel on
the teeth. I was within a hair's breadth of destruction; see on [Job
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#011) (note).

[Job 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 19:21</span></span>

Have pity upon me - The iteration here strongly indicates the depth of
his distress, and that his spirit was worn down with the length and
severity of his suffering.

[Job 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 19:22</span></span>

Why do ye persecute me as God - Are not the afflictions which God sends
enough? Do ye not see that I have as much as I can bear? When the
papists were burning Dr. Taylor at Oxford, while wrapped in the flames,
one of the true sons of the Church took a stick out of the faggots, and
threw it at his head, and split open his face. To whom he calmly said,
Man, why this wrong? Do not I suffer enough?

And are not satisfied with my flesh? - Will ye persecute my soul, while
God is persecuting my body? Is it not enough that my body is destroyed?
Why then labor to torment my mind?

[Job 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 19:23</span></span>

O that my words were now written! - Job introduces the important subject
which follows in a manner unusually solemn; and he certainly considers
the words which he was about to utter of great moment, and therefore
wishes them to be recorded in every possible way. All the modes of
writing then in use he appears to refer to. As to printing, that should
be out of the question, as no such art was then discovered, nor for
nearly two thousand years after. Our translators have made a strange
mistake by rendering the verb יחקו yuchaku, printed, when they should
have used described, traced out. O that my words were fairly traced out
in a book! It is necessary to make this remark, because superficial
readers have imagined that the art of printing existed in Job's time,
and that it was not a discovery of the fifteenth century of the
Christian era: whereas there is no proof that it ever existed in the
world before a.d. 1440, or thereabouts, for the first printed book with
a date is a psalter printed by John Fust, in 1457, and the first Bible
with a date is that by the same artist in 1460. Three kinds of writing
Job alludes to, as being practiced in his time:

1\. Writing in a book, formed either of the leaves of the papyrus,
already described, (see on [Job 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#011)
(note)), or on a sort of linen cloth. A roll of this kind, with unknown
characters, I have seen taken out of the envelopments of an Egyptian
mummy. Denon, in his travels in Egypt, gives an account of a book of
this kind, with an engraved facsimile, taken also out of an Egyptian
mummy.

2\. Cutting with an iron stile on plates of lead.

3\. Engraving on large stones or rocks, many of which are still found in
different parts of Arabia.

To the present day the leaves of the palm tree are used in the East
instead of paper, and a stile of brass, silver, iron, etc., with a steel
point, serves for a pen. By this instrument the letters are cut or
engraved on the substance of the leaf, and afterwards some black
colouring matter is rubbed in, in order to make the letters apparent.
This was probably the oldest mode of writing, and it continues among the
Cingalese to the present day. It is worthy of remark that Pliny (Hist.
Nat., lib. xiii., c. 11) mentions most of these methods of writing, and
states that the leaves of the palm tree were used before other
substances were invented. After showing that paper was not used before
the conquest of Egypt by Alexander the Great, he proceeds: In palmarum
foliis primo scriptitatum; deinde quarundam arborum libris: postea
publica monumenta plumbeis voluminibus, mox et privata linteis confici
caepta, aut ceris. "At first men wrote on palm tree leaves, and
afterwards on the bark or rind of other trees. In process of time,
public monuments were written on rolls of lead, and those of a private
nature on linen books, or tables covered with wax." Pausanias, lib.
xii., c. 31, giving an account of the Boeotians, who dwelt near fount
Helicon, states the following fact: -

Και μοι μολιβδον εδεικνυσαν, ενθα ἡ πηγη, τα πολλα ὑπο του χρονου
λελυμασμενον, εγγεγραπται γαρ αυτῳ τα εργα;

"They showed me a leaden table near to the fountain, all which his works
(Hesiod's) were written; but a great part had perished by the injuries
of time."

[Job 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 19:24</span></span>

Iron pen and lead - Some suppose that the meaning of this place is this:
the iron pen is the chisel by which the letters were to be deeply cut in
the stone or rock; and the lead was melted into those cavities in order
to preserve the engraving distinct. But this is not so natural a
supposition as what is stated above; that Job refers to the different
kinds of writing or perpetuating public events, used in his time: and
the quotations from Pliny and Pausanias confirm the opinion already
expressed.

[Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 19:25</span></span>

For I know that my Redeemer liveth - Any attempt to establish the true
meaning of this passage is almost hopeless. By learned men and eminent
critics the words have been understood very differently; some vehemently
contending that they refer to the resurrection of the body, and the
redemption of the human race by Jesus Christ; while others, with equal
vehemence and show of argument, have contended that they refer only to
Job's restoration to health, family comforts, and general prosperity,
after the present trial should be ended. In defense of these two
opinions larger treatises have been written than the whole book of Job
would amount to, if written even in capitals. To discuss the arguments
on either side the nature of this work forbids; but my own view of the
subject will be reasonably expected by the reader. I shall therefore lay
down one principle, without which no mode of interpretation hitherto
offered can have any weight. The principle is this: Job was now under
the especial inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and spoke prophetically.
Now, whether we allow that the passage refers to the general
resurrection and the redemption by Christ, or to Job's restoration to
health, happiness, and prosperity, this principle is equally necessary.

1\. In those times no man could speak so clearly concerning the general
resurrection and the redemption by Jesus Christ as Job, by one class of
interpreters, is supposed here to do, unless especially inspired for
this very purpose.

2\. Job's restoration to health and happiness, which, though it did take
place, was so totally improbable to himself all the way through, so
wholly unexpected, and, in every sense, impossible, except to the
almighty power of God, that it could not be inferred from any thing that
had already taken place, and must be foreshown by direct inspiration.

Now, that it was equally easy to predict either of these events, will be
at once evident, because both were in futurity, and both were previously
determined. Nothing contingent could exist in either; with them man had
nothing to do; and they were equally within the knowledge of Him to
whose ubiquity there can be neither past nor future time; in whose
presence absolute and contingent events subsist in their own distinctive
characters, and are never resolved into each other. But another question
may arise, Which was most likely to be the subject of this oracular
declaration, the general resurrection and redemption by Christ; or the
restoration of Job to health and affluence? If we look only to the
general importance of these things, this question may be soon decided;
for the doctrine of human redemption, and the general resurrection to an
eternal life, are of infinitely greater importance than any thing that
could affect the personal welfare of Job. We may therefore say, of two
things which only the power of God can effect, and one of which only
shall be done it is natural to conclude he will do that which is of most
importance; and that is of most importance by which a greater measure of
glory is secured to himself, and a greater sum of good produced to
mankind. As, therefore, a revelation by which the whole human race, in
all its successive generations, to the end of time, may be most
essentially benefited, is superior in its worth and importance to that
by which one man only can be benefited, it is natural to conclude here,
that the revelation relative to the general resurrection, etc., is that
which most likely the text includes. But to this it may be answered, God
does not do always in the first instance that which is most necessary
and important in itself, as every thing is done in that order and in
that time which seems best to his godly wisdom; therefore, a thing of
less importance may be done now, and a thing of greater importance left
to a future time. So, God made the earth before he made man, produced
light before he formed the celestial luminaries, and instituted the
Mosaic economy before the Christian dispensation. This is all true, for
every thing is done in that season in which it may best fulfill the
designs of providence and grace. But the question still recurs, Which of
the predictions was most congruous to the circumstances of Job, and
those of his companions; and which of them was most likely to do most
good on that occasion, and to be most useful through the subsequent ages
of the world? The subject is now considerably narrowed; and, if this
question could be satisfactorily answered, the true meaning of the
passage would be at once found out.

1\. For the sake of righteousness, justice, and truth, and to vindicate
the ways of God with man, it was necessary that Job's innocence should
be cleared; that the false judgments of his friends should be corrected;
and that, as Job was now reduced to a state of the lowest distress, it
was worthy the kindness of God to give him some direct intimation that
his sufferings should have a happy termination. That such an event ought
to take place, there can be no question: and that it did take place, is
asserted in the book; and that Job's friends saw it, were reproved,
corrected, and admitted into his favor of whom they did not speak that
which was right, and who had, in consequence, God's wrath kindled
against them, are also attested facts. But surely there was no need of
so solemn a revelation to inform them of what was shortly to take place,
when they lived to see it; nor can it be judged essentially necessary to
the support of Job, when the ordinary consolations of God's Spirit, and
the excitement of a good hope through grace, might have as completely
answered the end.

2\. On the other hand, to give men, who were the chiefs of their
respective tribes, proper notice of a doctrine of which they appear to
have had no adequate conception, and which was so necessary to the peace
of society, the good government of men, and the control of unruly and
wayward passions, which the doctrine of the general resurrection and
consequent judgment is well calculated to produce; and to stay and
support the suffering godly under the afflictions and calamities of
life; were objects worthy the highest regards of infinite philanthropy
and justice, and of the most pointed and solemn revelation which could
be given on such an occasion. In short, they are the grounds on which
all revelation is given to the sons of men: and the prophecy in
question, viewed in this light, was, in that dark age and country, a
light shining in a dark place; for the doctrine of the general
resurrection and of future rewards and punishments, existed among the
Arabs from time immemorial, and was a part of the public creed of the
different tribes when Mohammed endeavored to establish his own views of
that resurrection and of future rewards and punishments, by the edge of
the sword. I have thus endeavored dispassionately to view this subject;
and having instituted the preceding mode of reasoning, without
foreseeing where it would tend, being only desirous to find out truth, I
arrive at the conclusion, that the prophecy in question was not designed
to point out the future prosperity of Job; but rather the future
redemption of mankind by Jesus Christ, and the general resurrection of
the human race. After what has been stated above, a short paraphrase on
the words of the text will be all that is necessary to be added. I know,
ידעתי yadati, I have a firm and full persuasion, that my Redeemer, גאלי
goali, my Kinsman, he whose right it was among the ancient Hebrews to
redeem the forfeited heritages belonging to the family, to vindicate its
honor, and to avenge the death of any of his relatives by slaying the
murderer; ([Lev 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025); [Num
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#012); [Rut
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#013)); but here it must refer to
Christ, who has truly the right of redemption, being of the same
kindred, who was born of woman, flesh of flesh and bone of our bone.
Liveth, חי chai, is the living One, who has the keys of hell and death:
the Creator and Lord of the spirits of all flesh, and the principle and
support of all life. And that he shall stand at the latter day upon the
earth. The latter day, אחרון acharon, the latter day, or time, when God
comes to judgment; or finally, or at last, or in the last time, or
latter days, as the Gospel is termed, he shall be manifested in the
flesh. He shall stand, יקום yakum, he shall arise, or stand up, i.e., to
give sentence in judgment: or he himself shall arise from the dust, as
the passage has been understood by some to refer to the resurrection of
Christ from the dead. Upon the earth, על עפר al aphar, over the dead, or
those who are reduced to dust. This is the meaning of עפר aphar in [Psa
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009) : What profit is there in my
blood when I go down to the pit? Shall the Dust (i.e., the dead) praise
thee? He shall arise over the dust - over them who sleep in the dust,
whom he shall also raise up.

[Job 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 19:26</span></span>

And though after my skin worms destroy this body - My skin, which is now
almost all that remains of my former self, except the bones; see [Job
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020). They destroy this - not body.
נקפו זאת nikkephu zoth, they - diseases and affliction, destroy This
wretched composition of misery and corruption.

Yet in my flesh shall I see God - Either, I shall arise from the dead,
have a renewed body and see him with eyes of flesh and blood, though
what I have now shall shortly moulder into dust, or, I shall see him in
the flesh; my Kinsman, who shall partake of my flesh and blood, in order
that he may ransom the lost inheritance.

[Job 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 19:27</span></span>

Whom I shall see for myself - Have a personal interest in the
resurrection, as I shall have in the Redeemer.

And mine eyes shall behold - That very person who shall be the
resurrection, as he is the life.

And not another - ולא זר velo zar, and not a stranger, one who has no
relation to human nature; but גאלי goali, my redeeming Kinsman.

Though my reins be consumed within me - Though I am now apparently on
the brink of death, the thread of life being spun out to extreme
tenuity. This, on the mode of interpretation which I have assumed,
appears to be the meaning of this passage. The words may have a somewhat
different colouring put on them; but the basis of the interpretation
will be the same. I shall conclude with the version of Coverdale: -

For I am sure that my Redeemer liveth;

And that I shal ryse out of the earth in the latter daye;

That I shal be clothed againe with this skynne

And se God in my flesh.

Yee, I myself shal beholde him,

Not with other, but with these same eyes.

My reins are consumed within me, when ye saye,

Why do not we persecute him?

We have founde an occasion against him.

[Job 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 19:28</span></span>

But ye should say - Or, Then ye shall say.

Why persecute we him - Or, as Mr. Good, How did we persecute him! Alas!
we are now convinced that we did wrong.

Seeing the root of the matter - A pure practice, and a sound hope,
resting on the solid ground of sound faith, received from God himself.
Instead of בי bi, in Me, בי bo, in Him, is the reading of more than one
hundred of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS., and in several of the
versions. Seeing the root of the matter is found in Him.

[Job 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 19:29</span></span>

Be ye afraid of the sword - Of God's judgments.

For wrath bringeth - Such anger as ye have displayed against me, God
will certainly resent and punish.

That ye may know there is a judgment - That ye may know that God will
judge the world; and that the unequal distribution of riches and
poverty, afflictions and health, in the present life, is a proof that
there must be a future judgment, where evil shall be punished and virtue
rewarded.

It would not be fair, after all the discussion of the preceding verses
in reference to the two grand opinions and modes of interpretation
instituted by learned men, not to inform the reader that a third method
of solving all difficulties has been proposed, viz., that Job refers to
a Divine conviction which he had just then received, that God would
appear in the most evident manner to vindicate his innocence, and give
the fullest proofs to his friends and to the world that his afflictions
had not been sent as a scourge for his iniquities. Dr. Kennicott was the
proposer of this third mode of solving these difficulties, and I shall
give his method in his own words. "These five verses, though they
contain but twelve lines, have occasioned controversies without number,
as to the general meaning of Job in this place, whether he here
expressed his firm belief of a resurrection to happiness after death, or
of a restoration to prosperity during the remainder of his life. "Each
of these positions has found powerful as well as numerous advocates; and
the short issue of the whole seems to be, that each party has confuted
the opposite opinion, yet without establishing its own. For how could
Job here express his conviction of a reverse of things in this world,
and of a restoration to temporal prosperity, at the very time when he
strongly asserts that his miseries would soon be terminated by death?
See [Job 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#011); [Job
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#021); [Job
17:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#011); [Job
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#010), and particularly in [Job
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#007) : O remember that my life is wind;
mine eye shall no more see good. "Still less could Job here express a
hope full of immortality, which sense cannot be extorted from the words
without every violence. And as the possession of such belief is not to
be reconciled with Job's so bitterly cursing the day of his birth in
[Job 3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#001), so the declaration of such
belief would have solved at once the whole difficulty in dispute. "But
if neither of the preceding and opposite opinions can be admitted, if
the words are not meant to express Job's belief either of a restoration
or of a resurrection, what then are we to do? It does not appear to me
that any other interpretation has yet been proposed by the learned; yet
I will now venture to offer a third interpretation, different from both
the former, and which, whilst it is free from the preceding
difficulties, does not seem liable to equal objections. "The conviction,
then, which I suppose Job to express here, is this: That though his
dissolution was hastening on amidst the unjust accusations of his
pretended friends, and the cruel insults of his hostile relations; and
though, whilst he was thus singularly oppressed with anguish of mind, he
was also tortured with pains of body, torn by sores and ulcers from head
to foot, and sitting upon dust and ashes; yet still, out of that
miserable body, in his flesh thus stripped of skin, and nearly dropping
into the grave, He Should See God, who would appear in his favor, and
vindicate The Integrity of his character. This opinion may perhaps be
fairly and fully supported by the sense of the words themselves, by the
context, and by the following remarks. "We read in [Job
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007), that Job was smitten with sore
boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown; and [Job
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008), 'He sat down among the ashes.' In
[Job 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#005), Job says, 'My flesh is
clothed with worms, and clods of dust; my skin is broken, and become
loathsome.' In [Job 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#019) : 'Also now,
behold, my witness is in heaven, and my record is on high.' Then come
the words of Job, [Job 19:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025). And
then, in opposition to what Job had just said, that God would soon
appear to vindicate him, and that even his accusing friends would acquit
him, Zophar says, [Job 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#027), that
'the heaven would reveal his iniquity, and the earth would rise up
against him.' Lastly, this opinion concerning Job's words, as to God's
vindication of him, is confirmed strongly at the end of the book, which
records the conclusion of Job's history. His firm hope is here supposed
to be that, before his death, he should, with his bodily eyes, see God
appearing and vindicating his character. And from the conclusion we
learn that God did thus appear: Now, says Job, mine eye seeth thee. And
then did God most effectually and for ever brighten the glory of Job's
fame, by four times calling him His Servant; and, as his anger was
kindled against Job's friends, by speaking to them in the following
words: 'Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant
Job hath. Go to my servant Job, - and my servant Job shall pray for you,
- in that ye have not spoken of me the thing which is right, like my
servant Job,' [Job 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#007), [Job
40:8](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#008)." Dr. K. then gives the common
version, and proposes the following as a new version: -

[Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025) For I know that my
Vindicator liveth,And he at last shall arise over this dust.

[Job 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026) And after that mine
adversaries have mangled me thus,Even in my flesh shall I see God.

[Job 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#027) Whom I shall see on my
side;And mine eyes shall behold, but not estranged from me:All this have
I made up in mine bosom.

[Job 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#028) Verily ye shall say, Why
have we persecuted him;Seeing the truth of the matter is found with him?

[Job 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#029) Tremble for yourselves at
the face of the sword;For the sword waxeth hot against
iniquities:Therefore be assured that judgment will take place.

Kennicott's Remarks on Select Passages of Scripture, p. 165.

There is something very plausible in this plan of Dr. Kennicott; and in
the conflicting opinions relative to the meaning of this celebrated and
much controverted passage, no doubt some will be found who will adopt it
as a middle course. The theory, however, is better than some of the
arguments by which it is supported. Yet had I not been led, by the
evidence mentioned before, to the conclusion there drawn, I should
probably have adopted Dr. K.'s opinion with some modification: but as to
his new version, it is what I am persuaded the Hebrew text can never
bear. It is even too loose a paraphrase of the original, as indeed are
most of the new versions of this passage. Dr. Kennicott says, that such
a confidence as those cause Job to express, who make him speak
concerning the future resurrection, ill comports with his cursing so
bitterly the day of his birth, etc. But this objection has little if any
strength, when we consider that it is not at all probable that Job had
this confidence any time before the moment in which he uttered it: it
was then a direct revelation, nothing of which he ever had before, else
he had never dropped those words of impatience and irritation which we
find in several of his speeches. And this may be safely inferred from
the consideration, that after this time no such words escaped his lips:
he bears the rest of his sufferings with great patience and fortitude;
and seems to look forward with steady hope to that day in which all
tears shall be wiped away from off all faces, and it be fully proved
that the Judge of all the earth has done right.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 20](job020)

</div>
