<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job013)  [Next](job015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 14:0</span></span>

The shortness, misery, and sinfulness of man's life, [Job
14:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001). The unavoidable necessity of
death; and the hope of a general resurrection, [Job
14:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005). Job deplores his own state,
and the general wretchedness of man, [Job
14:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#016).

[Job 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 14:1</span></span>

Man - born of a woman - There is a delicacy in the original, not often
observed: אדם ילוד אשה Adam yelud ishah, "Adam born of a woman, few of
days, and full of tremor." Adam, who did not spring from woman, but was
immediately formed by God, had many days, for he lived nine hundred and
thirty years; during which time neither sin nor death had multiplied in
the earth, as they were found in the days of Job. But the Adam who
springs now from woman, in the way of ordinary generation, has very few
years. Seventy, on an average, being the highest term, may be well said
to be few in days; and all matter of fact shows that they are full of
fears and apprehensions, רגז rogez, cares, anxieties, and tremors. He
seems born, not indeed to live, but to die; and, by living, he forfeits
the title to life.

[Job 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 14:2</span></span>

He cometh forth like a flower - This is a frequent image both in the Old
and New Testament writers; I need not quote the places here, as the
readers will find them all in the margin.

He fleeth also as a shadow - Himself, as he appears among men, is only
the shadow of his real, substantial, and eternal being. He is here
compared to a vegetable; he springs up, bears his flower is often nipped
by disease, blasted by afflictions and at last cut down by death. The
bloom of youth, even in the most prosperous state, is only the
forerunner of hoary hairs, enfeebled muscles, impaired senses, general
debility, anility, and dissolution. All these images are finely
embodied, and happily expressed, in the beautiful lines of a very
nervous and correct poet, too little known, but whose compositions
deserve the first place among what may be called the minor poets of
Britain. See at the end of the chapter, [Job
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#022) (note).

[Job 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 14:3</span></span>

Dost thou open thine eyes upon such a one - The whole of this chapter is
directed to God alone; in no part of it does he take any notice of his
friends.

[Job 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 14:4</span></span>

Who can bring a clean thing - This verse is thus rendered by the
Chaldee: "Who will produce a clean thing from man, who is polluted with
sins, except God, who is one?" By Coverdale thus: Who can make it
cleane, that commeth of an uncleane thinge? No body. The text refers to
man's original and corrupt nature. Every man that is born into the world
comes into it in a corrupt or sinful state. This is called original sin;
and is derived from fallen Adam, who is the stock, to the utmost
ramifications of the human family. Not one human spirit is born into the
world without this corruption of nature. All are impure and unholy; and
from this principle of depravity all transgression is produced; and from
this corruption of nature God alone can save. The Septuagint, in the
Codex Alexandrinus, reads the verse thus: Τις γαρ εσται καθαρο· απο
ῥυπου; ουδε εἱς, εαν και μιας ἡμερας γενηται ὁ βιος αυτου επι της γης;
"Who is pure from corruption? Not one, although he had lived but one day
upon the earth."

[Job 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 14:5</span></span>

Seeing his days are determined - The general term of human life is fixed
by God himself; in vain are all attempts to prolong it beyond this term.
Several attempts have been made in all nations to find an elixir that
would expel all the seeds of disease, and keep men in continual health;
but all these attempts have failed. Basil, Valentine, Norton, Dastin,
Ripley, Sandivogius, Artephius, Geber, Van Helmont, Paracelsus,
Philalethes, and several others, both in Europe and Asia, have written
copiously on the subject, and have endeavored to prove that a tincture
might be produced, by which all imperfect metals may be transmuted into
perfect; and an elixir by which the human body may be kept in a state of
endless repair and health. And these profess to teach the method by
which this tincture and this elixir may be made! Yet all these are dead;
and dead, for aught we know, comparatively young! Artephius is, indeed,
said to have lived ninety years, which is probable; but some of his
foolish disciples, to give credit to their thriftless craft, added
another cipher, and made his age nine hundred! Man may endeavor to pass
the bound; and God may, here and there, produce a Thomas Parr, who died
in 1635, aged one hundred and fifty-two; and a Henry Jenkins, who died
in 1670, aged one hundred and sixty-nine; but these are rare instances,
and do not affect the general term. Nor can death be avoided. Dust thou
art, and unto dust thou shalt return, is the law, and that will ever
render nugatory all such pretended tinctures and elixirs. But, although
man cannot pass his appointed bounds, yet he may so live as never to
reach them; for folly and wickedness abridge the term of human life; and
therefore the psalmist says, Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out
Half their days, [Psa 55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023), for by
indolence, intemperance, and disorderly passions, the life of man is
shortened in cases innumerable. We are not to understand the bounds as
applying to individuals, but to the race in general. Perhaps there is no
case in which God has determined absolutely that man's age shall be so
long, and shall neither be more nor less. The contrary supposition
involves innumerable absurdities.

[Job 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 14:6</span></span>

Turn from him, that he may rest - Cease to try him by afflictions and
distresses, that he may enjoy some of the comforts of life, before he be
removed from it: and thus, like a hireling, who is permitted by his
master to take a little repose in the heat of the day, from severe
labor, I shall also have a breathing time from affliction, before I come
to that bound over which I cannot pass. See [Job
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#020) (note), where there is a similar
request.

[Job 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 14:7</span></span>

For there is hope of a tree - We must not, says Calmet, understand this
of an old tree, the stem and roots of which are dried up and rotted: but
there are some trees which grow from cuttings, and some which, though
pulled out of the earth, and having had their roots dried and withered
by long exposure to the sun and wind, will, on being replanted, take
root and resume their verdure. There are also certain trees, the fibres
of which are so solid, that if after several years they be steeped in
water, they resume their vigor, the tubes dilate, and the blossoms or
flowers which were attached to them expand; as I have often witnessed in
what is called the rose of Jericho. There are few trees which will not
send forth new shoots, when the stock is cut down level with the earth.

[Job 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 14:9</span></span>

Through the scent of water it will bud - A fine metaphor: the water acts
upon the decaying and perishing tree, as strong and powerful odors from
musk, otto of roses, ammonia, etc., act on a fainting or swooning
person.

[Job 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 14:10</span></span>

But man dieth - No human being ever can spring from the dead body of
man; that wasteth away, corrupts, and is dissolved; for the man dies;
and when he breathes out his last breath, and his body is reduced to
dust, then, where is he? There is a beautiful verse in the Persian poet
Khosroo, that is not unlike this saying of Job: -

"I went towards the burying ground, and wept

To think of the departure of friends which were captives to death;

I said, Where are they! and Fate

Gave back this answer by Echo, Where are they?

Thus paraphrased by a learned friend: -

Beneath the cypress' solemn shade,

As on surrounding tombs I gazed,

I wept, and thought of friends there laid,

Whose hearts with warmest love had blazed.

Where are those friends my heart doth lack,

Whose words, in grief, gave peace? Ah, where?

And Fate, by Echo, gave me back

This short but just reply, Ah, where?

[Job 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 14:11</span></span>

The waters fail from the sea - I believe this refers to evaporation, and
nothing else. As the waters are evaporated from the sea, and the river
in passing over the sandy desert is partly exsiccated, and partly
absorbed; and yet the waters of the sea are not exhausted, as these
vapors, being condensed, fall down in rain, and by means of rivers
return again into the sea: so man is imperceptibly removed from his
fellows by death and dissolution; yet the human race is still continued,
the population of the earth being kept up by perpetual generations.

[Job 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 14:12</span></span>

So man lieth down - He falls asleep in his bed of earth.

And riseth not - Men shall not, like cut down trees and plants,
reproduce their like; nor shall they arise till the heavens are no more,
till the earth and all its works are burnt up, and the general
resurrection of human beings shall take place. Surely it would be
difficult to twist this passage to the denial of the resurrection of the
body. Neither can these expressions be fairly understood as implying
Job's belief in the materiality of the soul, and that the whole man
sleeps from the day of his death to the morning of the resurrection. We
have already seen that Job makes a distinction between the animal life
and rational soul in man; and it is most certain that the doctrine of
the materiality of the soul, and its sleep till the resurrection, has no
place in the sacred records. There is a most beautiful passage to the
same purpose, and with the same imagery, in Moschus's epitaph on the
death of Bion: -

Αι, αι ται μαλαχαι μεν επαν κατα καπον ολωνται,

Η τα χλωρα σελινα, το τ' ευθαλες ουλον ανηθον,

Ὑστερον αυ ζωοντι, και εις ετος αλλο φυοντι·

Αμμες δ', οἱ μεγαλοι, και καρτεροι, η σοφοι ανδρες,

Ὁπποτε πρωτα θανωμες, ανακοοι εν χθονι κοιλα

Εὑδομες ευ μαλα μακρον, ατερμονα, νηγρετον ὑπνον.

Idyll. iii., ver. 100.

Alas! alas! the mallows, when they die,

Or garden herbs, and sweet Anethum's pride,

Blooming in vigor, wake again to life,

And flourish beauteous through another year:

But we, the great, the mighty, and the wise,

When once we die, unknown in earth's dark womb

Sleep long and drear, the endless sleep of death.

J. B. B. C.

A more cold and comfortless philosophy was never invented. The next
verse shows that Job did not entertain this view of the subject.

[Job 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 14:13</span></span>

O that thou wouldest hide me in the grave - Dreadful as death is to
others, I shall esteem it a high privilege; it will be to me a covert
from the wind and from the tempest of this affliction and distress.

Keep me secret - Hide my soul with thyself, where my enemies cannot
invade my repose; or, as the poet expresses it: -

"My spirit hide with saints above,

My body in the tomb."

Job does not appear to have the same thing in view when he entreats God
to hide him in the grave; and to keep him secret, until his wrath be
past. The former relates to the body; the latter to the spirit.

That thou wouldest appoint me a set time - As he had spoken of the death
of his body before, and the secreting of his spirit in the invisible
world, he must refer here to the resurrection; for what else can be said
to be an object of desire to one whose body is mingled with the dust?

And remember me! - When my body has paid that debt of death which it
owes to thy Divine justice, and the morning of the resurrection is come,
when it may be said thy wrath, אפך appecha, "thy displeasure," against
the body is past, it having suffered the sentence denounced by thyself:
Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return, for in the day thou
eatest thereof thou shalt surely die; then remember me - raise my body,
unite my spirit to it, and receive both into thy glory for ever.

[Job 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 14:14</span></span>

If a man die, shall he live again? - The Chaldee translates, If a wicked
man die, can he ever live again? or, he can never live again. The Syriac
and Arabic thus: "If a man die, shall he revive? Yea, all the days of
his youth he awaits till his old age come." The Septuagint: "If a man
die, shall he live, having accomplished the days of his life? I will
endure till I live again." Here is no doubt, but a strong persuasion, of
the certainty of the general resurrection.

All the days of my appointed time - צבאי tsebai, "of my warfare;" see on
[Job 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001) (note). Will I await till
חליפתי chaliphathi, my renovation, come. This word is used to denote the
springing again of grass, [Psa 90:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005),
[Psa 90:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#006), after it had once withered,
which is in itself a very expressive emblem of the resurrection.

[Job 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 14:15</span></span>

Thou shalt call - Thou shalt say There shall be time no longer: Awake,
ye dead! and come to judgment!

And I will answer thee - My dissolved frame shall be united at thy call;
and body and soul shall be rejoined.

Thou wilt have a desire - תכסף tichsoph, "Thou wilt pant with desire;"
or, "Thou wilt yearn over the work of thy hands." God has subjected the
creature to vanity, in hope; having determined the resurrection. Man is
one of the noblest works of God. He has exhibited him as a master-piece
of his creative skill, power, and goodness. Nothing less than the
strongest call upon justice could have induced him thus to destroy the
work of his hands. No wonder that he has an earnest desire towards it;
and that although man dies, and is as water spilt upon the ground that
cannot be gathered up again; yet doth he devise means that his banished
be not expelled from him. Even God is represented as earnestly longing
for the ultimate reviviscence of the sleeping dust. He cannot, he will
not, forget the work of his hands.

[Job 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 14:16</span></span>

For now thou numberest my steps - כי עתה ki attah, Although thou, etc.
Though thou, by thy conduct towards me, seemest bent on my utter
destruction, yet thou delightest in mercy, and I shall be saved.

[Job 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 14:17</span></span>

My transgression is sealed up in a bag - An allusion to the custom of
collecting evidence of state transgressions, sealing them up in a bag,
and presenting them to the judges and officers of state to be examined,
in order to trial and judgment. Just at this time (July, 1820) charges
of state transgressions, sealed up in a Green Bag, and presented to the
two houses of parliament, for the examination of a secret committee, are
making a considerable noise in the land. Some suppose the allusion is to
money sealed up in bags; which is common in the East. This includes two
ideas:

1\. Job's transgressions were all numbered; not one was passed by.

2\. They were sealed up; so that none of them could be lost. These bags
were indifferently sewed or sealed, the two words in the text.

[Job 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 14:18</span></span>

The mountain falling cometh to naught - Every thing in nature is exposed
to mutability and decay: - even mountains themselves may fall from their
bases, and be dashed to pieces; or be suddenly swallowed up by an
earthquake; and, by the same means, the strongest and most massive rocks
may be removed.

[Job 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 14:19</span></span>

The waters wear the stones - Even the common stones are affected in the
same way. Were even earthquakes and violent concussions of nature
wanting, the action of water, either running over them as a stream, or
even falling upon them in drops, will wear these stones. Hence the
proverb: -

Gutta cavat lapidem non vi sed saepe cadendo.

"Constant droppings will make a hole in a flint."

Εκ θαμινης ραθαμιγγος, ὁκως λογος, αιες ιοισας,

Χ' ἁ λιθος ες ρωχμον κοιλαινεται.

"From frequent dropping, as the proverb says, perpetually falling, even
a stone is hollowed into a hole."

Thou washest away the things - Alluding to sudden falls of rain
occasioning floods, by which the fruits of the earth are swept away; and
thus the hope of man - the grain for his household, and provender for
his cattle, is destroyed.

[Job 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 14:20</span></span>

Thou prevailest for ever against him - It is impossible for him to
withstand thee: every stroke of thine brings him down.

Thou changest his countenance - Probably an allusion to the custom of
covering the face, when the person was condemned, and sending him away
to execution. See the case of Haman, in the note on Esther, [Est
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#008) (note).

[Job 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 14:21</span></span>

His sons come to honor - When dead, he is equally indifferent and
unconscious whether his children have met with a splendid or oppressive
lot in life; for as to this world, when man dies, in that day all his
thoughts perish.

[Job 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 14:22</span></span>

But his flesh upon him shall have pain - The sum of the life of man is
this, pain of body and distress of soul; and he is seldom without the
one or the other, and often oppressed by both. Thus ends Job's discourse
on the miserable state and condition of man. The last verse of the
preceding chapter has been differently translated and explained. Mr.

Good's version is the following, which he vindicates in a learned note:
-

For his flesh shall drop away from him;

And his soul shall become a waste from him.

The Chaldee thus: "Nevertheless his flesh, on account of the worms,
shall grieve over him; and his soul, in the house of judgment, shall
wail over him." In another copy of this version it is thus:
"Nevertheless his flesh, before the window is closed over him, shall
grieve; and his soul, for seven days of mourning, shall bewail him in
the house of his burial." I shall give the Hebrew: -

אך בשרו עליו יכאב

Ach besaro alaiv yichab,

ונפשו עליו תאבל

Venaphsho alaiv teebal.

Which Mr. Stock translates thus, both to the spirit and letter: -

But over him his flesh shall grieve;

And over him his breath shall mourn.

"In the daring spirit of oriental poetry," says he, "the flesh, or body,
and the breath, are made conscious beings; the former lamenting its
putrefaction in the grave, the latter mourning over the mouldering clay
which it once enlivened."

This version is, in my opinion, the most natural yet offered. The Syriac
and Arabic present nearly the same sense: "But his body shall grieve
over him; and his soul be astonished over him."

Coverdale follows the Vulgate: Whyle he lyveth his flesh must have
travayle; and whyle the soul is in him, he must be in sorowe.

On [Job 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#002). I have referred to the
following beautiful lines, which illustrate these finely figurative
texts: -

He cometh forth as a Flower, and is Cut Down; he fleeth also as a
shadow, and continueth not.

All flesh is Grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the Flower of
the field.

The Grass withereth, the Flower fadeth; but the word of our God shall
stand for ever.

The morning flowers display their sweets,And gay their silken leaves
unfold;

As careless of the noonday heats,As fearless of the evening cold.

Nipp'd by the wind's untimely blast,Parch'd by the sun's directer ray,

The momentary glories waste,The short-lived beauties die away.

So blooms the human face divine,When youth its pride of beauty shows;

Fairer than spring the colors shine,And sweeter than the virgin rose.

Or worn by slowly-rolling years,Or broke by sickness in a day,

The fading glory disappears,The short-lived beauties die away.

Yet these, new rising from the tomb,With lustre brighter far shall
shine;

Revive with ever-during bloom,Safe from diseases and decline.

Let sickness blast, let death devour,If heaven must recompense our
pains:

Perish the grass and fade the flower,If firm the word of God remains.

See a Collection of Poems on Sundry Occasions, by the Rev. Samuel
Wesley, Master of Blundell's School, Tiverton.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 15](job015)

</div>
