<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh004)  [Next](joh006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 5:0</span></span>

The man who had been diseased thirty-eight years healed on the Sabbath
day, [Joh 5:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001). The Jews cavil,
persecute Christ, and seek to kill him, because he had done this cure on
the Sabbath, [Joh 5:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#010). Our Lord
vindicates his conduct, and shows, from the testimony of the Father, the
Scriptures, John the Baptist, and his own works, that he came from God,
to be the light and salvation of the world, vv. 17-39. He reproves the
Jews for their obstinacy, [Joh 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#040);
hatred to God, [Joh 5:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#041), [Joh
5:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#042); pride, [Joh
5:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#043), [Joh
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044); and disbelief of their own law,
[Joh 5:45-47](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#045).

[John 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 5:1</span></span>

A feast - This is generally supposed, by the best critics, to have been
the feast of the passover, which was the most eminent feast among the
Jews. In several excellent MSS. the article is added, ἡ ἑορτη, The
feast, the grand, the principal festival. Petavius supposes that the
feast of Purim, or lots, is here meant; and one MS. reads ἡ σκηνοπηγια,
the feast of Tabernacles. Several of the primitive fathers believe
Pentecost to be intended; and they are followed by many of the moderns,
because, in [Joh 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#002), mention is made
of the feast of Tabernacles, which followed Pentecost, and was about the
latter end of our September; and, in [Joh
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#022), mention is made of the feast of
Dedication, which was held about the latter end of November. See Bp.
Pearce. See [Joh 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#022).

Calmet, however, argues that there is no other feast with which all the
circumstances marked here so well agree as with the passover; and Bp.
Newcome, who is of Calmet's opinion, thinks Bp. Pearce's argument
concerning the succession of the feasts to be inconclusive; because it
is assumed, not proved, that the three feasts which he mentions above
must have happened in the same year. See much on the same subject in Bp.
Newcome's notes to his Harmony, p. 15, etc.

Lightfoot has observed, that the other evangelists speak very sparingly
of our Lord's acts in Judea. They mention nothing of the passovers, from
our Lord's baptism till his death, excepting the very last: but John
points at them all. The first he speaks of, [Joh
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#013); the third, [Joh
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#004); the fourth, [Joh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001); and the second in this place:
for although he does not call it the passover, but a feast in general,
yet the circumstances agree best with this feast; and our Lord's words,
[Joh 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035), seem to cast light on this
subject. See the note there.

[John 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 5:2</span></span>

There Is - This is thought by some to be a proof that John wrote his
Gospel before the destruction of Jerusalem; and that the pool and its
porticoes were still remaining. Though there can be little doubt that
Jerusalem was destroyed many years before John wrote, yet this does not
necessarily imply that the pool and its porticoes must have been
destroyed too. It, or something in its place, is shown to travelers to
the present day. See Maundrell's Jour. p. 108. But instead of εϚι, Is,
both the Syriac, all the Arabic, Persic, Armenian, and Nonnus, read ην,
Was; which is to me some proof that it did not exist when these versions
were made, and that the pool which is shown now is not the original.

By the sheep market - Rather, gate: see [Neh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001), [Neh
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#032); [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039). This was in all probability the
gate through which the sheep were brought which were offered in
sacrifice in the temple.

A pool - Bp. Pearce thinks the word κολυμβηθρα should be translated
bath, and that this place was built for the purpose of bathing and
swimming in. He observes that κολυμβᾳν signifies to swim, in [Act
27:43](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#043). In proof of this, he cites
three of the old Itala, which have natatoria, a bathing or swimming
place.

Bethesda - This word is variously written in the MSS. and versions:
Bezatha - Bethzatha - Betzetha - Belzetha - Belzatha - Berzeta; and many
have Bethsaida. But the former reading is the genuine one. Bethesda, or
according to the Hebrew ביתחסדה Bethchasdah, signifies literally, the
house of mercy. It got this name probably from the cures which God
mercifully performed there. It is likely the porticoes were built for
the more convenient reception of the poor and distressed, who came
hither to be healed. It does not appear that any person was obliged to
pay man for what the mercy of God freely gave. Wicked as the Jewish
people were, they never thought of levying a tax on the poor and
afflicted, for the cures they received in these healing waters. How is
it that a well-regulated state, such as that of Great Britain, can ever
permit individuals or corporations to enrich themselves at the expense
of God's mercy, manifested in the sanative waters of Bristol, Bath,
Buxton, etc.? Should not the accommodations be raised at the expense of
the public, that the poor might enjoy without cost, which they are
incapable of defraying, the great blessing which the God of nature has
bestowed on such waters? In most of those places there is a profession
that the poor may drink and bathe gratis; but it is little better than a
pretense, and the regulations relative to this point render the whole
nearly inefficient. However, some good is done.

[John 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 5:3</span></span>

Blind, halt, withered - To these the Codex Bezae, three copies of the
Itala, and both the Persic, add παραλυτικων, paralytic; but they are
probably included among the withered.

Waiting for the moving of the water - This clause, with the whole of the
fourth verse, is wanting in some MSS. and versions; but I think there is
no sufficient evidence against their authenticity. Griesbach seems to be
of the same opinion; for though he has marked the whole passage with the
notes of doubtfulness, yet he has left it in the text. Some have
imagined that the sanative virtue was communicated to the waters by
washing in them the entrails of the beasts which were offered in
sacrifice; and that the angel meant no more than merely a man sent to
stir up from the bottom this corrupt sediment, which, being distributed
through the water, the pores of the person who bathed in it were
penetrated by this matter, and his disorder repelled! But this is a
miserable shift to get rid of the power and goodness of God, built on
the merest conjectures, self-contradictory, and every way as unlikely as
it is insupportable. It has never yet been satisfactorily proved that
the sacrifices were ever washed; and, could even this be proved, who can
show that they were washed in the pool of Bethesda? These waters healed
a man in a moment of whatsoever disease he had. Now, there is no one
cause under heaven that can do this. Had only one kind of disorders been
cured here, there might have been some countenance for this deistical
conjecture - but this is not the case; and we are obliged to believe the
relation just as it stands, and thus acknowledge the sovereign power and
mercy of God, or take the desperate flight of an infidel, and thus get
rid of the passage altogether.

[John 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 5:4</span></span>

Angel - "Of the Lord," is added by AKL, about 20 others, the Ethiopic,
Armenian, Slavonic, Vulgate, Anglo-Saxon, and six copies of the Itala:
Cyril and Ambrose have also this reading. If this reading be genuine,
and the authorities which support it are both ancient and respectable,
it destroys Dr. Hammond's conjecture, that, by the angel, a messenger
only, sent from the Sanhedrin, is meant, and that these cures were all
performed in a natural way.

Those who feel little or none of the work of God in their own hearts are
not willing to allow that he works in others. Many deny the influences
of God's Spirit, merely because they never felt them. This is to make
any man's experience the rule by which the whole word of God is to be
interpreted; and consequently to leave no more divinity in the Bible
than is found in the heart of him who professes to explain it.

Went down - Κατεβαινεν, descended. The word seems to imply that the
angel had ceased to descend when John wrote. In the second verse, he
spoke of the pool as being still in existence; and in this verse he
intimates that the Divine influence ceased from these waters. When it
began, we know not; but it is likely that it continued no longer than
till the crucifixion of our Lord. Some think that this never took place
before nor after this time. Neither Josephus, Philo, nor any of the
Jewish authors mention this pool; so that it is very likely that it had
not been long celebrated for its healing virtue, and that nothing of it
remained when those authors wrote.

Certain season - This probably refers to the time of the feast, during
which only this miraculous virtue lasted. It is not likely that the
angel appeared to the people - his descent might be only known by the
ebullition caused in the waters. Was not the whole a type Of Christ? See
[Zac 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001). He is the true Bethesda, or
house of mercy, the fountain opened to the house of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness; unto which all
the diseased may come, and find health and life eternal.

[John 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 5:5</span></span>

Had an infirmity thirty and eight years - St. Chrysostom conjectured
that blindness was the infirmity of this person: what it was, the
inspired writer does not say - probably it was a palsy: his case was
deplorable - he was not able to go into the pool himself, and he had no
one to help him; so that poverty and disease were here connected. The
length of the time he had been afflicted makes the miracle of his cure
the greater. There could have been no collusion in this case: as his
affliction had lasted thirty-eight years, it must have been known to
multitudes; therefore he could not be a person prepared for the
occasion. All Christ's miracles have been wrought in such a way, and on
such persons and occasions, as absolutely to preclude all possibility of
the suspicion of imposture.

[John 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 5:6</span></span>

Wilt thou be made whole? - Christ, by asking this question, designed to
excite in this person faith, hope, and a greater desire of being healed.
He wished him to reflect on his miserable state, that he might be the
better prepared to receive a cure, and to value it when it came.
Addresses of this kind are always proper from the preachers of the
Gospel, that the hearts, as well of hardened as of desponding sinners,
may be stirred up to desire and expect salvation. Do you wish to be
healed? Do you know that you are under the power of a most inveterate
and dangerous disease? If so, there is a remedy - have immediate
recourse to the physician. Questions of this kind are frequently asked
in the secret of our souls, by the inspirations of God's Spirit. Happy
those who pay attention to them, and give right answers.

[John 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 5:7</span></span>

Sir, I have no man - Ναι, Κυριε - "Yes, sir; but I have no man:" - this
is the reading of C\*GH, fourteen others, both the Syriac, later Persic,
Arabic, and Chrysostom. Reader, be thankful to God for health and
outward comforts. When long affliction has been allied to deep poverty,
how deplorable is the state!

[John 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 5:8</span></span>

Rise, take up thy bed, and walk - Jesus speaks here as God. He speaks in
no name but his own, and with an authority which belongs to God alone.
And what is the consequence? The man became whole immediately; and this
sudden restoration to health and strength was an incontestable proof of
the omnipotence of Christ. It has been remarked, that our Lord, after
having performed a miracle, was accustomed to connect some circumstance
with it, which attested its truth. After the miracle of the five loaves,
he ordered the fragments to be collected, which were more in quantity
than the loaves themselves, though several thousands had been fed. When
he changed the water into wine, he ordered some to be taken first to the
steward of the feast, that he might taste and bear testimony to its
genuineness and excellency. When he cured the lepers, he commanded them
to show themselves to the priests, whose business it was to judge of the
cure. So here, he judged it necessary, after having cured this infirm
man, to order him not only to arise, but to take up his bed, and walk,
which sufficiently attested the miracle which he had wrought. God's work
is ever known by its excellence and good effects.

The bed of a poor Hindoo is seldom any thing besides a single mat, or a
cloth as thick as a bed-quilt. Men carrying such beds may be seen daily
on the highways.

[John 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 5:9</span></span>

The same day was the sabbath - Mr. Toynard supposes that this miracle
was wrought on the 11th of Nisan, the sabbath before the passover, which
was celebrated the 14th of Nisan, or 28th of March. But why did our Lord
command this man to carry his bed on the sabbath, as the law prohibited
all servile work, and especially the carrying of burthens? See [Exo
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008); [Jer
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#021); [Neh
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#015). To this it may be answered,

1\. The man was a poor man, and if he had left his bed he might have
lost it; and he could not have conveniently watched it till the next
morning.

2\. Christ showed by this that he was Lord of the sabbath: see [Mat
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#008).

3\. This was not contrary to the spirit of the law: the sabbath was made
to honor God in, and this was a public monument of his power and
goodness.

4\. It was consistent with the wisdom of Christ to do his miracles so
that they might be seen and known by a multitude of people, and
especially in Jerusalem, which was the capital of the country, and the
center of the Jewish religion; and this very circumstance of the healed
man carrying his bed on the sabbath day must call the attention of many
to this matter, and cause the miracle to be more generally known.

[John 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 5:11</span></span>

He that made me whole, etc. - The poor man reasoned conclusively: - He
who could work such a miracle must be at least the best of men: now a
good man will neither do evil himself, nor command others to do it: but
he who cured me ordered me to carry my bed; therefore, there can be no
evil in it.

[John 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 5:13</span></span>

Jesus had conveyed himself away - Or, had withdrawn himself. And this he
might easily do, as there was a crowd in the place. Some think the words
indicate, that Jesus withdrew on seeing a multitude in the place, i.e.
raising a tumult, because of the man's carrying his bed (margin: Or,
from the multitude that was). He had not yet finished his work, and
would not expose himself to the envy and malice of the Jewish rulers.

[John 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 5:14</span></span>

Jesus findeth him in the temple - The man being conscious that it was
through the mercy of God that he was restored, (though he did not as yet
know distinctly who Christ was), went to the temple to return thanks to
God for his cure. Whether this was on the same day, or some other, does
not distinctly appear: it was probably the same day, after he had
carried home his couch. How many, when they are made well, forget the
hand that has healed them, and, instead of gratitude and obedience to
God, use their renewed health and strength in the service of sin! Those
who make this use of God's mercies may consider their restoration as a
respite only from perdition.

Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee - Our Lord, intending to
discover to this man who he was, gave him two proofs of the perfection
of his knowledge.

1\. He showed him that he knew the secret of the past - sin no more:
thereby intimating that his former sins were the cause of his long
affliction.

2\. He showed him that he knew the future - lest a worse thing come unto
thee: if thy iniquity be repeated, thy punishment will be increased.

[John 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 5:15</span></span>

The man departed, and told the Jews - He did not say it was Jesus who
had ordered him to carry his bed, but it was Jesus who had cured him;
and he left them to draw the inference, viz. That this Jesus must be the
miraculous power of God.

[John 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 5:16</span></span>

And sought to slay him - This clause is omitted by BCDL, some others,
and several ancient versions. Griesbach has left it out of the text; and
Professor White says, certissime delenda: but it does not appear to me
that it should be omitted. However, it was true of the Jews, whether the
words were originally in the evangelist or not. For what cause did these
persons seek to destroy our Lord? Because he had healed a poor man, who
had been diseased thirty-eight years, and ordered him to carry home the
couch on which he lay! How implacable must their malice have been! The
spirit of religious persecution has always been the most fell and
dangerous of all on this side perdition. Every other disposition appears
to have its moderator; but this is wholly abandoned to the guidance of
Satan, and has for its objects the men who know the truth, and who live
to the glory of their God, and for the benefit of mankind. How strange
that such should ever be objects of malice and hatred! But the Satanic
nature in fallen man is ever opposed to whatever comes from God.

[John 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 5:17</span></span>

My Father worked hitherto, and I work - Or, As my Father worketh until
now, etc., καθως being understood. God created the world in six days: on
the seventh he rested from all creating acts, and set it apart to be an
everlasting memorial of his work. But, though he rested from creating,
he never ceased from preserving and governing that which he had formed:
in this respect he can keep no sabbaths; for nothing can continue to
exist, or answer the end proposed by the Divine wisdom and goodness,
without the continual energy of God. So I work - I am constantly
employed in the same way, governing and supporting all things,
comforting the wretched, and saving the lost; and to me, in this
respect, there is no sabbath.

[John 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 5:18</span></span>

Making himself equal with God - This the Jews understood from the
preceding verse: nor did they take a wrong meaning out of our Lord's
words; for he plainly stated that, whatever was the Father's work, his
was the same; thus showing that He and the Father were One. They had now
found out two pretenses to take away his life: one was that he had
broken the Sabbath - ελυε, dissolved, as they pretended, the obligation
of keeping it holy. The other was that he was guilty of blasphemy, in
making himself equal to God: for both which crimes, a man, according to
the law, must suffer death. See [Num
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#032); [Lev
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#011), [Lev
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#014), [Lev
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016).

[John 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 5:19</span></span>

The Son can do nothing of himself - Because of his inseparable union
with the Father: nor can the Father do any thing of himself, because of
his infinite unity with the Son.

What things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son - God does nothing
but what Christ does. What God does is the work of God, and proper to no
creature - Jesus does whatsoever God does, and therefore is no created
being. The Son can do nothing but what he sees the Father do: now, any
intelligent creature may do what God cannot do: he may err - he may sin.
If Jesus can do nothing but what God does, then he is no creature - he
can neither sin nor err, nor act imperfectly. The conclusion from our
Lord's argument is: If I have broken the Sabbath, so has God also; for I
can do nothing but what I see him doing. He is ever governing and
preserving; I am ever employed in saving.

[John 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 5:20</span></span>

Greater works than these - Two of these he immediately mentions: Raising
the dead, [Joh 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021). And judging the
world, [Joh 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022).

That ye may marvel - Or, So as to make you wonder. Our Lord sometimes
speaks of himself as God, and sometimes as the ambassador of God. As he
had a human and Divine nature, this distinction was essentially
necessary. Many errors have originated from want of attention to this
circumstance.

[John 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 5:21</span></span>

As the Father raised up the dead - This he did in the case of the
widow's son at Sarepta, [Kg1 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#022), by
the ministry of the Prophet Elijah. And again, in the case of the
Shunamite's son, [Kg2 4:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#032), by the
ministry of the Prophet Elisha.

The Son quickeneth whom he will - He raiseth from death to life
whomsoever he pleases. So he did, for he raised the ruler's daughter,
[Mar 5:35-42](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#035); the widow's son at Nain,
[Luk 7:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#011); and Lazarus, at Bethany,
John 11:14-44.

Whom he will. Here our Lord points out his sovereign power and
independence; he gives life according to his own will - not being
obliged to supplicate for the power by which it was done, as the
prophets did; his own will being absolute and sufficient in every case.

[John 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 5:22</span></span>

The Father judgeth no man - This confirms what he had said before, [Joh
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017), [Joh
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019), that the Father acts not without
the Son, nor the Son without the Father; their acts are common, their
power equal.

[John 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 5:23</span></span>

That all men should honor the Son, etc. - If then the Son is to be
honored, Even As the Father is honored, then the Son must be God, as
receiving that worship which belongs to God alone. To worship any
creature is idolatry: Christ is to be honored even as the Father is
honored; therefore Christ is not a creature; and, if not a creature,
consequently the Creator. See [Joh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003).

He that honoureth not the Son - God will not receive that man's
adoration who refuses to honor Jesus, even as he honors him. The Jews
expected the Messiah as a great and powerful Prince; but they never
thought of a person coming in that character enrobed with all the
attributes of Godhead. To lead them off from this error, our Lord spoke
the words recorded in these verses.

[John 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 5:24</span></span>

He that heareth my word - My doctrine - and believeth on him that sent
me - he who credits my Divine mission, that I am come to give light and
life to the world by my doctrine and death - hath eternal life - the
seed of this life is sown in his heart the moment he believes - and
shall not come into condemnation, εις κρισιν, into judgment - that which
will speedily come on this unbelieving race; and that which shall
overwhelm the wicked in the great day.

But is passed from death unto life - Μεταβεβηκεν, Has changed his
country, or place of abode. Death is the country where every Christless
soul lives. The man who knows not God lives a dying life, or a living
death; but he who believes in the Son of God passes over from the empire
of death, to the empire of life. Reader! thou wast born in death: hast
thou yet changed the place of thy natural residence? Remember that to
live in sin is to live in death; and those who live and die thus shall
die eternally.

[John 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 5:25</span></span>

The dead shall hear the voice - Three kinds of death are mentioned in
the Scriptures: natural, spiritual, and eternal.

The first consists in the separation of the body and soul. The second in
the separation of God and the soul. The third in the separation of body
and soul from God in the other world. Answerable to these three kinds of
death, there is a threefold life: Natural life, which consists in the
union of the soul and body. Spiritual life, which consists in the union
of God and the soul, by faith and love. Eternal life, which consist in
the communion of the body and soul with God, by holiness, in the realms
of bliss.

Of the dead, our Lord says, the hour is coming, and now is, when they
shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and live. The hour is coming,
when all that sleep in the dust shall awake at the voice of the Son of
man, and come to judgment: for he giveth life to the dead, [Joh
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021), [Joh
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028), [Joh
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029). Again, the hour is coming, when
some of those who have died a natural death shall hear the voice of the
Son of God and live again here. It is likely that our Lord had not as
yet raised any from the dead; and he refers to those whom he intended to
raise: see on [Joh 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021) (note).
Lastly, the hour now is, when many who are dead in trespasses and sins,
shall hear the voice (the word) of the Son of God, believe, and receive
spiritual life through him.

[John 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 5:26</span></span>

Hath he given to the Son to have life, etc. - Here our Lord speaks of
himself in his character of Messiah, or envoy of God.

[John 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 5:27</span></span>

Because he is the Son of man - Because he is the Messiah; for in this
sense the phrase, Son of man, is often to be understood. But some join
this to the next verse thus: - Marvel not at this, because he is the Son
of man.

[John 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 5:28</span></span>

Marvel not at this - I think it quite necessary to follow here, as noted
above, the punctuation of both the Syriac, the Armenian, Chrysostom,
Damascenus, Theophylact, Euthymius, and others; which is found also in
some very good MSS. Theophylact says that the common method of reading
this, which he highly objects to, was the invention of Paul of Samosata.
In [Joh 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026), [Joh
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027), our Lord, speaking of himself as
envoy of God, said, the Father had given him to have life in himself, so
that, like any of the ancient prophets, he could vivify others; and that
he had given him authority to execute judgment, probably referring to
that judgment which he was shortly to execute on this unbelieving
nation, and apparently in direct reference to [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013), Behold one like the Son of man
came with the clouds, etc., a place which the Jews expound of the
promised Messiah. In this verse he anticipates an objection, as if they
had said: "This cannot be: thou art a man - thou wast born among us."
Our Lord answers: Don't marvel at this, Because I am a man - for greater
things than these shall be done by me: he who now addresses you, though
disguised under the form of a man, shall appear in the great day to be
the Judge of quick and dead: by his almighty power, he shall raise all
the dead; and, by his unerring wisdom and justice, shall adjudge the
wicked to hell, and the righteous to heaven. The first sense, however,
of this passage, appears to some the most probable; though they both
amount nearly to the same meaning.

[John 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 5:30</span></span>

I can of mine own self do nothing - Because of my intimate union with
God. See on [Joh 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019) (note).

I week not mine own will - I do not, I cannot attempt to do any thing
without God. This, that is, the Son of man, the human nature which is
the temple of my Divinity, [Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014),
is perfectly subject to the Deity that dwells in it. In this respect our
blessed Lord is the perfect pattern of all his followers. In every thing
their wills should submit to the will of their heavenly Father. Nothing
is more common than to hear people say, I will do it because I choose.
He who has no better reason to give for his conduct than his own will
shall in the end have the same reason to give for his eternal
destruction. "I followed my own will, in opposition to the will of God,
and now I am plunged in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone."
Reader, God hath sent thee also to do his will: his will is that thou
shouldst abandon thy sins, and believe in the Lord Jesus. Hast thou yet
done it?

[John 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 5:31</span></span>

If I bear witness - If I had no proof to bring of my being the Messiah,
and equal to God, common sense would direct you to reject my testimony;
but the mighty power of God, by which I work my miracles, sufficiently
attests that my pretensions are well founded.

Bishop Pearce gives a different turn to this verse, by translating it
interrogatively, thus: "If I only bear witness of myself, is not my
witness true? i.e. is it, on that account, not true? In [Joh
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#014), he says, Though I bear record of
myself, yet my record is true. And in [Joh
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#018), he says, I am one that bear
witness of myself."

[John 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 5:32</span></span>

There is another - God the Father, who, by his Spirit in your prophets,
described my person, office, and miracles. You read these scriptures,
and you cannot help seeing that they testify of me: - no person ever did
answer the description there given, but myself; and I answer to that
description in the fullest sense of the word. See [Joh
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039).

And I know - Instead of οιδα, I know, οιδατε, ye know, is the reading of
the Codex Bezae, Armenian, and two of the Itala. Ye believe the
Scriptures to be of God, and that he cannot lie; and yet ye will not
believe in me, though these Scriptures have so clearly foretold and
described me! It is not one of the least evils attending unbelief, that
it acts not only in opposition to God, but it also acts inconsistently
with itself. It receives the Scriptures in bulk, and acknowledges them
to have come through Divine inspiration; and yet believes no part
separately. With it the whole is true, but no part is true! The very
unreasonableness of this conduct shows the principle to have come from
beneath, were there no other evidences against it.

[John 5:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 5:33</span></span>

Ye sent unto John - I am not without human testimony of the most
respectable kind: - Ye sent to John, and he bare witness. There are
several circumstances in John's character which render his testimony
unexceptionable.

1\. He is consulted by the very enemies of Christ, as a very holy and
extraordinary man.

2\. He is perfectly free from all self-interest, having declined making
the least advantage by his own reputation.

3\. He is sincere, undaunted, and so averse from all kinds of flattery
that he reproves Herod at the hazard of his liberty and life.

4\. He was so far from being solicited by Christ to give his testimony
that he had not even seen him when he gave it. See [Joh
1:19-28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#019).

[John 5:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 5:34</span></span>

But I receive not testimony from man \[only\] - I have no need of John's
testimony: the works that I do bear sufficient testimony to me, [Joh
5:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036).

But these things I say, etc. - You believed John to be a prophet - a
prophet cannot lie: he bore testimony that I am the Lamb of God, that
beareth away the sin of the world, [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029); therefore, that ye may be saved
by believing in me as such, I have appealed to John's testimony.

[John 5:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 5:35</span></span>

He was a burning and a shining light - Ην ὁ λυχνος ὁ καιομενος και
φαινων, should be translated, He was a burning and a shining Lamp. He
was not το φως του κοσμου, the light of the world, i.e. the sun; but he
was ὁ λυχνος, a lamp, to give a clear and steady light till the sun
should arise. It is supposed that John had been cast into prison about
four months before this time. See the note on [Joh
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035). As his light continued no longer
to shine, our Lord says he Was.

The expression of lamp our Lord took from the ordinary custom of the
Jews, who termed their eminent doctors the lamps of Israel. A lighted
candle is a proper emblem of a minister of God; and, Alteri serviens
consumor - "In serving others, I myself destroy:" - a proper motto.
There are few who preach the Gospel faithfully that do not lose their
lives by it. Burning may refer to the zeal with which John executed his
message; and shining may refer to the clearness of the testimony which
he bore concerning Christ. Only to shine is but vanity; and to burn
without shining will never edify the Church of God. Some shine, and some
burn, but few both shine and burn; and many there are who are
denominated pastors, who neither shine nor burn. He who wishes to save
souls must both burn and shine: the clear light of the knowledge of the
sacred records must fill his understanding; and the holy flame of loving
zeal must occupy his heart. Zeal without knowledge is continually
blundering; and knowledge without zeal makes no converts to Christ.

For a season - The time between his beginning to preach and his being
cast into prison.

To rejoice - Αγαλλιασθηναι, To jump for joy, as we would express it.
They were exceedingly rejoiced to hear that the Messiah was come,
because they expected him to deliver them out of the hands of the
Romans; but when a spiritual deliverance, of infinitely greater moment
was preached to them, they rejected both it and the light which made it
manifest.

[John 5:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 5:36</span></span>

But I have greater witness - However decisive the judgment of such a man
as John may be, who was the lamp of Israel, a miracle of grace, filled
with the spirit of Elijah, and more than any prophet, because he pointed
out, not the Messiah who was to come, but the Messiah who was already
come: nevertheless, I am not obliged to depend on his testimony alone;
for I have a greater one, that of Him whom you acknowledge to be your
God. And how do I prove that this God bears testimony to me? By my
works: these miracles, which attest my mission, and prove by themselves
that nothing less than unlimited power and boundless love could ever
produce them. By my word only, I have perfectly and instantly healed a
man who was diseased thirty and eight years. Ye see the miracle - the
man is before you whole and sound. Why then do ye not believe in my
mission, that ye may embrace my doctrine, and be saved?

[John 5:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 5:37</span></span>

The Father himself - hath borne witness - That is, by his prophets.

Ye have neither heard his voice - I make these words, with Bp. Pearce, a
parenthesis: the sense is - "Not that my Father ever appeared visibly or
spake audibly to any of you; but he did it by the mouths of his
prophets." Lately, however, he had added to their testimony his own
voice from heaven, on the day of Christ's baptism. See [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017).

[John 5:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 5:38</span></span>

Ye have not his word abiding in you - Though ye believe the Scriptures
to be of God, yet ye do not let them take hold of your hearts - his word
is in your mouth, but not in your mind. What a miserable lot! to read
the Scriptures as the true sayings of God, and yet to get no salvation
from them! Thy word, says David, ([Psa
119:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#011)), have I hid in my heart, that
I might not sin against thee. This, these Jews had not done. Reader,
hast thou?

[John 5:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 5:39</span></span>

Search the Scriptures - Ερευνατε τας γραφας. This should be translated,
not in the imperative, but in the indicative mood - thus, Ye search the
Scriptures diligently. That these words are commonly read in the
imperative mood is sufficiently known; but this reading can never accord
well with the following verse, nor can the force and energy of the words
be perceived by this version.

The rabbins strongly recommend the study of the Scriptures. The Talmud,
Tract. Shabbath, fol. 30, brings in God thus addressing David: "I am
better pleased with one day in which thou sittest and studiest the law,
than I shall be with a thousand sacrifices which thy son Solomon shall
offer upon my altar."

Perhaps the Scriptures were never more diligently searched than at that
very time: first, because they were in expectation of the immediate
appearing of the Messiah; secondly, because they wished to find out
allegories in them; (see Philo); and, thirdly, because they found these
scriptures to contain the promise of an eternal life. He, said they, who
studies daily in the law, is worthy to have a portion in the world to
come, Sohar. Genes. fol. 31. Hence we may infer:

1st. That the Jews had the knowledge of a future state before the coming
of Christ; and

2ndly. That they got that knowledge from the Old Testament Scriptures.

The word ερευνατε, which might be translated, Ye search diligently, is
very expressive. Homer, Il. xviii. l. 321, applies it to a lion deprived
of his whelps, who "scours the plains, and traces the footsteps of the
man." And in Odyss. xix. l. 436, to dogs tracing their game by the scent
of the foot.

In the Septuagint, the verb ερευναω answers to the Hebrew חפש chapash,
to search by uncovering; to חקר chakar, to search minutely, to explore;
to חשף chashaph, to strip, make bare; and to משש mashash, to feel,
search by feeling. It is compounded of ερεω, I seek, and ευνη, a bed;
"and is," says St. Chrysostom, "a metaphor taken from those who dig
deep, and search for metals in the bowels of the earth. They look for
the bed where the metal lies, and break every clod, and sift and examine
the whole, in order to discover the ore." Those who read the verse in
the imperative mood consider it an exhortation to the diligent study of
the Sacred Writings. Search; that is, shake and sift them, as the word
also signifies: search narrowly, till the true force and meaning of
every sentence, yea, of every word and syllable, nay, of every letter
and yod therein, be known and understood. Confer place with place; the
scope of one place with that of another; things going before with things
coming after: compare word with word, letter with letter, and search the
whole thoroughly. See Parkhurst, Mintert, and Leigh.

Leaving every translation of the present passage out of the question,
this is the proper method of reading and examining the Scriptures, so as
to become wise unto salvation through them.

[John 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 5:40</span></span>

And ye will not come to me - Though ye thus search the Scriptures, in
hopes of finding the Messiah and eternal life in them, yet ye will not
come unto me, believe in me, and be my disciples, though so clearly
pointed out by them, that ye may have that eternal life which can only
come through me.

[John 5:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 5:41</span></span>

I receive not honor from men - I do not stand in need of you or your
testimony. I act neither through self-interest nor vanity. Your
salvation can add nothing to me, nor can your destruction injure me: I
speak only through my love for your souls, that ye may be saved.

[John 5:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">joh 5:42</span></span>

But I know you, that ye have not, etc. - Don't say that you oppose me
through zeal for God's honor, and love for his name, because I make
myself equal to him: no, this is not the case. I know the dispositions
of your souls; and I know ye have neither love for his name, nor zeal
for his glory. Incorrigible ignorance, and malicious jealousy, actuate
your hearts. Ye read the Scriptures, but ye do not enter into their
meaning. Had you been as diligent to find out the truth, as you have
been to find out allegories, false glosses, and something to countenance
you in your crimes, you would have known that the Messiah, who is equal
with God, must be the Son of man also, and the inheritor of David's
throne; and that the very works which I do are those which the prophets
have foretold the Messiah should perform. See [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013), [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014); [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006), [Isa
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007); [Isa
11:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001), [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010); [Isa
35:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#004).

[John 5:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 5:43</span></span>

I am come in my Father's name - With all his influence and authority.
Among the rabbins, it was essential to a teacher's credit that he should
be able to support his doctrine by the authority of some eminent persons
who had gone before. Hence the form, Coming in the name of another.

If another shall come in his own name - Having no Divine influence, and
no other authority than his own, him ye will receive. That this was
notoriously the case may appear from Josephus, Antiq. b. xviii. c. 14;
[Act 5:36](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#036), [Act
5:37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#037); Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. b. iv. c.
6. It is by the just judgment of God, that those who will not believe
the truth of God shall be so given up as to believe the most absurd of
lies. For an account of these false Christs, see the notes on [Mat
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#005).

[John 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">joh 5:44</span></span>

How can ye believe, which receive honor, etc. - The grand obstacle to
the salvation of the scribes and Pharisees was their pride, vanity, and
self-love. They lived on each other's praise. If they had acknowledged
Christ as the only teacher, they must have given up the good opinion of
the multitude; and they chose rather to lose their souls than to forfeit
their reputation among men! This is the ruin of millions. They would be
religious, if religion and worldly honor were connected; but as the
kingdom of Christ is not of this world, and their hearts and souls are
wedded to the earth, they will not accept the salvation which is offered
to them on these terms - Deny thyself: take up thy cross, and follow Me.
It is no wonder that we never find persons making any progress in
religion who mix with the world, and in any respect regulate their
conduct by its anti-Christian customs, maxims, and fashions.

From God only? - Or, from the only God - Παρα του μονου Θεου. Two of the
ancient Slavonic versions read, From the only begotten Son of God.

[John 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">joh 5:45</span></span>

Do not think that I will accuse you - You have accused me with a breach
of the Sabbath, which accusation I have demonstrated to be false: I
could, in return, accuse you, and substantiate the accusation, with the
breach of the whole law; but this I need not do, for Moses, in whom ye
trust, accuses you. You read his law, acknowledge you should obey it,
and yet break it both in the letter and in the spirit. This law,
therefore, accuses and condemns you. It was a maxim among the Jews that
none could accuse them but Moses: the spirit of which seems to be, that
only so pure and enlightened a legislator could find fault with such a
noble and excellent people! For, notwithstanding their abominations,
they supposed themselves the most excellent of mankind!

[John 5:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 5:46</span></span>

He wrote of me - For instance, in reciting the prophecy of Jacob, [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010). The scepter shall not depart
from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and
unto him shall the gathering of the people be. And in [Deu
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018) : I will raise them up a Prophet
from among their brethren like unto thee; and I will put my words in his
mouth, etc. Confer this with [Act
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022), and [Act
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#037). Besides, Moses pointed out the
Messiah in a multitude of symbols and figures, which are found in the
history of the patriarchs, the ceremonial laws, and especially in the
whole sacrificial system. All these were well-defined, though shadowy
representations of the birth, life, sufferings, death, and resurrection
of the Savior of the world. Add to this, Moses has given you certain
marks to distinguish the false from the true prophet, [Deu
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001); [Deu
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#022), which, if you apply to me, you
will find that I am not a false but a true prophet of the Most High God.

[John 5:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 5:47</span></span>

But if ye believe not his writings, etc. - If you lay them not to heart
- if you draw not those conclusions from them which their very letter,
as well as their spirit, authorizes you to draw, how shall ye believe my
words, against which ye have taken up the most ungrounded prejudice? It
is no wonder that we find the Jews still in the gall of bitterness, and
bond of iniquity: as they believe not Moses and the prophets, in
reference to the Messiah, it is no marvel that they reject Christ and
the apostles. Till they see and acknowledge, from the law and the
prophets, that Christ must have come, they will never believe the
Gospel. St. Paul says, [Co2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015), that
even until this day, when Moses (i.e. the law) is read, the Veil is upon
their hearts: - so that they see not to the end of that which is
abolished: [Co2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013). Nor will this
veil be taken away, till they turn from worldly gain and atheism (which
appears to be their general system) to the Lord, [Co2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016); and then the light of the glory
of God shall shine on them in the face (through the mediation and
merits) of Jesus Christ.

It appears that this discourse of our Lord had effectually confounded
these Jews, for they went away without replying - a manifest proof they
had nothing to say.

1\. In all periods of their history, the Jews were both an incredulous
and disobedient people: perhaps it was on this ground that God first
chose them to be keepers of his testimonies; for had they not had the
most incontrovertible proofs that God did speak, they would neither have
credited nor preserved his oracles.

Their incredulity is, therefore, no mean proof of the Divine authority
of the law and the prophets. The apostles, who were all Jews, partook
deeply of the same spirit, as various places in the Gospel prove; and,
had not they had the fullest evidence of the divinity of their Master,
they would not have believed, much less have sealed the truth with their
blood. Thus their incredulity is a strong proof of the authenticity of
the Gospel.

2\. When a man, through prejudice, bigotry, or malevolence, is
determined to disbelieve, both evidence and demonstration are lost upon
him: he is incapable of conviction, because he is determined not to
yield. This was, this is, the case with the Jews - there are facts
before their eyes sufficient to convince and confound them; but they
have made a covenant with unbelief, and therefore they continue blind,
ignorant, and wicked; obstinately closing their eyes against the light;
and thus the wrath of God is coming upon them to the very uttermost. But
shall not a rebellious and wicked Christian be judged worthy of more
punishment? Certainly: for he professes to believe that truth which is
able to make him wise unto salvation, by faith in Jesus Christ. Reader,
it is an awful thing to trifle with the Gospel! - the God of it is pure,
jealous, and holy. Come unto him and implore forgiveness of thy past
sins, that thou mayest have eternal life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 6](joh006)

</div>
