<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jonah Index](jon)  
  [Previous](jon002)  [Next](jon004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#001)

[Jonah](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jon 3:0</span></span>

Jonah is sent again to Nineveh, a city of three days' journey, (being
sixty miles in circumference, according to Diodorus Siculus), [Jon
3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#001). The inhabitants, in consequence
of the prophet's preaching, repent in dust and ashes, [Jon
3:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005). God, seeing that they were
deeply humbled on account of their sins, and that they turned away from
all their iniquities, repents of the evil with which he had threatened
them, [Jon 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010).

[Jonah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jon 3:1</span></span>

And the word of the Lord - The same oracle as that before given; and
which, from what he had felt and seen of the justice and mercy of the
Lord, he was now prepared to obey.

[Jonah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jon 3:2</span></span>

And preach unto it the preaching - וקרא את הקריאה vekera eth hakkeriah,
"And cry the cry that I bid thee." Be my herald, and faithfully deliver
my message. The word κηρυξ in Greek answers to the Hebrew קורא kore:
both signifying a crier, a herald, a preacher; one that makes
proclamation with a loud and earnest cry. Such was John Baptist, [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003); such was Jesus Christ, John
7:18-37; and such were all his apostles. And such earnestness becomes a
ministry that has to do with immortal souls, asleep and dead in sin,
hanging on the brink of perdition, and insensible of their state. The
soft-speaking, gentle-toned, unmoved preacher, is never likely to awaken
souls. As we preach, so the people hear; scarcely receiving any counsels
that appear to have no importance by the manner in which they are
delivered. But this earnestness is widely different from that noisy,
blustering, screaming rant, that manifests more of the turbulence of
disorderly passions, than of the real inspired influence of the Spirit
of God.

[Jonah 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jon 3:3</span></span>

Nineveh was an exceeding great city, of three days' journey - See on
[Jon 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#002) (note). Strabo says, lib.
xvi., πολυ μειζων ην της Βαβυλωνος, "it was much larger than Babylon:"
and Ninus, the builder, not only proposed to make it the largest city of
the world, but the largest that could be built by man. See Diodor. Sic.
Bib. 50:2. And as we find, from the lowest computation, that it was at
least fifty-four or sixty English miles in circumference, it would take
the prophet three days to walk round upon the walls, and announce from
them the terrible message, "Yet forty days, and Nineveh will be
destroyed!"

[Jonah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jon 3:4</span></span>

Yet forty days - Both the Septuagint and Arabic read three days.
Probably some early copyist of the Septuagint, from whom our modern
editions are derived, mistook the Greek numerals μ forty for γ three; or
put the three days' journey in preaching instead of the forty days
mentioned in the denunciation. One of Kennicott's MSS., instead of
ארבעים arbaim, forty, has שלשים sheloshim, thirty: but the Hebrew text
is undoubtedly the true reading; and it is followed by all the ancient
versions, the Septuagint and Vulgate excepted. thus God gives them time
to think, reflect, take counsel, and return to him. Had they only three
days' space, the denunciation would have so completely confounded them,
as to excite nothing but terror, and prevent repentance and conversion.

[Jonah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jon 3:5</span></span>

The people of Nineveh believed God - They had no doubt that the
threatening would be fulfilled, unless their speedy conversion prevented
it; but, though not expressed, they knew that the threatening was
conditional. "The promises and threatenings of God, which are merely
personal, either to any particular man or number of men, are always
conditional, because the wisdom of God hath thought fit to make these
depend on the behavior of men." - Dr. S. Clarke's Sermons, vol. i.

Proclaimed a fast - And never was there one so general, so deep, and so
effectual. Men and women, old and young, high and low, and even the
cattle themselves, all kept such a fast as the total abstinence from
food implies.

[Jonah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jon 3:6</span></span>

Word came unto the king - This, some think, was Pul; others,
Sardanapalus his son, king of Assyria, who flourished in the reign of
Jeroboam the Second: but it seems more probable that the monarch here
alluded to was a king of Assyria contemporary with Joash, king of Judah.
It was by the decree of the king that the fast was instituted, and
became general.

[Jonah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jon 3:8</span></span>

Let man and beast be covered - This was done that every object which
they beheld might deepen the impression already made, and cause them to
mourn after a godly sort. Virgil tells us that the mourning for the
death of Julius Caesar was so general, that the cattle neither ate nor
drank: -

Non ulli pastos illis egere diebus

Frigida, Daphni, boves ad flumina: nulla neque amnem

Libavit quadrupes, nec graminis attigit herbam.

Ecl. 5:24.

"The swains forgot their sheep, nor near the brink

Of running waters brought their herds to drink.

The thirsty cattle of themselves abstain'd,

From water, and their grassy fare disdain'd."

Dryden.

And that they sometimes changed: or reversed the harness and ornaments
of cattle, as indicative of mourning, we have a proof in Virgil's
description of the funeral procession in honor of Pallas, slain by
Turnus, Aen. 11 ver. 89.

Post bellator equus, positis insignibus, Aethon

It lacrymans, guttisque humectat grandibus ora.

"Stripp'd of his trappings, and his head declined,

Aethon, his generous warrior-horse, behind,

Moves with a solemn, slow, majestic pace;

And the big tears come rolling down his face."

[Jonah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jon 3:9</span></span>

Who can tell if God will turn and repent - There is at least a
peradventure for our salvation. God may turn towards us, change his
purpose, and save us alive. While there is life there is hope; God has
no pleasure in the death of sinners; he is gracious and compassionate.
Himself has prescribed repentance; if we repent, and turn to him from
our iniquities, who knows then whether God will not turn, etc.

[Jonah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jon 3:10</span></span>

And Gods saw their works - They repented, and brought forth fruits meet
for repentance; works which showed that they did most earnestly repent.
He therefore changed his purpose, and the city was saved. The purpose
was: If the Ninevites do not return from their evil ways, and the
violence that is in their hands, within forty days, I will destroy the
city. The Ninevites did return, etc., and therefore escaped the
threatened judgment. Thus we see that the threatening was conditional.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 4](jon004)

</div>
