<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos004)  [Next](jos006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 5:0</span></span>

The effect produced on the minds of the Canaanites by the late miracle,
[Jos 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001). Joshua is commanded to
circumcise the Israelites, [Jos 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#002).
He obeys, [Jos 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#003). Who they were that
were circumcised, and why it was now done, [Jos
5:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#004). They abide in the camp till
they are whole, [Jos 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#008). The place is
called Gilgal, and why, [Jos 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#009). They
keep the passover in the same place, [Jos
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#010). They eat unleavened cakes and
parched corn, on the morrow after the passover, [Jos
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#011). The manna ceases, [Jos
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#012). The captain of the Lord's host
appears to Joshua, [Jos 5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013).

[Joshua 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 5:1</span></span>

The Amorites which were on the side of Jordan westward - It has already
been remarked that the term Amorite is applied sometimes to signify all
the nations or tribes of Canaan. It appears from this verse that there
were people thus denominated that dwelt on both sides of the Jordan.
Those on the east side had already been destroyed in the war which the
Israelites had with Sihon and Og; with those on the west side Joshua had
not yet waged war. It is possible however that the Amorites of whom we
read in this verse, were the remains of those who dwelt on the east side
of the Jordan, and who had taken refuge here on the defeat of Og and
Sihon.

[Joshua 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 5:2</span></span>

Make thee sharp knives - חרבות צרים charboth tsurim, knives of rock,
stone, or flint. Before the use of iron was common, all the nations of
the earth had their edge-tools made of stones, flints, etc. In the
lately discovered islands this is found to be a common case. Our
ancestors in these countries made their arrow and spear-heads of flint:
these I have often seen turned up by the plough. But we cannot suppose
that at the time here referred to the Israelites were destitute of iron,
and were therefore obliged to use knives made of stone or flint, their
different manufactures in the wilderness prove that they must have had
both iron and steel. Why then use knives made of stone? Probably it was
unlawful to use metal of any kind in this religious rite; and indeed
this seems likely from the circumstance of Zipporah ([Exo
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025)) taking a sharp stone and
circumcising her son; and we find, from the most ancient and authentic
accounts, that the Egyptians considered it unlawful or profane to use
any kind of metal to make incisions in the human body, when preparing it
for embalming; see the note on [Gen
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#002), and on [Exo
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025). That it was deemed improper to
use any other kind of instrument in circumcision we have a proof in the
tribe Alnajab, in Ethiopia, who follow the Mosaic institution, and
perform the rite of circumcision, according to Ludolf, cultris
lapidibus, with knives made of stone. - Hist. Aethiop., lib. iii., c. 1.
And as God commanded the people to make him an altar of unhewn stones,
on which no tool of iron had been lifted up, because this would pollute
it, (see [Exo 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#025), and [Deu
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005)), he might require that no
instrument of iron should be used in a rite by which the body and soul
of the person were in the most solemn and sacred manner dedicated to him
to be his house and temple, the heart itself being the altar on which
continual sacrifices to God must be offered. A physical reason has been
given for preferring knives of stone in this operation, "the wound
suffers less through inflammation, and is sooner healed." For this a
reason may be given. It is almost impossible to get an edge made so even
and firm as not to leave particles of the metal in the incisions made
even in the most delicate flesh; these particles would soon become
oxidized by the action of the air, and extra inflammation in the part
would be the consequence. The great aptitude of iron to be oxidized,
i.e., to be converted to rust, is well known; but how far this
reasoning, thus applied, may be supported by fact, I cannot pretend to
determine: it is sufficiently evident that it was a common custom to use
knives of stone in circumcision, and in all operations on those parts of
the human body. I shall give a few examples. Pliny says, when they
amputate certain parts they do it with a sharp stone, because nothing
else could be employed without danger. Samia testa virilitatem
amputabant: nec aliter citra perniciem. Ovid, Fast. lib. iv., ver. 237,
relates a circumstance where the saxum acutum, or sharp stone, was used
about those parts: -

Ille etiam Saxo corpus laniavit Acuto,

Longaque in immundo pulvere tracta coma est.

Voxque fuit, Merui; meritas dem sanguine poenas;

Ah! pereant partes quae nocuere mihi;

Ah! pereant; dicebat adhuc, onus inguinis aufert;

Nullaque sunt subito signa relicta viri.

This quotation is produced in order to prove that a knife made of a
sharp stone was used in making incisions and amputations of certain
parts of the body, even when the use of iron was well known; but a
translation of the verse is not necessary, and would be improper. The

Mollia qui Rapta secuit Genitalia Testa

of Juvenal (Sat. vi., ver. 513) is a farther proof of this. Many other
proofs might be produced but those who wish for more may consult Calmet
and Scheuchzer.

Circumcise again the children of Israel the second time - This certainly
does not mean that they should repeat circumcision on those who had
already received it. This would have been as absurd as impracticable.
But the command implies that they were to renew the observance of a rite
which had been neglected in their travels in the desert: this is
sufficiently evident from the following verses.

[Joshua 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 5:4</span></span>

This is the cause why Joshua did circumcise - The text here explains
itself. Before the Israelites left Egypt all the males were circumcised;
and some learned men think that all those who were born during their
encampment at Sinai were circumcised also, because there they celebrated
the passover; but after that time, during the whole of their stay in the
wilderness, there were none circumcised till they entered into the
promised land. Owing to their unsettled state, God appears to have
dispensed, for the time being, with this rite; but as they were about to
celebrate another passover, it was necessary that all the males should
be circumcised; for without this they could not be considered within the
covenant, and could not keep the passover, which was the seal of that
covenant. As baptism is generally understood to have succeeded to
circumcision, and the holy eucharist to the passover, hence, in the
Church of England, and probably in most others, no person is permitted
to receive the sacrament of the Lord's Supper till he has been baptized.

[Joshua 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 5:8</span></span>

They abode - in the camp, till they were whole - This required several
days; see the notes on [Gen 34:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#024),
[Gen 34:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#025). Sir J. Chardin informs us
that when adults were circumcised they were obliged to keep their beds
for about three weeks, or at least during that time they are not able to
walk about but with great difficulty. The account he had from several
renegadoes, who had received circumcision among the Mohammedans. Is it
not strange that during this time they were not attacked by the
inhabitants of the land, and utterly destroyed, which might have been
easily effected? See the case of the poor Shechemites, as related in
[Gen 34:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#024), with the notes there.
Joshua, as an able general, would at once perceive that this very
measure must expose his whole host to the danger of being totally
annihilated; but he knew that God could not err, and that it was his
duty to obey; therefore in the very teeth of his enemies he reduced the
major part of his army to a state of total helplessness, simply trusting
for protection in the arm of Jehovah! The sequel shows that his
confidence was not misplaced; during the whole time God did not permit
any of their enemies to disturb them. The path of duty is the path of
safety; and it is impossible for any soul to be injured while walking in
the path of obedience. But why did not God order them to be circumcised
while they were on the east side of Jordan in a state of great security?
Because he chose to bring them into straits and difficulties where no
counsel or might but his own could infallibly direct and save them; and
this he did that they might see that the excellence of the power was of
God, and not of man. For the same reason he caused them to pass the
Jordan at the time that it overflowed its banks, and not at the time
when it was low and easily fordable, that he might have the better
opportunity to show them that they were under his immediate care and
protection; and convince them of his almighty power, that they might
trust in him for ever, and not fear the force of any adversaries. In
both cases how apparent are the wisdom, power, and goodness of God!

[Joshua 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 5:9</span></span>

The reproach of Egypt - Their being uncircumcised made them like the
uncircumcised Egyptians; and the Hebrews ever considered all those who
were uncircumcised as being in a state of the grossest impurity. Being
now circumcised, the reproach of uncircumcision was rolled away. This is
another proof that the Israelites did not receive circumcision from the
Egyptians; for they could not have considered those in a state of
abomination, from whom they received that rite by which they conceived
themselves to be made pure. The Israelites had this rite from Abraham;
and Abraham had it from the express order of God himself. See [Gen
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#010) (note), and the note there.

The place is called Gilgal - A rolling away or rolling off. See the note
on [Jos 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019), where the word is
largely explained.

[Joshua 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 5:10</span></span>

Kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the month - If the ceremony
of circumcision was performed on the eleventh day of the month, as many
think; and if the sore was at the worst on the thirteenth, and the
passover was celebrated on the fourteenth, the people being then quite
recovered; it must have been rather a miraculous than a natural healing.
We have already seen from the account of Sir J. Chardin, that it
required about three weeks to restore to soundness adults who had
submitted to circumcision: if any thing like this took place in the case
of the Israelites at Gilgal, they could not have celebrated the passover
on the third or fourth day after their circumcision. The apparent
impossibility of this led Mr. Harmer to suppose that they kept the
passover on the fourteenth day of the second month, the preceding time
having been employed in the business of the circumcision. See his
Observations, vol. iv., p. 427, etc.

[Joshua 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 5:11</span></span>

They did eat of the old corn of the land - The Hebrew word עבור abur,
which we translate old corn, occurs only in this place in such a sense,
if that sense be legitimate. The noun, though of doubtful signification,
is evidently derived from עבר abar, to pass over, to go beyond; and here
it may be translated simply the produce, that which passes from the land
into the hands of the cultivator; or according to Cocceius, what passes
from person to person in the way of traffic; hence bought corn, what
they purchased from the inhabitants of the land.

On the morrow after the passover - That is, on the fifteenth day; for
then the feast of unleavened bread began. But they could neither eat
bread, nor parched corn, nor green ears, till the first-fruits of the
harvest had been waved at the tabernacle; (see [Lev
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#009), etc.); and therefore in this
case we may suppose that the Israelites had offered a sheaf of the
barley-harvest, the only grain that was then ripe, before they ate of
the unleavened cakes and parched corn.

[Joshua 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 5:12</span></span>

And the manna ceased - after they had eaten of the old corn - This
miraculous supply continued with them as long as they needed it. While
they were in the wilderness they required such a provision; nor could
such a multitude, in such a place, be supported without a miracle. Now
they are got into the promised land, the anathematized inhabitants of
which either fall or flee before them, they find an old stock, and they
are brought in just at the commencement of the harvest; hence, as there
is an ample provision made in the ordinary way of Providence, there is
no longer any need of a miraculous supply; therefore the manna ceased
which they had enjoyed for forty years. The circumstances in which it
was first given, its continuance with them through all their
peregrinations in the wilderness, its accompanying them over Jordan, and
ceasing as soon as they got a supply in the ordinary way of Providence,
all prove that it was a preternatural gift. "On the fourteenth of Nisan
they sacrificed the paschal lamb: on the fifteenth, i.e., according to
our calculation, the same day after sunset, they disposed themselves for
eating it, and actually did eat it. On the morrow, the sixteenth, after
having offered to God the homer, they began eating the corn of the
country; and the seventeenth, the manna ceased to fall from heaven. What
supports this calculation is, that the homer or sheaf was offered the
sixteenth of Nisan, in broad daylight, though pretty late. Now the manna
did not fall till night, or very early in the morning; so that it cannot
be said to have ceased falling the same day that the Israelites began to
eat of the produce of the country." - Dodd.

[Joshua 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 5:13</span></span>

When Joshua was by Jericho - The sixth chapter should have commenced
here, as this is an entirely new relation; or these two chapters should
have made but one, as the present division has most unnaturally divided
the communication which Joshua had from the angel of the Lord, and which
is continued to [Jos 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#005). It is very
likely that Joshua had gone out privately to reconnoitre the city of
Jericho when he had this vision; and while contemplating the strength of
the place, and probably reflecting on the extreme difficulty of reducing
it, God, to encourage him, granted him this vision, and instructed him
in the means by which the city should be taken.

There stood a man over against him - It has been a very general opinion,
both among the ancients and moderns, that the person mentioned here was
no other than the Lord Jesus in that form which, in the fullness of
time, he was actually to assume for the redemption of man. That the
appearance was supernatural is agreed on all hands; and as the name
Jehovah is given him, ([Jos 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#002)), and
he received from Joshua Divine adoration, we may presume that no created
angel is intended.

And Joshua went unto him - This is a very natural relation, and carries
with it all the appearances and characteristics of a simple relation of
fact. The whole history of Joshua shows him to have been a man of the
most undaunted mind and intrepid courage - a genuine Hero. An ordinary
person, seeing this man armed, with a drawn sword in his hand, would
have endeavored to have regained the camp, and sought safety in flight;
but Joshua, undismayed though probably slightly armed, walks up to this
terrible person and immediately questions him, Art thou for us or for
our adversaries? probably at first supposing that he might be the
Canaanitish general coming to reconnoitre the Israelitish camp, as
himself was come out to examine the city of Jericho.

[Joshua 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 5:14</span></span>

But as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come - By this saying
Joshua was both encouraged and instructed. As if he had said, "Fear not;
Jehovah hath sent from heaven to save thee and thy people from the
reproach of them that would swallow thee up. Israel is the Lord's host;
and the Lord of hosts is Israel's Captain. Thou thyself shalt only be
captain under me, and I am now about to instruct thee relative to thy
conduct in this war."

And Joshua - did worship - Nor was he reprehended for offering Divine
worship to this person, which he would not have received had he been a
created angel. See [Rev 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#008), [Rev
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#009).

[Joshua 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 5:15</span></span>

Loose thy shoe from off thy foot, etc. - These were the same words which
the angel, on Mount Sinai, spoke to Moses; (see [Exo
3:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005)); and from this it seems likely
that it was the same person that appeared in both places: in the first,
to encourage Moses to deliver the oppressed Israelites, and bring them
to the promised land; in the second, to encourage Joshua in his arduous
labor in expelling the ancient inhabitants, and establishing the people
in the inheritance promised to their fathers. There is scarcely a more
unfortunate division of chapters in the whole Bible than that here.
Through this very circumstance many persons have been puzzled to know
what was intended by this extraordinary appearance, because they
supposed that the whole business ends with the chapter, whereas, it is
continued in the succeeding one, the first verse of which is a mere
parenthesis, simply relating the state of Jericho at the time that
Joshua was favored by this encouraging vision. We may draw two useful
reflections from the subjects of this chapter: -

1\. As the manna had now failed, the people always greatly addicted to
incredulity, might have been led to imagine that God had now given them
up, and would be no longer in their armies, had he not given them this
strong assurance, that the Angel of his presence should be with them as
the guide and protector of the whole camp; for Joshua undoubtedly
informed them of the encouragement he had received from the captain of
the Lord's host.

2\. By this vision he showed them that their help came from himself, and
that it was not by human might or power, but by the Lord of hosts, they
were to have the victory over all their adversaries; and he gave them
the most convincing proof of this in the miraculous destruction of
Jericho. By this means he continued to keep them dependent on his arm
alone, without which dependence the spirit of religion could not have
been preserved among them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 6](jos006)

</div>
