<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](deu034)  [Next](jos001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the Book of Joshua

Joshua, the son of Nun, of the tribe of Ephraim, was first called Oshea
or Hoshea, הושע, [Num 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#016), which
signifies saved, a savior, or salvation; but afterwards Moses, guided no
doubt by a prophetic spirit, changed his name into יהוש Yehoshua or
Joshua, which signifies he shall save, or the salvation of Jehovah;
referring, no doubt, to his being God's instrument in saving the people
from the hands of their enemies, and leading them from victory to
victory over the different Canaanitish nations, till he put them in
possession of the promised land. On the change and meaning of the name,
see the note on [Num 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#016). By the
Septuagint he is called Ιησους Ναυη, Jesus Naue, or Jesus son of Nave:
and in the New Testament he is expressly called Ιησους, Jesus; see [Act
7:45](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#045); [Heb
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#008). Joshua was denominated the
servant of Moses, as he seems to have acted sometimes as his secretary,
sometimes as his aid-du-camp, and sometimes as the general of the army.
He was early appointed to be the successor of Moses, see [Exo
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014); and under the instruction of
this great master he was fully qualified for the important office. He
was a great and pious man, and God honored him in a most extraordinary
manner, as the sequel of the history amply proves. From the preceding
books it appears that he became attached to Moses shortly after the
exodus from Egypt; that he was held by him in the highest esteem; had
the command of the army confided to him in the war with the Amalekites;
and accompanied his master to the Mount, when he went up to receive the
Law from God. These were the highest honors he could possibly receive
during the life-time of Moses.

Commentators and critics are divided in opinion whether the book that
goes under his name was actually compiled by him.

It is argued by those who deny Joshua to be the author, that there are
both names and transactions in it which did not exist till considerably
after Joshua's time. The account we have, [Jos
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#009), of the twelve stones set up by
Joshua in the midst of Jordan remaining to the present day, seems to
prove that the book, at least this verse, was not written till after
Joshua's time; the same may be said of the account of Ai, that Joshua
made it a heap for ever, even a desolation to the present day, [Jos
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#028), which is a proof, however, that
the book was not written after the time of the kings, as Ai subsisted
after the return from the captivity; see [Ezr
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#028) : The men of Beth-el and Ai, two
hundred twenty and three. It is supposed also, that the relation of the
marriage of Achsah, daughter of Caleb, with Othniel the son of Kenaz,
necessarily belongs to the time of the Judges; [Jos
15:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#016); as also the account of the
capture of Leshem by the Danites [Jos
19:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#047), compared with [Jdg
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#007), [Jdg
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#029).

"What is related, [Jos 15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063),
concerning the Jebusites dwelling with the children of Judah at
Jerusalem unto this day, must certainly have been written before the
time of David; for he took the strong hold of Zion, and expelled the
Jebusites; see [Sa2 5:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#007). Also, what
is said, [Jos 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#010), They drave not
out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer, but they dwelt among the
Ephraimites unto this day, must have been written before the time of
Solomon, for in his time Pharaoh, king of Egypt, had taken Gezer, burnt
it with fire, slain the Canaanites that dwelt in it, and given it a
present to his daughter, the wife of Solomon, [Kg1
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#016). The country of Cabul, mentioned
[Jos 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#027), had not this name till the
time of Solomon, as appears from [Kg1
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#013); and the city called Joktheel,
[Jos 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#038), had not this name till the
reign of Joash, as appears from [Kg2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007), it having been previously called
Selah. The like may be said of Tyre, [Jos
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#029); and of Galilee [Jos
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007); [Jos
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#032)."

These are the principal objections which are made against the book as
being the work of Joshua. Some of these difficulties might be so removed
as to render it still probable that Joshua was the author of the whole
book, as some think to be intimated [Jos
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#026); And Joshua wrote these words in
the book of the law of the Lord; (but this probably refers to nothing
more than the words of the covenant which was then made, and which is
included in Joshua 24:2-24); but there are other difficulties that
cannot be removed on the above supposition and therefore it has been
generally supposed that the book was written by some inspired person
after the time of Joshua; and positively before many kings had reigned
in Israel. The book has been attributed to Samuel, though some give this
honor to Ezra.

After all, I cannot help considering the book in the main as the
composition of Joshua himself. It is certain that Moses kept an accurate
register of all the events that took place during his administration in
the wilderness, at least from the giving of the law to the time of his
death. And in that wilderness he wrote the book of Genesis, as well as
the others that bear his name. Now, it is not likely that Joshua, the
constant servant and companion of Moses, could see all this - be
convinced, as he must be, of its utility - and not adopt the same
practice; especially as at the death of Moses he came into the same
office. I therefore take it for granted, that the Book of Joshua is as
truly his work, as the Commentaries of Caesar are his; and all the real
difficulties mentioned above may be rationally and satisfactorily
accounted for on the ground, that in transcribing this book in after
ages, especially between the times of Joshua and the Kings, some few
changes were made, and a very few slight additions, which referred
chiefly to the insertion of names by which cities were then known
instead of those by which they had been anciently denominated. This book
therefore I conceive to be not the work of Ezra, nor of Samuel, nor of
any other person of those times; nor can I allow that "it is called the
Book of Joshua, because he is the chief subject of it, as the heroic
poem of Virgil is called the Aeneis, because of the prince whose travels
and actions it relates;" but I conceive it to be called the Book of
Joshua,

1\. Because Joshua wrote it.

2\. Because it is the relation of his own conduct in the conquest,
division, and settlement of the promised land.

3\. Because it contains a multitude of particulars that only himself, or
a constant eye-witness, could possibly relate.

4\. Because it was evidently designed to be a continuation of the Book
of Deuteronomy, and is so connected with it, in narrative, as to prove
that it must have been immediately commenced on the termination of the
other.

5\. I might add to this, that with the exception of a few individuals,
the whole of the ancient Jewish and Christian Churches have uniformly
acknowledged Joshua to be its author.

The Book of Joshua is one of the most important writings in the old
covenant, and should never be separated from the Pentateuch, of which it
is at once both the continuation and completion. Between this Book and
the five Books of Moses, there is the same analogy as between the four
Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles. The Pentateuch contains a history
of the Acts of the great Jewish legislator, and the Laws on which the
Jewish Church should be established. The Book of Joshua gives an account
of the establishment of that Church in the Land of Canaan, according to
the oft-repeated promises and declarations of God. The Gospels give an
account of the transactions of Jesus Christ, the great Christian
legislator, and of those Laws on which his Church should be established,
and by which it should be governed. The Acts of the Apostles gives an
account of the actual establishment of that Church, according to the
predictions and promises of its great founder. Thus, then, the
Pentateuch bears as pointed a relation to the Gospels as the Book of
Joshua does to the Acts of the Apostles. And we might, with great
appearance of probability, carry this analogy yet farther, and show that
the writings of several of the Prophets bear as strict a relation to the
Apostolical Epistles, as the Books of Ezekiel and Daniel do to the
Apocalypse. On this very ground of analogy Christ obviously founded the
Christian Church; hence he had his twelve disciples, from whom the
Christian Church was to spring, as the Jewish Church or twelve tribes
sprang from the twelve sons of Jacob. He had his seventy or seventy-two
disciples, in reference to the seventy-two elders, six chosen out of
each of the twelve tribes, who were united with Moses and Aaron in the
administration of justice, etc., among the people. Christ united in his
person the characters both of Moses and Aaron, or legislator and high
priest; hence he ever considers himself, and is considered by his
apostles and followers, the same in the Christian Church that Moses and
Aaron were in the Jewish. As a rite of initiation into his Church, he
instituted baptism in the place of circumcision, both being types of the
purification of the heart and holiness of life; and as a rite of
establishment and confirmation, the holy eucharist in place of the
paschal lamb, both being intended to commemorate the atonement made to
God for the sins of the people. The analogies are so abundant, and
indeed universal, that time would fail to enumerate them. On this very
principle it would be a matter of high utility to read these Old
Testament and the New Testament books together, as they reflect a strong
and mutual light on each other, bear the most decided testimony to the
words and truth of prophecy, and show the ample fulfillment of all the
ancient and gracious designs of God. This appears particularly evident
in the five Books of Moses and the Book of Joshua compared and collated
with the four Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles; and the analogy will
be the more complete as to the number of those books, though that is a
matter of minor consideration, when we consider Joshua, as we ought, a
continuation of the Book of Deuteronomy, though written by a different
hand, which two books should be rated only as one history. Of Judges and
Ruth it may be said they are a sort of supplement to the Book of Joshua.

Whoever goes immediately from the reading of the Pentateuch to the
reading of the Gospels, and from the reading of Joshua to that of the
Acts, will carry with him advantages which on no other plan he will be
able to command. Even a commentator himself will derive advantages from
this plan, which he will seek in vain from any other. To see the wisdom
and goodness of God in the ritual of Moses, we must have an eye
continually on the incarnation and death of Christ, to which it refers.
And to have a proper view of the great atonement made by the sacrifice
of our Lord, we must have a constant reference to the Mosaic law, where
this is shadowed forth. Without this reference the law of Moses is a
system of expensive and burdensome ceremonies, destitute of adequate
meaning; and without this entering in of the law that the offense might
abound, to show the exceeding sinfulness of sin, the frailty of man, and
the holiness of God; the Gospel of Christ, including the account of his
incarnation, preaching, miracles, passion, death, burial, ascension, and
intercession, would not appear to have a sufficient necessity to explain
and justify it. By the Law is the knowledge of sin, and by the Gospel
its cure. Either, taken separately, will not answer the purpose for
which God gave these astonishing revelations of his justice and his
grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 1](jos001)

</div>
