<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos014)  [Next](jos016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 15:0</span></span>

The lot of the tribe of Judah described, [Jos
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#001). Their south border, [Jos
15:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#002). Their east border, [Jos
15:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#005). Their west border, [Jos
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#012). Caleb's conquest, [Jos
15:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013). Promises his daughter to the
person who should take Kirjath-sepher, [Jos
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#016). Othniel his kinsman renders
himself master of it, and gets Achsah to wife, [Jos
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#017). Her request to her father to
get a well watered land, which is granted, [Jos
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#018), [Jos
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#019). The cities of the tribe of
Judah are enumerated, vv. 20-63.

[Joshua 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 15:1</span></span>

This then was the lot of the tribe of - Judah - The geography of the
sacred writings presents many difficulties, occasioned by the changes
which the civil state of the promised land has undergone, especially for
the last two thousand years. Many of the ancient towns and villages have
had their names so totally changed, that their former appellations are
no longer discernible; several lie buried under their own ruins, and
others have been so long destroyed that not one vestige of them remains.
On these accounts it is very difficult to ascertain the situation of
many of the places mentioned in this and the following chapters. But
however this may embarrass the commentator, it cannot affect the truth
of the narrative. Some of the principal cities in the universe, cities
that were the seats of the most powerful empires, are not only reduced
to ruins, but so completely blotted out of the map of the world that
their situation cannot be ascertained. Where is Babylon? Where are
Nineveh, Carthage, Thebes, Tyre, Baalbec, Palmyra, and the so far-famed
and greatly celebrated Troy? Of the former and the latter, so renowned
by historians and poets, scarcely a vestige, properly speaking, remains;
nor can the learned agree on the spot once occupied by the buildings of
those celebrated cities! Should this circumstance invalidate the whole
history of the ancient world, in which they made so conspicuous a
figure? And can the authenticity of our sacred historian be impaired,
because several of the places he mentions no longer exist? Surely no:
nor can it be called in question but by the heedless and superficial, or
the decidedly profane. Although some of the cities of the holy land are
destroyed, and it would be difficult to ascertain the geography of
several, yet enough remain, either under their ancient names, or with
such decisive characteristics, that through their new names their
ancient appellatives are readily discernible. It is natural to suppose
that the division mentioned here was made after an accurate survey of
the land, which might have been made by proper persons accompanying the
conquering army of the Israelites. Nine tribes and a half were yet to be
accommodated, and the land must be divided into nine parts and a half.
This was no doubt done with the utmost judgment and discretion, the
advantages and disadvantages of each division being carefully balanced.
These were the portions which were divided by lot; and it appears that
Judah drew the first lot; and, because of the importance and
pre-eminence of this tribe, this lot is first described.

By their families - It is supposed that the family divisions were not
determined by lot. These were left to the prudence and judgment of
Joshua, Eleazar, and the ten princes, who appointed to each family a
district in proportion to its number, etc., the general division being
that alone which was determined by the lot.

To the border of Edom - The tribe of Judah occupied the most southerly
part of the land of Canaan. Its limits extended from the extremity of
the Dead Sea southward, along Idumea, possibly by the desert of Sin, and
proceeding from east to west to the Mediterranean Sea, and the most
eastern branch of the river Nile, or to what is called the river of
Egypt. Calmet very properly remarks, that Joshua is particular in giving
the limits of this tribe, as being the first, the most numerous, most
important; that which was to furnish the kings of Judea; that in which
pure religion was to be preserved, and that from which the Messiah was
to spring.

[Joshua 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 15:2</span></span>

From the bay that looketh southward - These were the southern limits of
the tribe of Judah, which commenced at the extremity of the lake
Asphaltites or Dead Sea, and terminated at Sihor or the river of Egypt,
and Mediterranean Sea; though some think it extended to the Nile.

[Joshua 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 15:3</span></span>

Maaleh-acrabbim - The ascent of the Mount of Scorpions, probably so
called from the multitude of those animals found in that place.

Kadesh-barnea - This place was called Enmishpat, [Gen
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007). It was on the edge of the
wilderness of Paran, and about twenty-four miles from Hebron. Here
Miriam, the sister of Moses and Aaron, died; and here Moses and Aaron
rebelled against the Lord; hence the place was called Meribah-Kadesh, or
the contention of Kadesh.

Karkaa - Supposed to be the Coracea of Ptolemy, in Arabia Petraea. -
Calmet.

[Joshua 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 15:4</span></span>

Toward Azmon - This was the last city they possessed toward Egypt.

The river of Egypt - The most eastern branch of the river Nile. See on
[Jos 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003) (note). But there is much
reason to doubt whether any branch of the Nile be meant, and whether the
promised land extended to that river. On this subject it is impossible
to decide either way.

[Joshua 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 15:5</span></span>

The east border was the Salt Sea - The Salt Sea is the same as the Dead
Sea, lake Asphaltites, etc. And here it is intimated that the eastern
border of the tribe of Judah extended along the Dead Sea, from its
lowest extremity to the end of Jordan, i.e., to the place where Jordan
falls into this sea.

[Joshua 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 15:6</span></span>

Beth-hogla - A place between Jericho and the Dead Sea, belonging to the
tribe of Benjamin, [Jos 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#021), though
here serving as a frontier to the tribe of Judah.

Stone of Bohan - This must have been some remarkable place, probably
like the stone of Jacob, which afterwards became Bethel; but where it
was situated is uncertain.

[Joshua 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 15:7</span></span>

The valley of Achor - Debir mentioned in this verse is unknown. The
valley of Achor had its name from the punishment of Achan. See the
account, [Jos 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#024) (note), etc.

En-shemesh - The fountain of the sun; it was eastward of Jerusalem, on
the confines of Judah and Benjamin.

[Joshua 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 15:8</span></span>

The valley of the son of Hinnom - Who Hinnom was is not known, nor why
this was called his valley. It was situated on the east of Jerusalem;
and is often mentioned in Scripture. The image of the idol Molech
appears to have been set up there; and there the idolatrous Israelites
caused their sons and daughters to pass through the fire in honor of
that demon, [Kg2 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010). It was also
called Tophet, see [Jer 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#032). When
King Josiah removed the image of this idol from this valley, it appears
to have been held in such universal execration, that it became the
general receptacle of all the filth and impurities which were carried
out of Jerusalem; and it is supposed that continual fires were there
kept up, to consume those impurities and prevent infection. From the
Hebrew words גי בן הנם gei ben Hinnom, the valley of the son of Hinnom,
and by contraction, גי הנם gei Hinnom, the valley of Hinnom, came the
Γεεννα, Gehenna of the New Testament, called also Γεεννα του πυρος, the
Gehenna of fire, which is the emblem of hell, or the place of the
damned. See [Mat 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022), [Mat
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029), [Mat
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#030); [Mat
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028); [Mat
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#009), etc. In the East it is common to
add the name of the father to that of the son, e.g., "This land belongs
to Goborka the son of Kake Prusada." But this addition is not made till
after the father's death. This custom prevailed also in the west. It is
common among the aborigines of both Ireland and Wales.

The same is Jerusalem - This city was formerly called Jebus; a part of
it was in the tribe of Benjamin; Zion, called its citadel, was in the
tribe of Judah.

The valley of the giants - Of the Rephaim. See the notes on [Gen
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004); [Gen
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005); [Deu
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#007), [Deu
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#011). On this subject, a very
intelligent clergyman favors me with his opinion in the following terms:
-

"The boundary between Judah and Benjamin went up from the valley of
Hinnom on the east to the top of the hill southward, leaving Jebusi (or
Jerusalem) to the northwest adjoining to Benjamin. This mount (Jebusi)
lay between the two tribes, which the Jebusites possessed till the time
of David. At the 63d verse here, it is said Judah could not drive out
these people; and in [Jdg 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021), the
same is said of the Benjamites. Each tribe might have attacked them at
various times. There were various mounts or tops to these hills. Mount
Zion and Moriah, where the temple stood, was in the tribe of Judah; [Psa
78:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#068), [Psa
78:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#069); [Psa
87:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#002). "In [Deu
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012) it is said of Benjamin, the Lord
shall dwell by him, i.e., near him, or beside his borders, between his
shoulders; the line might be circular between the two hills or tops so
as in part to encompass Mount Zion in the tribe of Judah, on which the
temple stood. Benjamin's gate, (mentioned [Jer
37:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#012), [Jer
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#013); [Jer
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#007)), was the gate leading out of the
city, into the tribe of Benjamin. So the gate of Ephraim, ([Kg2
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013)), was a gate which led towards
the tribe of Ephraim. We give names to roads, etc., in the same way now.
"Mount Calvary, (which was on the outside of the gate), seems to have
been in the tribe of Benjamin. Query. Whether Calvary or Golgotha was so
called from skulls being scattered about there, (as say some), or rather
from the figure of the rock being shaped like a man's skull, with one
face of it nearly perpendicular? I incline to this latter opinion. I
believe the Jews did not suffer human bones, even of malefactors, to lie
about." - J. C.

[Joshua 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 15:9</span></span>

Baalah, which is Kirjath-jearim - This place was rendered famous in
Scripture, in consequence of its being the residence of the ark, for
twenty years after it was sent back by the Philistines; see 1 Samuel
5:1-7:2.

[Joshua 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 15:10</span></span>

Beth-shemesh - The house or temple of the sun. It is evident that the
sun was an object of adoration among the Canaanites; and hence
fountains, hills, etc., were dedicated to him. Beth-shemesh is
remarkable for the slaughter of its inhabitants, in consequence of their
prying curiously, if not impiously, into the ark of the Lord, when sent
back by the Philistines. See [Sa1
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#019).

[Joshua 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 15:12</span></span>

The great sea - The Mediterranean.

[Joshua 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 15:13</span></span>

And unto Caleb - he gave a part - See the notes on [Jos
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#014), etc.

[Joshua 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 15:14</span></span>

The three sons of Anak - See on [Jos
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015) (note).

[Joshua 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 15:15</span></span>

Kirjath-sepher - The city of the book. Why so named is uncertain. It was
also called Debir, and Kirjath-sannah. See [Jos
15:49](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#049).

[Joshua 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 15:16</span></span>

Will I give Achsah my daughter - In ancient times fathers assumed an
absolute right over their children, especially in disposing of them in
marriage; and it was customary for a king or great man to promise his
daughter in marriage to him who should take a city, kill an enemy, etc.
So Saul promised his daughter in marriage to him who should kill
Goliath, [Sa1 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#025); and Caleb offers
his on this occasion to him who should take Kirjath-sepher. Profane
writers furnish many similar examples.

[Joshua 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 15:18</span></span>

As she came - As she was now departing from the house of her father to
go to that of her husband.

She moved him - Othniel, to ask of her father a field, one on which she
had set her heart, as contiguous to the patrimony already granted.

She lighted off her ass - ותצנח vattitsnach, she hastily, suddenly
alighted, as if she had forgotten something, or was about to return to
her father's house. Which being perceived by her father, he said, What
wouldest thou? What is the matter? What dost thou want?

[Joshua 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 15:19</span></span>

Give me a blessing - Do me an act of kindness. Grant me a particular
request.

Thou hast given me a south land - Which was probably dry, or very ill,
watered.

Give me also springs of water - Let me have some fields in which there
are brooks or wells already digged.

The upper springs, and the nether springs - He gave her even more than
she requested; he gave her a district among the mountains and another in
the plains well situated and well watered. There are several
difficulties in this account, with which I shall not trouble the reader.
What is mentioned above appears to be the sense.

[Joshua 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 15:24</span></span>

Ziph - There were two cities of this name in the tribe of Judah, that
mentioned here, and another [Jos
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055). One of these two is noted for
the refuge of David when persecuted by Saul; and the attempts made by
its inhabitants to deliver him into the hands of his persecutor. See
[Sa1 23:14-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#014).

[Joshua 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jos 15:28</span></span>

Beer-sheba - A city, famous in the book of Genesis as the residence of
the patriarchs Abraham and Jacob, [Gen
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#019); [Gen
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#010); [Gen
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001). See the note on [Gen
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#031). It lay on the way between
Canaan and Egypt, about forty miles from Jerusalem.

[Joshua 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jos 15:30</span></span>

Hormah - A place rendered famous by the defeat of the Hebrews by the
Canaanites. See [Num 14:45](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#045), [Deu
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#044).

[Joshua 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jos 15:31</span></span>

Ziklag - The Philistines seem to have kept possession of this city till
the time of David, who received it from Achish, king of Gath, [Sa1
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#006); after which time it remained in
the possession of the kings of Judah.

[Joshua 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jos 15:32</span></span>

All the cities are twenty and nine, with their villages - But on a
careful examination we shall find thirty-eight; but it is supposed that
nine of these are excepted; viz., Beersheba, Moladah, Hazarshual,
Baalah, Azem, Hormah, Ziklag, Ain, and Rimmon, which were afterwards
given to the tribe of Simeon. This may appear satisfactory, but perhaps
the truth will be found to be this: Several cities in the promised land
are expressed by compound terms; not knowing the places, different
translations combine what should be separated, and in many cases
separate what should be combined. Through this we have cities formed out
of epithets. On this ground we have thirty-eight cities as the sum here,
instead of twenty-nine.

[Joshua 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jos 15:33</span></span>

Eshtaol, and Zoreah - Here Samson was buried, it being the burial-place
of his fathers; see [Jdg 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#031). These
places though first given to Judah, afterwards fell to the lot of Dan,
[Jos 19:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#041).

[Joshua 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jos 15:35</span></span>

Jarmuth - See the note on [Jos 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#003).

Adullam - See the note on [Jos 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#015).

Socoh - It was near this place that David fought with and slew Goliath,
the champion of the Philistines, [Sa1
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#001).

[Joshua 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jos 15:36</span></span>

Gederah - See the note on [Jos 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#013).

Fourteen cities - Well reckoned, we shall find fifteen cities here; but
probably Gederah and Gederothaim ([Jos
15:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#036)) are the same. See the note on
[Jos 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#032).

[Joshua 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jos 15:39</span></span>

Lachish - and Eglon - See on [Jos 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#003)
(note).

[Joshua 15:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">jos 15:41</span></span>

Beth-dagon - The house or temple of Dagon. This is a well known idol of
the Philistines, and probably the place mentioned here was in some part
of their territories; but the situation at present is unknown.

[Joshua 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">jos 15:42</span></span>

Libnah - See the note on [Jos 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#029).

Ether - From [Jos 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#007) we learn that
this city was afterwards given to the tribe of Simeon.

[Joshua 15:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">jos 15:44</span></span>

Keilah - This town was near Hebron, and is said to have been the
burying-place of the prophet Habakkuk. David obliged the Philistines to
raise the siege of it; (see [Sa1
23:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#001)); but finding that its
inhabitants had purposed to deliver him into the hands of Saul, who was
coming in pursuit of him, he made his escape. See this remarkable case
explained in the note on [Deu 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)
(note).

Mareshah - Called also Maresheth and Marasthi; it was the birth-place of
the prophet Micah. Near this place was the famous battle between Asa,
king of Judah, and Zera, king of Cush or Ethiopia, who was at the head
of one thousand thousand men, and three hundred chariots. Asa defeated
this immense host and took much spoil, [Ch2
14:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009).

[Joshua 15:46](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">jos 15:46</span></span>

Ekron - One of the five Philistine lordships; see the note on [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003).

[Joshua 15:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">jos 15:47</span></span>

Ashdod - Called also Azotus, [Act
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#040).

Unto the river of Egypt - The Pelusiac branch of the Nile, or Sihor. But
see on [Jos 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#004) (note).

The great sea - The Mediterranean.

[Joshua 15:48](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">jos 15:48</span></span>

Socoh - See a town of this name, [Jos
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#035) (note).

[Joshua 15:49](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">jos 15:49</span></span>

Kirjath-sannah - See the note on [Jos
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#015).

[Joshua 15:51](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">jos 15:51</span></span>

Goshen - See the note on [Jos 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#041).

Giloh - The country of the traitor Ahithophel, [Sa2
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#012).

[Joshua 15:53](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">jos 15:53</span></span>

Beth-tappuah - The house of the apple or citron tree. Probably a place
where these grew in great abundance and perfection.

Aphekah - See the note on [Jos 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#018).

[Joshua 15:54](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">jos 15:54</span></span>

Kirjath-arba - See the note on [Jos
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015).

[Joshua 15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">jos 15:55</span></span>

Maon - In a desert to which this town gave name, David took refuge for a
considerable time from the persecution of Saul; and in this place Nabal
the Carmelite had great possessions. See [Sa1
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#024), [Sa1
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#025); [Sa1
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002).

Carmel - Not the celebrated mount of that name, but a village, the
residence of Nabal. See [Sa1 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002). It
was near Maon, mentioned above, and was about ten miles eastward of
Hebron. It is the place where Saul erected a trophy to himself after the
defeat of the Amalekites; see [Sa1
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#012).

Ziph - See on [Jos 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#024) (note).

[Joshua 15:57](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">jos 15:57</span></span>

Timnah - A frontier town of the Philistines; it was in this place that
Samson got his wife, see Judges 14:1-15:20.

[Joshua 15:58](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">jos 15:58</span></span>

Gedor - See the note on [Jos 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#013). In
this place the Alexandrian MS. of the Septuagint and the Codex Vaticanus
add the eleven following towns: Theca, and Ephratha, (that is,
Bethlehem), and Phagor, and Etan, and Kulon, and Tatam, and Thebes, and
Karam, and Galam, and Thether, and Manocho; eleven cities and their
villages. St. Jerome, on [Mic 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001),
mentions them, so that we find they were in the copies he used. Dr.
Kennicott contends that they should be restored to the text, and
accounts thus for their omission: "The same word וחצרויהן vechatsreyhen,
and their villages, occurring immediately before this passage and at the
end of it, the transcriber's eye passed from one to the other by
mistake. A similar accident has caused the omission of two whole verses,
the 35th and 36th of Joshua 21." See the note on [Jos
21:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#035), [Jos
21:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#036).

[Joshua 15:60](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">jos 15:60</span></span>

Kirjath-baal - The same as Baalah. See on [Jos
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#009) (note).

[Joshua 15:62](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">jos 15:62</span></span>

The city of Salt - Or of Melach. This city was somewhere in the vicinity
of the lake Asphaltites, the waters of which are the saltest perhaps in
the world. The whole country abounds with salt: see the note on [Gen
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#025). Some suppose that it is the
same as Zoar, the place to which Lot escaped after the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah.

En-gedi - The well of the kid: it was situated between Jericho and the
lake of Sodom or Dead Sea.

[Joshua 15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">jos 15:63</span></span>

The Jebusites dwell - at Jerusalem unto this day - The whole history of
Jerusalem, previously to the time of David, is encumbered with many
difficulties. Sometimes it is attributed to Judah, sometimes to
Benjamin, and it is probable that, being on the frontiers of both those
tribes, each possessed a part of it. If the Jebusites were ever driven
out before the time of David, it is certain they recovered it again, or
at least a part of it - what is called the citadel or strong hold of
Zion, (see [Sa2 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#007)), which he took
from them; after which the city fell wholly into the hands of the
Israelites. This verse is an additional proof that the book of Joshua
was not written after the times of the Jewish kings, as some have
endeavored to prove; for when this verse was written, the Jebusites
dwelt with the children of Judah, which they did not after the days of
David; therefore the book was written before there were any kings in
Judea.

It is very likely, not only that many cities have by the lapse of time
changed their names or been totally destroyed, (see the note on [Jos
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#001)), but that the names of those in
the preceding catalogue have been changed also, several of them repeated
that should have been mentioned but once, and not a few confounded with
the terms by which they are described. But we must not suppose that
every repetition of the name is through the carelessness of copyists;
for there are often two places which bear the same name, which is
frequently the case in England. But besides this, villages are mentioned
as being apparently in the tribe of Judah, which afterwards appear to
have been in an other tribe. The reason appears to be this: many towns
are mentioned which were frontier towns, and when the limits of a tribe
are pointed out, such places must necessarily be mentioned, though
allotted to a different tribe. This consideration will serve to remove
several difficulties which occur in the reading of this and the
following chapters.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 16](jos016)

</div>
