<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos003)  [Next](jos005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 4:0</span></span>

When the people are passed over, Joshua commands twelve men, one taken
out of each tribe, to take up a stone on his shoulder out of the midst
of the river, and carry it to the other side, to be set up as a memorial
of this miraculous passage, [Jos
4:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001). They do so, and set up the
stones in the place where they encamp the first night, [Jos
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#008), [Jos
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#009). The priests stand in the river,
till all the people are passed over, [Jos
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#010), [Jos
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#011). Of the tribes of Reuben and Gad,
and the half tribe of Manasseh, 40,000 fighting men pass over with the
other tribes, [Jos 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#012), [Jos
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#013). Joshua is magnified in the sight
of the people, and they fear him as they did Moses, [Jos
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#014). The priests are commanded to
come up out of the river, which, on their leaving it, immediately
returns, and overflows its banks as before, [Jos
4:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#015). This miraculous passage takes
place the tenth day of the first month, [Jos
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019). The stones are set up in Gilgal,
and Joshua teaches the people what use they are to make of them, [Jos
4:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#020).

[Joshua 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 4:2</span></span>

Take you twelve men - From [Jos 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#012),
it appears that the twelve men had been before appointed, one taken out
of each of the twelve tribes; and now they are employed for that purpose
for which they had been before selected.

[Joshua 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 4:3</span></span>

Where ye shall lodge this night - This was in the place that was
afterwards called Gilgal. See [Jos
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019).

[Joshua 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 4:4</span></span>

Twelve men, whom he had prepared - This must refer to their appointment,
[Jos 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#012).

[Joshua 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 4:6</span></span>

This may be a sign - Stand as a continual memorial of this miraculous
passage, and consequently a proof of their lasting obligation to God.

[Joshua 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 4:9</span></span>

And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan - It seems from
this chapter that there were two sets of stones erected as a memorial of
this great event; twelve at Gilgal, [Jos
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#020) and twelve in the bed of Jordan,
[Jos 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#009). The twelve stones in the bed
of Jordan might have been so placed on a base of strong stone-work so
high as always to be visible, and serve to mark the very spot where the
priests stood with the ark. The twelve stones set up at Gilgal would
stand as a monument of the place of the first encampment after this
miraculous passage. Though this appears to me to be the meaning of this
place, yet Dr. Kennicott's criticism here should not be passed by. "It
is well known," says he, "that when Joshua led the Israelites over
Jordan, he was commanded to take twelve stones out of the midst of
Jordan, to be a memorial that the ground in the very midst of that river
had been made dry. But where was this memorial to be set up? The ninth
verse says; Joshua set up these stones In the midst of Jordan. But is it
likely that the stones should be placed or set down where they were
taken up; and that the memorial should be erected there where, when the
river was again united, it would be concealed, and of course could be no
memorial at all? This however flatly contradicts the rest of the
chapter, which says these stones were pitched in Gilgal, where Israel
lodged in Canaan for the first time. The solution of this difficulty is,
that בתוך bethoch In the midst, should be here מתוך mittoch, From the
midst, as in [Jos 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#003), [Jos
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#008), [Jos
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#020), and as the word is here also in
the Syrian version. The true rendering therefore is, And Joshua set up
the twelve stones (taken) From the midst of Jordan," etc. I confess I
see no need for this criticism, which is not supported by a single MS.
either in his own or De Rossi's collection, though they amount to four
hundred and ninety-four in number. Twelve stones might be gathered in
different parts of the bed of the Jordan, and be set up as a pillar in
another, and be a continual visible memorial of this grand event. And if
twelve were set up in Gilgal as a memorial of their first encampment in
Canaan, it is still more likely that twelve would be set up in the bed
of the river to show where it had been divided, and the place where the
whole Israelitish host had passed over dry-shod. The reader may follow
the opinion he judges most likely.

[Joshua 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 4:10</span></span>

And the people hasted and passed over - How very natural is this
circumstance! The people seeing the waters divided, and Jordan running
back, might be apprehensive that it would soon resume its wonted course;
and this would naturally lead them to hasten to get over, with as much
speed as possible. The circumstance itself thus marked is a proof that
the relater was an eyewitness of this miraculous passage.

[Joshua 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 4:12</span></span>

The children of Reuben, and - Gad - Concerning the numbers of these
tribes that stayed behind to take care of the women, children, and
cattle, and which amounted to 70,580 men, see the note on [Num
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#017).

Passed over armed - See the note on [Jos
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#014).

[Joshua 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 4:14</span></span>

The Lord magnified Joshua - See the note on [Jos
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#007).

[Joshua 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 4:18</span></span>

The waters of Jordan returned unto their place - It is particularly
remarked by the sacred historian, that as soon as the soles of the
priests' feet touched the water, the stream of the Jordan was cut off,
[Jos 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#015), and the course of the river
continued to be inverted all the time they continued in its channel; and
that as soon as the soles of their feet had touched the dry land, on
their return from the bed of the river, the waters immediately resumed
their natural course. All this was done by the sovereign influence of
that God whose presence was represented by the ark of the covenant.

[Joshua 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 4:19</span></span>

On the tenth day of the first month - As the Israelites left Egypt on
the fifteenth day of the first month, A.M. 2513, (see Exodus 14:1-31),
and they entered into Canaan the tenth of the first month, A.M. 2553, it
is evident that forty years, wanting five days, had elapsed from the
time of their exodus from Egypt to their entrance into the promised
inheritance.

Encamped in Gilgal - That is, in the place that was afterwards called
Gilgal, see [Jos 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#009); for here the
name is given it by anticipation. In Hebrew, גל gal signifies to roll;
and the doubling of the root, גלגל galgal or gilgal, signifies rolling
round and round, or rolling off or away, because, in circumcising the
children that had been born in the wilderness, Joshua rolled away,
rolled off completely, the reproach of the people. From this time Gilgal
became a place of considerable eminence in the sacred history.

1\. It was the place where the Israelitish camp rested the first night
of their entering into that land which had been promised to their
fathers from the days of Abraham.

2\. It was the place in which Joshua circumcised all the people who had
been born in the wilderness, during the forty years of their wandering,
after they left Egypt.

3\. It was the place in which Joshua had what we might term his
fortified camp, and to which he and his army constantly returned after
each of their expeditions against the inhabitants of the land.

4\. It appears to have been the place where all the women, children,
cattle, and goods, etc., were lodged, probably during the whole of the
Canaanitish war.

5\. It was the place where they celebrated the first passover they kept
in the promised land.

6\. It was the place where Saul, the first king of Israel, was
proclaimed.

7\. There the manna ceased to fall. And,

8\. There the ark was fixed till, after the conquest of the country, it
was removed to Shiloh. Gilgal was about ten furlongs from Jericho, and
fifty from Jordan: Jericho being on the west, and Jordan on the east,
Gilgal being between both. See Josephus, De Bello, etc., lib. v., c. 4,
and Calmet on this place. Calmet supposes there was neither city nor
town here before the arrival of the Israelites.

[Joshua 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 4:20</span></span>

Those twelve stones - It is very likely that a base of mason-work was
erected of some considerable height, and then the twelve stones placed
on the top of it; and that this was the case both in Jordan and in
Gilgal: for twelve such stones as a man could carry a considerable way
on his shoulder, see [Jos 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#005), could
scarcely have made any observable altar, or pillar of memorial: but
erected on a high base of mason-work they would be very conspicuous, and
thus properly answer the end for which God ordered them to be set up.

[Joshua 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 4:22</span></span>

Then ye shall let your children know - The necessity of an early
religious education is inculcated through the whole oracles of God. The
parents who neglect it have an awful account to give to the Judge of
quick and dead.

[Joshua 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 4:24</span></span>

That all the people of the earth might know - It is very likely that כל
עמי הארץ col ammey haarets means simply, all the people of this land -
all the Canaanitish nations, to whom, by the miracles wrought in behalf
of his people, he intended to show his eternal power and Godhead, the
excellence of his protection, and the unavailableness of human might
against his omnipotence; and the miracles he wrought for this people, in
the sight of the heathen, were well calculated to make these things
known.

1\. God intends that his religion should be maintained and propagated in
the earth; therefore he has given a revelation of himself to men, that
it may be taught in the world; and he particularly requires that parents
should be diligent and fervent in teaching their children the knowledge
of his name.

2\. This is one great use of the ordinances of the Gospel, and the rites
of religion. They are all significators of sacred things, and point out
matters of infinite importance beyond themselves.

3\. A spirit of inquiry is common to every child: the human heart is
ever panting after knowledge; and if not rightly directed when young,
will, like that of our first mother, go astray after forbidden science.

4\. If we wish our children to be happy we should show them where
happiness is to be found. If we wish them to be wise, we should lead
them unto God by means of his word and ordinances. It is natural for a
child to inquire, "What do you mean by this baptism? - by this
sacrament? - by praying - by singing psalms and hymns?" etc. And what
fine opportunities do such questions give pious and intelligent parents
to instruct their children in every article of the Christian faith, and
in every fact on which these articles are established! Oh why is this
neglected, while the command of God is before our eyes, and the
importance of the measure so strikingly obvious?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 5](jos005)

</div>
