<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos013)  [Next](jos015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 14:0</span></span>

Eleazar, Joshua, and the heads of the fathers, distribute the land by
lot to the people, [Jos 14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#001). The
Levites receive no land, but cities to dwell in, and suburbs for their
cattle, [Jos 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#004), [Jos
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#005). Caleb requests to have Mount
Hebron for an inheritance, because of his former services, [Jos
14:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006). Joshua grants his request,
[Jos 14:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#013).

[Joshua 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 14:1</span></span>

Eleazar the priest, etc. - Eleazar, as being the minister of God in
sacred things is mentioned first. Joshua, as having the supreme command
in all things civil, is mentioned next. And the Heads or Princes of the
twelve tribes, who in all things acted under Joshua, are mentioned last.
These heads or princes were twelve, Joshua and Eleazar included; and the
reader may find their names in [Num
34:19-28](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#019). It is worthy of remark that
no prince was taken from the tribes of Reuben and Gad, because these had
already received their inheritance on the other side of Jordan, and
therefore could not be interested in this division.

[Joshua 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 14:2</span></span>

By lot was their inheritance - Concerning the meaning and use of the
lot, see the note on [Num 26:55](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#055); and
concerning the manner of casting lots in the case of the scapegoat, see
the note on [Lev 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#008), [Lev
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#009). On this subject Dr. Dodd has
selected some good observations from Calmet and Masius, which I here
borrow: "Though God had sufficiently pointed out by the predictions of
Jacob when dying, and those of Moses, what portions he designed for each
tribe, we readily discern an admirable proof of his wisdom in the orders
he gave to decide them by lot. By this means the false interpretations
which might have been given to the words of Jacob and Moses were
prevented; and by striking at the root of whatever might occasion
jealousies and disputes among the tribes, he evidently secured the
honesty of those who were to be appointed to distribute to them the
conquered countries in the land of Canaan. Besides, the success of this
method gave a fresh proof of the Divinity of the Jewish religion, and
the truth of its oracles. Each tribe finding itself placed by lot
exactly in the spot which Jacob and Moses had foretold, it was evident
that Providence had equally directed both those predictions and that
lot. The event justified the truth of the promises. The more singular it
was, the more clearly we discern the finger of God in it. The portion,
says Masius, fell to each tribe just as Jacob had declared two hundred
and fifty years before in the last moments of his life, and Moses,
immediately before his death; for to the tribe of Judah fell a country
abounding in vineyards and pastures; to Zebulun and Issachar, seacoasts;
in that of Asher was plenty of oil, wheat, and metals; that of Benjamin,
near to the temple, was, in a manner, between the shoulders of the
Deity; Ephraim and Manasseh were distinguished with a territory blessed
in a peculiar manner by Heaven; the land of Naphtali extended from the
west to the south of the tribe of Judah. Since therefore the lot so well
corresponded to these predictions, would it not be insolence and
stupidity in the highest degree, not to acknowledge the inspiration of
God in the word of Jacob and Moses, the direction of his hand in the
lot, and his providence in the event?" How the lot was cast in this case
cannot be particularly determined. It is probable,

1\. That the land was geographically divided into ten portions.

2\. That each portion was called by a particular name.

3\. That the name of each portion was written on a separate slip of
parchment, wood, etc.

4\. That the names of the claimants were also written on so many slips.

5\. The names of the portions, and of the tribes, were put into separate
vessels.

6\. Joshua, for example, put his hand into the vessel containing the
names of the tribes, and took out one slip; while Eleazar took out one
from the other vessel, in which the names of the portions were put.

7\. The name drawn, and the portion drawn, being read, it was
immediately discerned what the district was which God had designed for
such a tribe. This appears to be the most easy way to determine such a
business.

[Joshua 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 14:4</span></span>

The children of Joseph were two tribes - This was ascertained by the
prophetic declaration of their grandfather Jacob, [Gen
48:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#005), [Gen
48:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#006); and as Levi was taken out of the
tribes for the service of the sanctuary, one of these sons of Joseph
came in his place, and Joseph was treated as the first-born of Jacob, in
the place of Reuben, who forfeited his right of primogeniture.

With their suburbs for their cattle - For the meaning of this passage
the reader is referred to the note on [Num
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#006).

[Joshua 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 14:5</span></span>

They divided the land - This work was begun some time before at Gilgal,
and was finished some time after at Shiloh. It must have required a very
considerable time to make all the geographical arrangements that were
necessary for this purpose.

[Joshua 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 14:6</span></span>

Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite - In the note on the parallel
place, [Num 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#012), it is said Kenaz
was probably the father of Jephunneh, and that Jephunneh not Caleb, was
the Kenezite; but still, allowing this to be perfectly correct, Caleb
might also be called the Kenezite, as it appears to have been a family
name, for Othniel, his nephew and son-in-law, is called the son of
Kenaz, [Jos 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#017); [Jdg
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#013), and [Ch1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#013); and a grandson of Caleb is also
called the son of Kenaz, [Ch1 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#015). In
[Ch1 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#018), Caleb is called the son of
Hezron, but this is only to be understood of his having Hezron for one
of his ancestors; and son here may be considered the same as descendant;
for Hezron, of the tribe of Judah, having come into Egypt one hundred
and seventy-six years before the birth of Caleb, it is not at all likely
that he could be called his father in the proper sense of the term.
Besides, the supposition above makes a very good sense, and is
consistent with the use of the terms father, son, and brother, in
different parts of the sacred writings.

Thou knowest the thing that the Lord said - In the place to which Caleb
seems to refer, viz., [Num 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#024),
there is not a word concerning a promise of Hebron to him and his
posterity; nor in the place ([Deu
1:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#036)) where Moses repeats what had
been done at Kadesh-barnea: but it may be included in what is there
spoken. God promises, because he had another spirit within him, and had
followed God fully, therefore he should enter into the land whereinto he
came, and his seed should possess it. Probably this relates to Hebron,
and was so understood by all parties at that time. This seems tolerably
evident from the pointed reference made by Caleb to this transaction.

[Joshua 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 14:7</span></span>

As it was in mine heart - Neither fear nor favor influenced him on the
occasion; he told what he believed to be the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth.

[Joshua 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 14:9</span></span>

The land whereon thy feet have trodden - This probably refers to Hebron,
which was no doubt mentioned on this occasion.

[Joshua 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 14:10</span></span>

These forty and five years - See the note on [Jos
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001).

[Joshua 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 14:11</span></span>

Even so is my strength now - I do not ask this place because I wish to
sit down now, and take my ease; on the contrary, I know I must fight, to
drive out the Anakim, and I am as able and willing to do it as I was
forty-five years ago, when Moses sent me to spy out the land.

[Joshua 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 14:12</span></span>

I shall be able to drive them out - He cannot mean Hebron merely, for
that had been taken before by Joshua; but in the request of Caleb
doubtless all the circumjacent country was comprised, in many parts of
which the Anakim were still in considerable force. It has been
conjectured that Hebron itself had again fallen under the power of its
former possessors, who, taking the advantage of the absence of the
Israelitish army, who were employed in other parts of the country,
re-entered the city, and restored their ancient domination. But the
first opinion seems best founded.

[Joshua 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 14:13</span></span>

Joshua blessed him - As the word bless often signifies to speak good or
well of or to any person, (see the note on [Gen
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003)), here it may mean the praise
bestowed on Caleb's intrepidity and faithfulness by Joshua, as well as a
prayer to God that he might have prosperity in all things; and
especially that the Lord might be with him, as himself had expressed in
the preceding verse.

[Joshua 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 14:14</span></span>

Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb - Joshua admitted his
claim, recognized his right, and made a full conveyance of Hebron and
its dependencies to Caleb and his posterity; and this being done in the
sight of all the elders of Israel, the right was publicly acknowledged,
and consequently this portion was excepted from the general
determination by lot; God having long before made the cession of this
place to him and to his descendants.

[Joshua 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 14:15</span></span>

And the name of Hebron before was Kirjath-arba - That is, the city of
Arba, or rather, the city of the four, for thus קרית ארבע kiryath arba
may be literally translated. It is very likely that this city had its
name from four Anakim, gigantic or powerful men, probably brothers, who
built or conquered it. This conjecture receives considerable strength
from [Jos 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#014), where it is said that
Caleb drove from Hebron the three sons of Anak, Sheshai, Ahiman, and
Talmai: now it is quite possible that Hebron had its former name,
Kirjath-arba, the city of the four, from these three sons and their
father, who, being men of uncommon stature or abilities, had rendered
themselves famous by acts proportioned to their strength and influence
in the country. It appears however from [Jos
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013) that Arba was a proper name, as
there he is called the father of Anak. The Septuagint call Hebron the
metropolis of the Enakim, μητροπολις των Ενακιμ. It was probably the
seat of government, being the residence of the above chiefs, from whose
conjoint authority and power it might have been called חברון chebron; as
the word חבר chabar literally signifies to associate, to join in
fellowship, and appears to be used, [Job
41:6](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#006), for "associated merchants, or
merchants' companions, who traveled in the same caravan." Both these
names are expressive, and serve to confirm the above conjecture. No
notice need be taken of the tradition that this city was called the city
of the four because it was the burial-place of Adam, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. Such traditions confute themselves.

The land had rest from war - There were no more general wars; the
inhabitants of Canaan collectively could make no longer any head, and
when their confederacy was broken by the conquests of Joshua, he thought
proper to divide the land, and let each tribe expel the ancient
inhabitants that might still remain in its own territories. Hence the
wars after this time were particular wars; there were no more general
campaigns, as it was no longer necessary for the whole Israelitish body
to act against an enemy now disjointed and broken. This appears to be
the most rational meaning of the words, The land had rest from war.

The Jewish economy furnishes, not only a history of God's revelations to
man, but also a history of his providence, and an ample, most luminous,
and glorious comment on that providence. Is it possible that any man can
seriously and considerately sit down to the reading even of this book,
without rising up a wiser and a better man? This is the true history
which everywhere exhibits God as the first mover and prime agent, and
men only as subordinate actors. What a miracle of God's power, wisdom,
grace, justice, and providence are the people of Israel in every period
of their history, and in every land of their dispersions! If their fall
occasioned the salvation of the Gentile world, what shall their
restoration produce! Their future inheritance is not left to what men
would call the fortuitous decision of a lot; like Caleb's possession it
is confirmed by the oath of the Lord; and when the end shall be, this
people shall stand in their lot at the end of the days, and shall again
be great to the ends of the earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 15](jos015)

</div>
