<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos001)  [Next](jos003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 2:0</span></span>

Joshua sends out two spies to examine the state of the inhabitants of
the land, particularly those of Jericho, who are entertained at the
house of Rahab, [Jos 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001). The king of
Jericho is informed of their being in the town, and sends to Rahab,
commanding her to deliver them up, [Jos
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#002), [Jos
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#003). She hides the spies, and tells
the messengers that the men were departed and gone towards the mountain,
[Jos 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#004), [Jos
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#005). When the officers of the king of
Jericho were departed, she took the spies to the house-top, and covered
them with flax, [Jos 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#006), [Jos
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#007). She relates to them that the fear
of the Israelites had fallen on all the inhabitants of the country on
hearing of their victories over the Amorites; that she knew none could
resist the God of Israel, and therefore desired them to give her an oath
that, when they took Jericho, they would preserve the lives of her and
her family, [Jos 2:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#008). The spies
swear to her, [Jos 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#014). She lets them
down by a cord from the house-top, and gives them directions how to
proceed, in order to avoid the pursuers, [Jos
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#015), [Jos
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#016). She is to tie a scarlet line to
the window, through which she had let them down, which should be the
sign to the Israelites to spare that house and its inhabitants, [Jos
2:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#017). Having bound her to secresy,
they depart, [Jos 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#020), [Jos
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#021). After three days' stay in the
mountain, they return to Joshua, and make a favorable report, [Jos
2:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#022).

[Joshua 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 2:1</span></span>

Joshua - sent - two men to spy secretly - It is very likely that these
spies had been sent out soon after the death of Moses, and therefore our
marginal reading, had sent, is to be preferred. Secretly - It is very
probable also that these were confidential persons, and that the
transaction was between them and him alone. As they were to pass over
the Jordan opposite to Jericho, it was necessary that they should have
possession of this city, that in case of any reverses they might have no
enemies in their rear. He sent the men, therefore, to see the state of
the city, avenues of approach, fortifications, etc., that he might the
better concert his mode of attack.

A harlot's house - Harlots and inn-keepers seem to have been called by
the same name, as no doubt many who followed this mode of life, from
their exposed situation, were not the most correct in their morals.
Among the ancients women generally kept houses of entertainment, and
among the Egyptians and Greeks this was common. I shall subjoin a few
proofs.

Herodotus, speaking concerning the many differences between Egypt and
other countries, and the peculiarity of their laws and customs,
expressly says: Εν τοισι αἱ μεν γυναικες αγοραζουσι και καπηλευουσι· οἱ
δε ανδρες, κατ' οικους εοντες, ὑφαινουσι. "Among the Egyptians the women
carry on all commercial concerns, and keep taverns, while the men
continue at home and weave." Herod. in Euterp., c. xxxv. Diodorus
Siculus, lib. i., s. 8, and c. xxvii., asserts that "the men were the
slaves of the women in Egypt, and that it is stipulated in the marriage
contract that the woman shall be the ruler of her husband, and that he
shall obey her in all things." The same historian supposes that women
had these high privileges among the Egyptians, to perpetuate the memory
of the beneficent administration of Isis, who was afterwards deified
among them. Nymphodorus, quoted by the ancient scholiast on the Oedipus
Coloneus of Sophocles, accounts for these customs: he says that
"Sesostris, finding the population of Egypt rapidly increasing, fearing
that he should not be able to govern the people or keep them united
under one head, obliged the men to assume the occupations of women, in
order that they might be rendered effeminate." Sophocles confirms the
account given by Herodotus; speaking of Egypt he says: -

Εκει γαρ οἱ μεν αρσενες κατα στεγας

Θακουσιν ἱστουργουντες αἱ δε ξυννομοι

Τα' ξω βιου τροφεια προσυνους' αει

Oedip. Col. v. 352.

"There the men stay in their houses weaving cloth, while the women
transact all business out of doors, provide food for the family," etc.
It is on this passage that the scholiast cites Nymphodorus for the
information given above, and which he says is found in the 13th chapter
of his work "On the Customs of Barbarous Nations." That the same custom
prevailed among the Greeks we have the following proof from Apuleius:
Ego vero quod primate ingressui stabulum conspicatus sum, accessi, et de
Quadam Anu Caupona illico percontor. - Aletam. lib. i., p. 18, Edit.
Bip. "Having entered into the first inn I met with, and there seeing a
certain Old Woman, the Inn-Keeper, I inquired of her."

It is very likely that women kept the places of public entertainment
among the Philistines; and that it was with such a one, and not with a
harlot, that Samson lodged; (see [Jdg
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#001), etc.); for as this custom
certainly did prevail among the Egyptians, of which we have the fullest
proof above, we may naturally expect it to have prevailed also among the
Canaanites and Philistines, as we find from Apuleius that it did
afterwards among the Greeks. Besides there is more than presumptive
proof that this custom obtained among the Israelites themselves, even in
the most polished period of their history; for it is much more
reasonable to suppose that the two women, who came to Solomon for
judgment, relative to the dead child, ([Kg1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#016), etc), were inn-keepers, than
that they were harlots. It is well known that common prostitutes, from
their abandoned course of life, scarcely ever have children; and the
laws were so strict against such in Israel, ([Deu
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018)), that if these had been of that
class it is not at all likely they would have dared to appear before
Solomon. All these circumstances considered, I am fully satisfied that
the term זונה zonah in the text, which we translate harlot, should be
rendered tavern or inn-keeper, or hostess. The spies who were sent out
on this occasion were undoubtedly the most confidential persons that
Joshua had in his host; they went on an errand of the most weighty
importance, and which involved the greatest consequences. The risk they
ran of losing their lives in this enterprise was extreme. Is it
therefore likely that persons who could not escape apprehension and
death, without the miraculous interference of God, should in despite of
that law which at this time must have been so well known unto them, go
into a place where they might expect, not the blessing, but the curse,
of God? Is it not therefore more likely that they went rather to an inn
to lodge than to a brothel? But what completes in my judgment the
evidence on this point is, that this very Rahab, whom we call a harlot,
was actually married to Salmon, a Jewish prince, see [Mat
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#005). And is it probable that a prince
of Judah would have taken to wife such a person as our text represents
Rahab to be?

It is granted that the Septuagint, who are followed by [Heb
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#031), and [Jam
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025), translate the Hebrew זונה zonah
by πορνη, which generally signifies a prostitute; but it is not
absolutely evident that the Septuagint used the word in this sense.
Every scholar knows that the Greek word πορνη comes from περναω, to
sell, as this does from περαω, to pass from one to another; transire
facio a me ad alterum; Damm. But may not this be spoken as well of the
woman's goods as of her person? In this sense the Chaldee Targum
understood the term, and has therefore translated it אתתא פונדקיתא
ittetha pundekitha, a woman, a Tavern-Keeper. That this is the true
sense many eminent men are of opinion; and the preceding arguments
render it at least very probable. To all this may be added, that as our
blessed Lord came through the line of this woman, it cannot be a matter
of little consequence to know what moral character she sustained; as an
inn-keeper she might be respectable, if not honorable; as a public
prostitute she could be neither; and it is not very likely that the
providence of God would have suffered a person of such a notoriously bad
character to enter into the sacred line of his genealogy. It is true
that the cases of Tamar and Bathsheba may be thought sufficient to
destroy this argument; but whoever considers these two cases maturely
will see that they differ totally from that of Rahab, if we allow the
word harlot to be legitimate. As to the objection that her husband is
nowhere mentioned in the account here given; it appears to me to have
little weight. She might have been either a single woman or a widow; and
in either of these cases there could have been no mention of a husband;
or if she even had a husband it is not likely he would have been
mentioned on this occasion, as the secret seems to have been kept
religiously between her and the spies. If she were a married woman her
husband might be included in the general terms, all that she had, and
all her kindred, [Jos 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#023). But it is
most likely that she was a single woman or a widow, who got her bread
honestly by keeping a house of entertainment for strangers. See below.

[Joshua 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 2:3</span></span>

The king of Jericho sent unto Rahab - This appears to be a proof of the
preceding opinion: had she been a prostitute or a person of ill fame he
could at once have sent officers to have seized the persons lodged with
her as vagabonds; but if she kept a house of entertainment, the persons
under her roof were sacred, according to the universal custom of the
Asiatics, and could not be molested on any trifling grounds. A guest or
a friend is sacred in whatever house he may be received, in every part
of the east to the present day.

[Joshua 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 2:4</span></span>

And hid them - Probably she secreted them for the time being in some
private corner, till she had the opportunity of concealing them on the
house-top in the manner mentioned [Jos
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#006).

[Joshua 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 2:5</span></span>

When it was dark - So it appears that it was after night that the king
of Jericho sent to Rahab, ordering her to produce the persons who lodged
with her. The season itself was friendly to the whole plot: had these
transactions taken place in daylight, it is scarcely possible that the
spies could have escaped. But this is no excuse for the woman's
prevarication, for God could have saved his messengers independently of
her falsity. God never says to any, Do evil that good may come of it.
See at the end of the chapter, [Jos
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#024) (note).

[Joshua 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 2:6</span></span>

Hid then with the stalks of flax - It is a matter of little consequence
whether we translate פסתי העיץ pistey haets stalks of flax, or stalks of
hemp: the word עץ ets, which signifies wood, serves to show that whether
it was hemp or flax, it was in its rough, unmanufactured state; and as
this was about the season, viz., the end of March or the beginning of
April, in which the flax is ripe in that country, consequently Rahab's
flax might have been recently pulled, and was now drying on the roof of
her house. The reader may find some useful remarks upon this subject in
Harmer's Observations, vol. iv., p. 97, etc.

Upon the roof - We have already seen that all the houses in the east
were made flat-roofed; for which a law is given [Deu
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#008). On these flat roofs the Asiatics
to this day walk, converse, and oftentimes even sleep and pass the
night. It is probable that this hiding was after that referred to in the
fourth verse.

[Joshua 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 2:9</span></span>

I know that the Lord hath given you the land - It is likely she had this
only from conjecture, having heard of their successes against the
Amorites, their prodigious numbers, and seeing the state of terror and
dismay to which the inhabitants of her own land were reduced.

[Joshua 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 2:11</span></span>

He is God in heaven above, and to earth beneath - This confession of the
true God is amazingly full, and argues considerable light and
information. As if she had said, "I know your God to be omnipotent and
omnipresent:" and in consequence of this faith she hid the spies, and
risked her own life in doing it. But how had she this clear knowledge of
the Divine nature?

1\. Possibly the knowledge of the true God was general in the earth at
this time, though connected with much superstition and idolatry; the
people believing that there was a god for every district, and for every
people; for the mountains and for the valleys; see [Kg1
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#023).

2\. Or she received this instruction from the spies, with whom she
appears to have had a good deal of conversation; or,

3\. She had it from a supernatural influence of God upon her own soul.
She probably made a better use of the light she had received than the
rest of her countrymen, and God increased that light.

[Joshua 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 2:12</span></span>

Swear unto me by the Lord - This is a farther proof that this woman had
received considerable instruction in the Jewish faith; she acknowledged
the true God by his essential character Jehovah; and knew that an oath
in his name was the deepest and most solemn obligation under which a Jew
could possibly come. Does not this also refer to the command of God,
Thou shalt fear the Lord, and shalt swear by his name? See the note on
[Deu 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013).

[Joshua 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 2:13</span></span>

Deliver our lives from death - She had learned, either from the spies or
otherwise, that all the inhabitants of the land were doomed to
destruction, and therefore she obliges them to enter into a covenant
with her for the preservation of herself and her household.

[Joshua 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 2:14</span></span>

Our life for yours - "May our life be destroyed if we suffer yours to be
injured!" This is what was anciently called in our country pledging -
staking, a man's life for that of his neighbor or friend.

[Joshua 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 2:15</span></span>

Then she let them down by a cord etc. - The natural place of this verse
is after the first clause of [Jos
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#021); for it is certain that she did
not let them down in the basket till all those circumstances marked from
[Jos 2:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#016) inclusive had taken
place.

She dwelt upon the wall - That is, either the wall of the city made a
part of her house or her house was built close to the wall, so that the
top or battlements of it were above the wall with a window that looked
out to the country. As the city gates were now shut there was no way for
the spies to escape but through this window; and in order to this she
let them down through the window in a basket suspended by a cord, till
they reached the ground on the outside of the wall.

[Joshua 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 2:16</span></span>

Hide yourselves there three days - They were to travel by night, and
hide themselves in the day-time; otherwise they might have been
discovered by the pursuers who were in search of them.

[Joshua 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 2:18</span></span>

This line of scarlet thread - תקות חוט השני tikvath chut hashshani.
Probably this may mean, this piece of scarlet cloth, or, this cloth
(made) of scarlet thread. When the Israelites took the city this piece
of red cloth seems to have been hung out of the window by way of flag;
and this was the sign on which she and the spies had agreed.

[Joshua 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 2:20</span></span>

If thou utter this our business - It was prudent to make her life depend
on her secresy; had it been otherwise she might have been tempted to
give information, not only concerning the spies, but concerning the
designs of the Israelites. But her life being at stake, added to every
other motive, she kept the secret for the sake of her own personal
safety and that of all her relatives.

[Joshua 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 2:23</span></span>

So the two men returned - Having concealed themselves in the mountains
that night, all the next day, and the night ensuing, on the third day
they returned to Joshua.

[Joshua 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 2:24</span></span>

Truly the Lord hath delivered into our hands all the land - How
different was this report from that brought by the spies on a former
occasion! They found that all the inhabitants of the land were
panic-struck. The people had heard of the great exploits of the
Israelites on the other side of Jordan; and as they had destroyed the
potent kings of the Amorites, they took it for granted that nothing
could stand before them. This information was necessary to Joshua to
guide him in forming the plan of his campaign.

1\. It may be asked, Did not Rahab lie in the account she gave to the
officers of the king of Jericho, ([Jos
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#004), [Jos
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#005)), There came men unto me, etc.? I
answer, She certainly did; and the inspired writer sets down the fact
merely as it stood, without making the Spirit of God responsible for the
dissimulation of the woman. But was she not rewarded, etc.? Yes; for her
hospitality and faith, not for her lie. But could she have saved the
spies without telling a lie? Yes, she certainly might; but what notion
could a woman of her occupation, though nothing worse than an
inn-keeper, have of the nicer distinctions between truth and falsehood,
living among a most profligate and depraved people, where truth could
scarcely be known?

2\. There is a lax morality in the world that recommends a lie rather
than the truth, when the purposes of religion and humanity can be served
by it. But when can this be? The religion of Christ is one eternal
system of truth, and can neither be served by a lie nor admit one. On
this vile subject fine words have been spoken. Tasso, in his elegant
episode of Sophronia and Olindo, in the Gerusalemme Liberata, b. ii., v.
22, represents the former as telling a lie to Saladdin, relative to the
stealing of an image, for which, as he could not discover the culprit,
he doomed all the Christians in his power to death. Sophronia, a pious
Christian virgin, getting into the presence of the tyrant, in order to
save her people, accuses herself, though perfectly innocent, of the
theft. Her conduct on this occasion the poet embellishes in the
following manner, for which the religion of that time, which dealt in
holy frauds, would no doubt applaud him.

'Ed ella: il reo si trova al tuo cospetto;

Opra e il furto, Signor, di questa mano

Io l'immagine tolsi; Io son colei

Che tu ricerchi, e me punir tu dei.

Cosi al pubblico fato il capo altero

Offerse, e 'l volle in se sol racorre.

Magnanima Menzogna! or quando e il Vero

Si Bello, che si possa a te preporre?"

Then she: "Before thy sight the guilty stands;

The theft, O King, committed by these hands.

In me the thief who stole the image view!

To me the punishment decreed is due."

Thus, filled with public zeal, the generous dame

A victim for her people's ransom came.

O great deceit! O lie divinely fair!

What truth with such a falsehood can compare!

Hoole.

Thus a lie is ornamented with splendid decorations both by the Italian
and English poet, and the whole formed into an anti-apostolic maxim, Let
us do Evil, that Good may come of it. A purer morality was taught by one
of the most ancient heathen writers than is here preached by these
demi-christians: -

Εχθρος γαρ μοι κεινος, ὁμως αΐδαο πυλησιν,

Ὁς χ' ἑτερον μεν κευθει ενι φρεσιν, αλλο δε βαζει.

Iliad. l. ix., v. 312.

My soul detests him as the gates of hell,

Who knows the truth and dares a falsehood tell.

The following is the advice of a genuine Christian poet, and one of the
holiest men of his time: -

Lie not; but let thy heart be true to God;

Thy tongue to it, thy actions to them both

Cowards tell lies, and those who fear the rod;

The stormy working soul spits lies and froth.

Dare To Be True! nothing can Need a lie.

The fault that needs it most grows Two thereby.

Herbert.

For other observations on this subject see the notes on [Gen
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#020), at the end, and [Gen
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#012).

3\. Though the hand of God was evidently in every thing that concerned
the Israelites, and they were taught to consider that by his might alone
they were to be put in possession of the promised land; yet they were as
fully convinced that if they did not use the counsel, prudence, and
strength which they had received from him, they should not succeed.
Hence, while they depended on the Divine direction and power, they
exercised their own prudence, and put forth their own strength; and thus
they were workers together with him, and did not receive the grace of
God in vain. The application of this maxim is easy; and we cannot expect
any success, either in things spiritual or temporal, unless we walk by
the same rule and mind the same thing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 3](jos003)

</div>
