<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos000)  [Next](jos002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

Moses being dead, God commissions Joshua to bring the people into the
promised land, [Jos 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001), [Jos
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#002). The extent of the land to be
possessed, [Jos 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#003), [Jos
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#004). Joshua is assured of victory over
all his enemies, and is exhorted to courage and activity, [Jos
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#005), [Jos
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#006); and to be careful to act, in all
things, according to the law of Moses, in which he us to meditate day
and night, [Jos 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#007), [Jos
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#008). He is again exhorted to courage,
with the promise of continued support, [Jos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#009). Joshua commands the officers to
prepare the people for their passage over Jordan, [Jos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#010), [Jos
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#011). The Reubenites, Gadites, and
half tribe of Manasseh, are put in mind of their engagement to pass over
with their brethren, [Jos 1:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#012).
They promise the strictest obedience, and pray for the prosperity of
their leader, [Jos 1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#016).

[Joshua 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 1:1</span></span>

Now after the death of Moses - ויהי vayehi, and it was or happened after
the death of Moses. Even the first words in this book show it to be a
continuation of the preceding, and intimately connected with the
narrative in the last chapter in Deuteronomy, of which I suppose Joshua
to have been the author, and that chapter to have originally made the
commencement of this book, [Deu
34:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001) (note). The time referred to
here must have been at the conclusion of the thirty days in which they
mourned for Moses.

[Joshua 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 1:2</span></span>

Moses my servant - The word, servant, as applied both to Moses and
Joshua, is to be understood in a very peculiar sense. It signifies God's
prime minister, the person by whom he issued his orders, and by whom he
accomplished all his purposes and designs. No person ever bore this
title in the like sense but the Redeemer of mankind, of whom Moses and
Joshua were types.

Go over this Jordan - The account given by Josephus of this river may
not be unacceptable here. "Panium is thought to be the mountain of
Jordan, but in reality it is carried thither in an occult manner from
the place called Phiala. This place lies on the road to Trachonitis, and
is one hundred and twenty furlongs from Caesarea, not far out of the
road, on the right hand. It has its name Phiala, (a bowl or basin), very
justly, from the roundness of its circumference, being round like a
wheel. It is always full, without ever sinking or running over. This
origin of the Jordan was not known till the time of Philip, tetrarch of
Trachonitis, who having ordered some chaff to be thrown in at Phiala, it
was found at Panium. Jordan's visible stream arises from this cavern,
(Panium), and divides the marshes and fens of the lake Semechon; and
when it has run another hundred and twenty furlongs, it first passes by
the city Julias, and then passes through the middle of the lake
Gennesareth, after which, running a long way over the desert, it empties
itself into the lake Asphaltites." - War, book iii. chap. x., sect. 7.
See the note on [Num 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#012).

[Joshua 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 1:3</span></span>

The sole of your foot shalt tread upon - That is, the whole land
occupied by the seven Canaanitish nations, and as far as the Euphrates
on the east; for this was certainly the utmost of the grant now made to
them; and all that was included in what is termed the promised land, the
boundaries of which have already been defined. See [Deu
34:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001), and see [Jos
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#004) (note) below. It has been supposed
that the words, Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon,
were intended to express the ease with which they were to conquer the
whole land, an instance of which occurs in the taking of Jericho. It was
only their unfaithfulness to God that rendered the conquest in any case
difficult.

[Joshua 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 1:4</span></span>

From the wilderness and this Lebanon - Joshua appears to be standing
with his face towards the promised land, and pointing out the different
places, or their situation, with his hand, This Lebanon, etc. The utmost
of their limits should be from the desert of Arabia Petraea on the South
to Lebanon on the North: and from the Euphrates on the East to the
Mediterranean Sea on the West. The Israelites did not possess the full
extent of this grant till the days of David. See [Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003), etc., and [Ch2
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#026).

Land of the Hittites - These are generally reputed to have been the most
hardy and warlike of all the Canaanitish nations; and as they occupied
the mountainous countries on the south of the land of Canaan, it is
natural to suppose that they would be the most difficult to subdue, and
on this account, it is supposed, God particularly specifies these: "Ye
shall subdue and possess even all the land of the Hittites," but it is
probable that under this one term all the other nations are included, as
it is certain they are in other places under the term Amorites. Great
sea: The Mediterranean, called great in respect of the lakes in the land
of Judea, such as the sea of Gennesareth, or the sea of Tiberias, and
the Dead Sea, which were comparatively small lakes; but the Hebrews gave
the name of sea, ים yam, to every large collection of waters.

[Joshua 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 1:5</span></span>

Be able to stand before thee - Because God shall be with thee, therefore
thou shalt be irresistible. This promise was most punctually literally
fulfilled.

[Joshua 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 1:7</span></span>

Only be thou strong, and very courageous - Ισχυε ουν, και ανδριζου
σφοδρα. - Sept. Be strong therefore, and play the man to the uttermost.
Though God had promised him that no man should be able to stand before
him, yet it was on condition that he should use all his military skill,
and avail himself to the uttermost of all the means, natural and
providential, which God should place within his reach. God will not have
them who refuse to help themselves.

[Joshua 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 1:8</span></span>

This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth - The law which
had already been written by Moses, and from which he and the people were
to take all those precepts by which their lives were to be governed.
Though there was a copy of the law laid up in the sanctuary, yet this
was not sufficient. Joshua must have a copy for himself, and he was to
consult it incessantly, that his way might be made prosperous, and that
he might have good success. If he kept God's word, God would keep him in
body and soul; if he should observe to do according to that word, then
God would cause all his way to be prosperous. Those who are obedient to
God lack no manner of thing that is good.

[Joshua 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 1:10</span></span>

Commanded the officers - שטרים shoterim. These were different from the
שפטים shophetim, who were judges among the people, and whose business it
was to determine in all civil cases. The shoterim have been supposed to
be subordinate officers, whose business it was to see the decisions of
the shophetim carried into effect. Calmet conjectures that the shoterim
here may have been the heralds of the army like those so often met with
in Homer, who were called the messengers both of the gods and men; who
bore sceptres, and whose persons were ever held sacred. See on [Deu
1:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#013) (note).

[Joshua 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 1:11</span></span>

Prepare you victuals - צדה tsedah, such prey or provisions as they had
taken from the conquered countries, such as corn, oxen, sheep, etc.; for
the word signifies prey, or what is taken by hunting, etc. This was
necessary, as they were about to undergo considerable fatigue in
marching, and in making preparations for the passage of the Jordan; for
although the manna had not ceased to fall, yet such other provisions as
are mentioned above were necessary on this occasion.

For within three days ye shall pass - Calmet contends, with great
appearance of truth, that these three days should be reckoned from the
first day of their encamping at Jordan, three days after the return of
the spies, i.e., on the eighth day of the first month, on the tenth of
which they passed over Jordan. The text therefore is supposed to mean,
Prepare victuals for three days' march, for "on the third day after your
decampment from Shittim ye shall pass over this Jordan."

[Joshua 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 1:13</span></span>

Remember the word - He puts the Reubenites, etc., in remembrance of the
engagements they had made with Moses (See [Num
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#020)) when he granted them their
portion on the east side of Jordan.

[Joshua 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 1:14</span></span>

Your wives, your little ones - And with these it appears, from [Num
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#017), were left behind 70,580
effective men to guard them and their property; only 40,000 having
passed over Jordan to assist the nine tribes and half to conquer the
land. See [Jos 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#013).

Armed - חמשים chamushim, by fives; in several lines, five in front,
probably the usual method of marching; but it seems to signify arrayed,
equipped, accoutred, well-armed, and ready for battle. See the note on
[Exo 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018).

[Joshua 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 1:15</span></span>

Toward the sun-rising - This is the East, as toward the going down of
the sun signifies the West.

[Joshua 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 1:16</span></span>

All that thou commandest us we will do - Here they acknowledge the
Divine mission of Joshua, as they had done that of Moses, and
consequently promise to follow his directions in all things.

[Joshua 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 1:17</span></span>

Only the Lord thy God be with thee - Provided God be with thee, as he
was with Moses, we will implicitly obey thee. The words however may mean
no more than an earnest prayer for Joshua's prosperity: May God be with
thee, as he was with Moses!

[Joshua 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 1:18</span></span>

He shall be put to death - This was martial law; he who disobeyed the
command of his general should be put to death. To this the people
agreed, and it was essentially necessary in order that proper discipline
should be kept up in this great army. By insubordination their fathers
had suffered much in the wilderness; they rejected the authority of
Moses, mutinied and made themselves a leader to conduct them back to
Egypt. (See [Num 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#004)). And Joshua
himself, for attempting to encourage them against their fears, was near
being stoned to death. It was necessary, therefore, that they should
give him the most positive assurance that they would not act as their
fathers had done.

1\. Notwithstanding the great honor God put on his servants Moses,
Aaron, Phinehas, and Joshua, yet we find him using every means to induce
the people to trust in himself alone. Hence he is ever showing them that
even those great men had nothing but what they had received, and that
they were as fully dependent upon himself as the meanest of the people.
What was even Moses without his God?

2\. Is it not strange that at the death of Moses utter despair had not
overwhelmed the whole camp, as he whom they expected to give them rest
had died before any conquest was made in Canaan? We find, however, that
they are not discouraged; he who gave them Moses, has now given them
Joshua in his place; and they had now fully learned that if God be for
them, none could be successfully against them.

3\. From all this we may learn, that when God has a great work to
accomplish, he will provide himself suitable instruments; and though one
which he has greatly honored, appear to fail, we should know that he is
not confined to work by that one alone. He has way every where, and all
things serve the purposes of his will. He will as surely support his
Church on earth, as he will support the earth itself; and while the sun
and moon endure, the Church shall flourish: this is for his own honor,
and he certainly is more concerned for his own glory in the
administration of justice, judgment, and salvation in the earth, than
any of the children of men can possibly be.

4\. Though God had so implicitly promised them his help, yet he strongly
insists on their own co-operation. He requires the use of every power
and talent he has given; even Joshua himself must be strong and very
courageous, and the people must obey him in all things, in order that
they may go over the Jordan to possess the good land; and without this
they had never got into the promised rest.

Shall we suppose, then, that if we be not workers together with God we
shall be saved? Vain expectation! He works in us to will and to do,
i.e., he gives the principle of volition in things that are holy, and
the principle of power to bring the acts of will into good practical
effect; therefore, says the apostle, work out your own salvation with
fear and trembling. Will, therefore, under the influence of the gracious
principle of volition; act under the influence of the principle of
power. Without the power you can neither will nor do; but having the
power it is your duty to will and do. It is enough that God gives the
power. It is our duty, when we receive these talents, to improve them.
In a million of cases a man may be both able to will and to do, and yet
do neither to the salvation of his soul.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 2](jos002)

</div>
