<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos002)  [Next](jos004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 3:0</span></span>

The Israelitish camp removes from Shittim to Jordan, [Jos
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#001). The officers inform them how they
are to pass the river, and the distance they are to keep from the ark,
[Jos 3:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#002). Joshua directs the people,
[Jos 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#005), [Jos
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#006); and the Lord gives directions to
Joshua, [Jos 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#007), [Jos
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#008). He delivers the Lord's message to
the people, and foretells the miraculous passage and division of Jordan,
[Jos 3:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#009). The priests, bearing the
ark, enter the river, and immediately the waters are cut off, and the
priests stand on dry ground, in the bed of the river, till all the camp
passes over, [Jos 3:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#014).

[Joshua 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 3:1</span></span>

Joshua rose early - Archbishop Usher supposes that this was upon
Wednesday, the 28th of April, A. M. 2553, the fortieth year after the
exodus from Egypt. From Shittim, where they had lately been encamped, to
Jordan, was about sixty stadia, according to Josephus; that is, about
eight English miles.

[Joshua 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 3:2</span></span>

After three days - These three days are probably to be thus understood:
As soon as Joshua took the command of the army, he sent the spies to
ascertain the state of Jericho; as we have seen [Jos
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#012). They returned at the end of
three days, or rather on the third day, and made their report. It was at
this time, immediately on the return of the spies, that he made the
proclamation mentioned here; in consequence of which the people
immediately struck their tents, and marched forward to Jordan.

[Joshua 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 3:4</span></span>

About two thousand cubits - This distance they were to keep,

1\. For the greater respect, because the presence of the ark was the
symbol and pledge of the Divine presence.

2\. That the ark, which was to be their pilot over these waters, might
be the more conspicuous which it could not have been had the people
crowded upon it.

[Joshua 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 3:5</span></span>

Sanctify yourselves - What was implied in this command we are not
informed; but it is likely that it was the same as that given by Moses,
[Exo 19:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010). They were to wash
themselves and their garments, and abstain from every thing that might
indispose their minds from a profitable attention to the miracle about
to be wrought in their behalf.

[Joshua 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 3:6</span></span>

Spake unto the priests, saying, Take up the ark - It is remarkable that
the priests, not the Levites, whose ordinary business it was were
employed to carry the ark on this occasion. Calmet conjectures that this
was because it was probably carried without being wrapped up in its
curtains, as it always was when the Levites carried it. Though it was
the business of the Levites, the sons of Kohath, to carry the ark; yet
on certain occasions the priests alone performed this office.

1\. In the present case.

2\. When they encompassed Jericho, [Jos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#006).

3\. When it was carried to the war against the Philistines by the
priests, the sons of Eli, [Sa2 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#025).

4\. When David sent it back to Jerusalem, at the time he was obliged to
fly from it, through the rebellion of his son Absalom, [Sa2
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#025); and,

5\. At the time that it was taken out of the tabernacle, to be deposited
in the temple; see [Kg1 8:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#006).

These were the most solemn occasions, and on such alone, we may presume,
the priests performed this office instead of the Levites. In all their
former marches the ark was carried in the center of this immense camp;
(see the scheme at the end of [Num 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#002)
(note) of the book of Numbers); but now it was to proceed at the head of
the army, and to go before them, and at such a distance, about three
quarters of a mile, that the whole camp might see it as their guide.

[Joshua 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 3:7</span></span>

This day will I begin to magnify thee - By making him the instrument in
this miraculous passage, he did him honor and gave him high credit in
the sight of the people: hence his authority was established, and
obedience to him as their leader fully secured. What must have confirmed
this authority was, his circumstantially foretelling how the waters
should be cut off as soon as the feet of the priests had touched them,
[Jos 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#013). This demonstrated that the
secret of the Lord was with him.

[Joshua 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 3:8</span></span>

Ye shall stand still in Jordan - The priests proceeded first with the
ark, and entered into the bed of the river the course of which was
immediately arrested, the waters collecting above the place where the
priests stood, while the stream fell off towards the Dead Sea; so that
the whole channel below where the priests were standing became dry. The
whole camp, therefore, passed over below where the priests were
standing, keeping at the distance of two thousand cubits from the ark;
this they would readily do, as the whole bed of the river was dry for
many miles below the place where the priests entered.

[Joshua 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 3:10</span></span>

Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you - The Israelites
were apt to be discouraged, and to faint at even the appearance of
danger; it was necessary, therefore, that they should have the fullest
assurance of the presence and assistance of God in the important
enterprise on which they were now entering. They are to combat
idolaters, who have nothing to trust in and help them but gods of wood,
stone, and metal: whereas they are to have the living God in the midst
of them - He who is the author of life and of being - who can give, or
take it away, at his pleasure; and who by this miracle proved that he
had undertaken to guide and defend them: and Joshua makes this
manifestation of God the proof that he will drive out the Hittites,
Hivites, etc, before them. With regard to the situation of each of these
nations in the land of Canaan, Calmet remarks, that those called
Canaanites chiefly inhabited what is called Phoenicia, the environs of
Tyre and Sidon: the Hittites occupied the mountains, southward of the
promised land: the Hivites dwelt by Ebal and Gerizim, Sichem and Gibeon,
towards the mountains of Hermon: the Perizzites were probably not a
distinct nation or tribe, but rather villagers, scattered through the
country in general: the Girgashites possessed the country beyond the
Jordan, towards the lake of Gennesareth: the Jebusites possessed
Jerusalem: and the Amorites occupied the mountainous country in the
vicinity of the western part of the Dead Sea, and also that part of the
land of Moab which the Israelites conquered from Sihon and Og.

[Joshua 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 3:12</span></span>

Take you twelve men - See the note on [Jos
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#002).

[Joshua 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 3:15</span></span>

And the feet of the priests - were dipped in the brim of the water -
Thus we find that every thing occurred exactly in the way in which
Joshua had foretold it. This must have greatly increased his credit
among the people.

For Jordan overfloweth all his banks, etc. - It has often been remarked
that there was no need of a miracle in crossing Jordan, as it is but an
inconsiderable stream, easily fordable, being but about twenty yards in
breadth. But the circumstance marked here by the sacred historian proves
that there was a time in the year, viz., in the harvest, that this said
river overflowed its banks; and this is confirmed by another place in
Scripture, [Ch1 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#015). As the miracle
reported here took place about the beginning of April, a time in which
rivers in general are less than in winter, it may be asked how there
could be such an increase of waters at this time? The simple fact is,
that the Jordan, as we have already seen, has its origin at the foot of
Mount Lebanon, which mountain is always covered with snow during the
winter months; in those months therefore the river is low: but when the
summer's sun has melted these snows, there is consequently a prodigious
increase of waters, so that the old channel is not capable of containing
them; this accounts for the statement in the text that the Jordan
overfloweth his banks all the time of harvest; and this was the time
which God chose they should pass over it, that a miraculous
interposition might be necessary, and that by the miracle they should be
convinced of his omnipotence, who was not only their guide, but had
promised to put them in possession of this good land.

[Joshua 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 3:16</span></span>

Rose up upon a heap - That is, they continued to accumulate, filling up
the whole of the channel toward the source, and the adjacent ground over
which they were now spread, to a much greater depth, the power of God
giving a contrary direction to the current. We need not suppose them to
be gathered up like a mountain, instar montis, as the Vulgate expresses
it, but that they continued to flow back in the course of the channel;
and ere they could have reached the lake of Gennesareth, where they
might have been easily accumulated, the whole Israelitish army would
have all got safely to the opposite side.

Very far from the city Adam - beside Zaretan - Where these places were
it is difficult to say. The city Adam is wholly unknown. From [Kg1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#012) we learn that Zartanah was below
Jezreel near Bethshean, or Scythopolis, and not far from Succoth, [Kg1
7:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#046). And it appears from [Gen
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017), [Jos
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#027), that Succoth lay on the east
side of Jordan, not far from the lake of Gennesareth; and probably Adam
was on the same side to the north of Succoth. It is probable that the
Israelites crossed the Jordan near Bethabara, where John baptized, [Joh
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028), and which probably had its name,
the house of passage, from this very circumstance. After all, it is
extremely difficult to ascertain the exact situation of these places, as
in the lapse of upwards of 3,000 years the face of the country must have
been materially changed. Seas, rivers, and mountains, change not; and
though we cannot ascertain the spot, it is sufficiently evident that we
can come near to the place. It has been considered a lame objection
against the truth of the Iliad that the situation of Troy cannot now be
exactly ascertained. There are even many ancient cities and considerable
towns in Europe, that, though they still bear their former names, do not
occupy the same spot. There are not a few of those even in England;
among such Norwich, Salisbury, etc., may be ranked, neither of which is
in its primitive situation.

Right against Jericho - It would be impossible for the whole camp to
pass over in the space opposite to Jericho, as they must have taken up
some miles in breadth, besides the 2,000 cubits which were left on the
right between them and the ark; but the river was divided opposite to
Jericho, and there the camp began to pass over.

[Joshua 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 3:17</span></span>

The priests - stood firm on dry ground - They stood in the mid channel,
and shifted not their position till the camp, consisting of nearly
600,000 effective men, besides women, children, etc., had passed over.

1\. Is it not surprising that the Canaanites did not dispute this
passage with the Israelites? It is likely they would, had they had any
expectation that such a passage would have been attempted. They must
have known that the Israelitish camp was on the other side of the
Jordan, but could they have supposed that a passage for such a host was
possible when the banks of the Jordan were quite overflowed? It was not
merely because they were panic struck that they did not dispute this
passage, but because they must have supposed it impossible; and when
they found the attempt was made, the passage was effected before they
could prepare to prevent it.

2\. God now appears in such a way, and works in such a manner, as to
leave no doubt concerning his presence or his power, or of his love to
Israel. After this, was it possible for this people ever to doubt his
being or his bounty? This, with the miraculous passage of the Red Sea,
were well calculated to have established their faith for ever; and those
who did not yield to the evidence afforded by these two miracles were
incapable of rational conviction.

3\. In some respects the passage of the Jordan was more strikingly
miraculous than that even of the Red Sea. In the latter God was pleased
to employ an agent; the sea went back by a strong east wind all that
night, and made the sea dry land, [Exo
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021). Nothing of this kind appeared
in the passage of the Jordan; a very rapid river (for so all travelers
allow it to be) went back to its source without any kind of agency but
the invisible hand of the invisible God.

4\. Through the whole period of the Jewish history these miracles, so
circumstantially related, were never denied by any, but on the contrary
conscientiously believed by all. Nor did any of them in their revolts
from God, which were both foul and frequent, ever call these great facts
in question, when even so full of enmity against God as to blaspheme his
name, and give his glory to dumb idols! Is not this a manifest proof
that these facts were incontestable? and that Jehovah had so done his
marvellous works that they should be had in everlasting remembrance?
Reader, the same God who is over all is rich in mercy to all that call
upon him. He changes not, neither is he weary: trust in the Lord for
ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength; and He ever saves
his followers out of the hands of all their enemies, and, having guided
them by his counsel, will receive them into his glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 4](jos004)

</div>
