<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1012)  [Next](kg1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 13:0</span></span>

A man of God prophesies against Jeroboam's altar, and foretells the
destruction of that altar, and of its idolatrous priests by Josiah; and
gives Jeroboam a sign that the prophecy should be accomplished, [Kg1
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001). Jeroboam is enraged, and
orders the man of God to be seized; and stretching out his hand for this
purpose, his arm dries up, [Kg1 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#004).
The altar is rent, and the ashes poured out, according to the sign given
by the man of God; and at his intercession Jeroboam's arm is restored,
[Kg1 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#005), [Kg1
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#006). Jeroboam wishes to engage him in
his service, but he refuses, and tells him that he was ordered by God
not even to eat or drink in that place; and he accordingly departs, [Kg1
13:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#007). An old prophet that dwelt at
Beth-el, hearing of this, rides after the man of God; deceives him;
brings him back to his house, and persuades him to eat and drink, [Kg1
13:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#011). While he is eating, the word
of the Lord comes to the old prophet, and he foretells the death of the
man of God; who departing is met by a lion, and slain, [Kg1
13:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#020). On hearing this, the old
prophet goes to the place, finds the carcass, brings it home, burns it,
and mourns over it, charging his sons to bury him, when dead, in the
same grave, [Kg1 13:26-32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#026).
Notwithstanding these warnings, Jeroboam continues in his idolatry, [Kg1
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#033), [Kg1
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#034).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 13:1</span></span>

There came a man of God - Who this was we know not. The Chaldee, Syriac,
and Arabic call him a prophet. The Vulgate and Septuagint follow the
Hebrew, איש אלהים ish elohim means a Divine person, one wholly devoted
to God's service. Some have thought it was Shemaiah, others Joel, and
others Iddo. It could not have been the latter, for he wrote the acts of
Jeroboam, [Ch2 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029), and the prophet
was killed before he returned home; but conjecture is idle on such a
subject.

Jeroboam stood by the altar - Like gods, like priest; he made himself
high priest, and he took of the lowest of the people, and made them
priests of the high places; they proved themselves to be fools by
worshipping calves.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 13:2</span></span>

He cried against the altar - He denounced the destruction of this
idolatrous system.

A child shall be born - Josiah by name - This is one of the most
remarkable and most singular prophecies in the Old Testament. It here
most circumstantially foretells a fact which took place three hundred
and forty years after the prediction; a fact which was attested by the
two nations. The Jews, in whose behalf this prophecy was delivered,
would guard it most sacredly; and it was the interest of the Israelites,
against whom it was levelled, to impugn its authenticity and expose its
falsehood, had this been possible. This prediction not only showed the
knowledge of God, but his power. He gave, as it were, this warning to
idolatry, that it might be on its guard, and defend itself against this
Josiah whenever a person of that name should be found sitting on the
throne of David; and no doubt it was on the alert, and took all prudent
measures for its own defense; but all in vain, for Josiah, in the
eighteenth year of his reign, literally accomplished this prophecy, as
we may read, [Kg2 23:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015). And from
this latter place we find that the prophecy had three permanent
testimonials of its truth.

1\. The house of Israel;

2\. The house of Judah; and,

3\. The tomb of the prophet who delivered this prophecy, who, being
slain by a lion, was brought back and buried at Beth-el, the
superscription on whose tomb remained till the day on which Josiah
destroyed that altar, and burnt dead men's bones upon it. See above,
[Kg2 23:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#016).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 13:3</span></span>

And he gave a sign - A miracle to prove that the prophecy should be
fulfilled in its season.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 13:4</span></span>

Lay hold on him - No doubt, stretching out his own hand at the same
time, through rage, pride, and haste, to execute his own orders.

And his hand dried up - The whole arm became suddenly rigid; the nerves
no longer communicated their influence, and the muscles ceased to obey
the dictates of the will.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 13:5</span></span>

The altar was also rent - It split or clave of its own accord; and, as
the split parts would decline at the top from the line of their
perpendicular, so the ashes and coals would fall off, or be poured out.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 13:6</span></span>

Entreat - the face of the Lord thy God - The face of God is his favor,
as we see in many parts of the sacred writings. He says, thy God; for
Jeroboam knew that he was not his God, for he was now in the very act of
acknowledging other gods, and had no portion in the God of Jacob.

And the king's hand was restored - Both miracles were wrought to show
the truth of the Jewish religion, and to convince this bold innovator of
his wickedness, and to reclaim him from the folly and ruinous tendency
of his idolatry.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 13:7</span></span>

Come home with me - and I will give thee a reward - Come and be one of
my priests, and I will give thee a proper salary.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 13:9</span></span>

For so it was charged me - Eat no bread, etc. - That is, Have no kind of
communication with those idolaters. He was charged also not to return by
the way that he came; probably lest the account of what was done should
have reached the ears of any of the people through whom he had passed,
and he suffer inconveniences on the account, either by persecution from
the idolaters, or from curious people delaying him, in order to cause
him to give an account of the transactions which took place at Beth-el.
This is a reason why he should not return by the same way; but what the
reason of this part of the charge was, if not the above, is not easy to
see.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 13:11</span></span>

An old prophet - Probably once a prophet of the Lord, who had fallen
from his steadfastness, and yet not so deeply as to lose the knowledge
of the true God, and join with Jeroboam in his idolatries. We find he
was not at the king's sacrifice, though his sons were there; and perhaps
even they were there, not as idolaters, but as spectators of what was
done.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 13:14</span></span>

And went after the man of God - I can hardly think that this was with
any evil design. His sons had given him such an account of the
prediction, the power, and influence of this prophet, that he wished to
have a particular acquaintance with him, in order that he might get
farther information relative to the solemn import of the prophecy which
he had denounced against the idolatry at Beth-el. This good man could
not have been an object of the old prophet's malevolence.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 13:18</span></span>

An angel spake unto me - That he lied unto him is here expressly
asserted, and is amply proved by the event. But why should he deceive
him? The simple principle of curiosity to know all about this
prediction, and the strange facts which had taken place, of which he had
heard at second hand by means of his sons, was sufficient to induce such
a person to get the intelligence he wished by any means. We may add to
this, that, as he found the man of God sitting under an oak, probably
faint with fatigue and fasting, for he had had no refreshment, his
humanity might have led him to practice this deception, in order to
persuade him to take some refreshment. Having fallen from God, as I have
supposed, [Kg1 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#011), his own
tenderness of conscience was gone; and he would not scruple to do a
moral evil, if even a temporal good could come of it. Again, is it not
possible that the old prophet was himself deceived? for, though he lied
unto him, it is possible that he was not conscious of his lie, for
Satan, as an angel of light, might have deceived him in order to lead
him to deceive the other. He does not say, as the man of God did, It was
said to me by the word of the Lord; no: but, An angel spake unto me by
the word of the Lord. And I think it very likely that an angel did
appear to him on the occasion; an angel of darkness and idolatry, in the
garb of an angel of light, who wished to use him as an instrument to
bring discredit on the awful transactions which had lately taken place,
and to destroy him who had foretold the destruction of his power and
influence.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 13:19</span></span>

So he went back with him - He permitted himself to be imposed on; he
might have thought, as he had accomplished every purpose for which God
sent him, and had actually begun to return by another way, God, who had
given him the charge, had authority to say, "As thy purpose was to obey
every injunction, even to the letter, I now permit thee to go with this
old prophet, and take some refreshment." Now God might as well have
dispensed with this part of the injunction, as he did in the case of
Abraham: Take thy son Isaac, thy only son, whom thou lovest - and offer
him for a burnt-offering; but, when he saw his perfect readiness, he
dispensed with the actual offering, and accepted a ram in his stead.
Thus much may be said in vindication of the man of God: but if this be
so, why should he be punished with death, for doing what he had reason
and precedent to believe might be the will of God? I answer: He should
not have taken a step back, till he had remission of the clause from the
same authority which gave him the general message. He should have had it
from the word of the Lord to himself, in both cases, as Abraham had; and
not taken an apparent contradiction of what was before delivered unto
him, from the mouth of a stranger, who only professed to have it from an
angel, who pretended to speak unto him by the word of the Lord. In this,
and in this alone, lay the sinfulness of the act of the man of God, who
came out of Judah.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 13:20</span></span>

The word of the Lord came unto the prophet that brought him back - "A
great clamor," says Dr. Kennicott, "has been raised against this part of
the history, on account of God's denouncing sentence on the true prophet
by the mouth of the false prophet: but if we examine with attention the
original words here, they will be found to signify either he who brought
him back; or, whom he had brought back; for the very same words, אשר
השיבו asher heshibo, occur again in [Kg1
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#023), where they are now translated,
whom he had brought back; and where they cannot be translated otherwise.
This being the case, we are at liberty to consider the word of the Lord
as delivered to the true prophet thus brought back; and then the
sentence is pronounced by God himself, calling to him out of heaven, as
in [Gen 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011). And that this doom was
thus pronounced by God, not by the false prophet, we are assured in [Kg1
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#026) : 'The Lord hath delivered him
unto the lion, according to the word of the Lord which He spake unto
him.' Josephus expressly asserts that the sentence was declared by God
to the true prophet." The Arabic asserts the same.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 13:21</span></span>

And he - That is, according to the above interpretation, the voice of
God from heaven addressing the man of God, the old prophet having
nothing to do in this business.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 13:22</span></span>

Thy carcass shall not come - This intimated to him that he was to die an
untimely death, but probably did not specify by what means.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 13:24</span></span>

A lion met him - and slew him - By permitting himself to be seduced by
the old prophet, when he should have acted only on the expressly
declared counsel of God, he committed the sin unto death; that is, such
a sin as God will punish with the death of the body, while he extends
mercy to the soul. See my notes on [Jo1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016) (note), [Jo1
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#017) (note).

From the instance here related, we see, as in various other cases, that
often judgment begins at the house of God. The true prophet, for
receiving that as a revelation from God which was opposed to the
revelation which himself had received, and which was confirmed by so
many miracles, is slain by a lion, and his body deprived of the burial
of his fathers; while the wicked king, and the old fallen prophet, are
both permitted to live! If this was severity to the man of God, it was
mercy to the others, neither of whom was prepared to meet his judge.
Here we may well say, "If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall
the ungodly and the sinner appear?"

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg1 13:28</span></span>

The lion had not eaten the carcass, nor torn the ass - All here was
preternatural. The lion, though he had killed the man, does not devour
him; the ass stands quietly by, not fearing the lion; and the lion does
not attempt to tear the ass: both stand as guardians of the fallen
prophet. How evident is the hand of God in all!

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg1 13:30</span></span>

Alas, my brothers - This lamentation is very simple, very short, and
very pathetic. Perhaps the old prophet said it as much in reference to
himself, who had been the cause of his untimely death, as in reference
to the man of God, whose corpse he now committed to the tomb. But the
words may be no more than the burden of each line of the lamentation
which was used on this occasion. See instances of this among the
Asiatics in the note on [Jer 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#018)
(note).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 13:31</span></span>

Lay my bones beside his bones - This argues a strong conviction in the
mind of the old prophet, that the deceased was a good and holy man of
God; and he is willing to have place with him in the general
resurrection.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg1 13:32</span></span>

In the cities of Samaria - It is most certain that Samaria, or as it is
called in Hebrew Shomeron, was not built at this time. We are expressly
told that Omri, king of Israel, founded this city on the hill which he
bought for two talents of silver, from a person of the name of Shemer,
after whom he called the city Samaria or Shomeron; (see [Kg1
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#024)); and this was fifty years after
the death of Jeroboam. How then could the old prophet speak of Samaria,
not then in existence, unless he did it by the spirit of prophecy,
calling things that are not as though they were; as the man of God
called Josiah by name three hundred years before he was born? Some
suppose that the historian adds these words because Samaria existed in
his time, and he well knew that it did not exist in the time of the old
prophet; for himself, in the sixteenth chapter, gives us the account of
its foundation by Omri. After all, it is possible that God might have
given this revelation to the old prophet; and thus by anticipation which
is the language of prophecy, spoke of Samaria as then existing. This is
the solution of Houbigant, and is thought sound by many good critics.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg1 13:33</span></span>

Jeroboam returned not from his evil way - There is something exceedingly
obstinate and perverse, as well as blinding and infatuating, in
idolatry. The prediction lately delivered at Beth-el, and the miracles
wrought in confirmation of it, were surely sufficient to have affected
and alarmed any heart, not wholly and incorrigibly hardened; and yet
they had no effect on Jeroboam!

Made - the lowest of the people priests - So hardy was this bad man in
his idolatry that he did not even attempt to form any thing according to
the model of God's true worship: he would have nothing like God and
truth. In his calves, or rather oxen, he copied the manner of Egypt; and
in the formation of his priesthood, he seems to have gone aside from all
models. Amongst the worst of heathens, the priesthood was filled with
respectable men; but Jeroboam took of the lowest of the people, and put
them in that office.

Whosoever would, he consecrated him - He made no discrimination: any
vagabond that offered was accepted even of those who had no character,
who were too idle to work, and too stupid to learn.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg1 13:34</span></span>

And this thing became sin - These abominations were too glaring, and too
insulting to the Divine Majesty, to be permitted to last; therefore his
house was cut off, and destroyed from the face of the earth.

A Holy priesthood, a righteous ministry, is a blessing to any state,
because it has a most powerful effect on the morals of the community;
inducing order, sobriety, and habits of industry, among the people: on
the contrary, the profligacy of the clergy, and false principles of
religion, are the most likely to unsettle a kingdom, and to bring about
destructive revolutions in the state. This is the principle on which all
national establishments of religion were originally formed. The state
thought proper to secure a permanency of religion, that religion might
secure the safety of the state; because it was supposed from the general
aversion of men from good, that, if left to themselves, they would have
no religion at all. Where the religion of the country is pure, founded
solely on the oracles of God, it deserves the utmost sanction of the
state, as well as the attention of every individual. A Christian state
has surely authority to enact, The Christian religion is and shall be
the religion of this land; and, prejudice apart, should not the laws
provide for the permanence of this system? Is the form of Christianity
likely to be preserved in times of general profligacy, if the laws do
not secure its permanence? What would our nation have been if we had not
had a version of the sacred writings established by the authority of the
laws: and a form of sound words for general devotion established by the
same authority? Whatever the reader may do the writer thanks God for the
religious establishment of his country. For abuses in church or state,
he is the last to contend.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 14](kg1014)

</div>
