<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1008)  [Next](kg1010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 9:0</span></span>

The Lord appears a second time to Solomon, and assures him that he had
heard his prayer; and that he would establish his worship for ever in
that temple, and him and his successors on the throne of Israel,
provided he and they would keep his statutes and judgments, [Kg1
9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#001); but if they should transgress
and forsake the Lord, then they should be cast off, the temple itself
abandoned, and their enemies permitted to prevail over them, [Kg1
9:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#006). Solomon having finished the
temple and the king's house, about which he was employed twenty years,
and having received assistance from Hiram king of Tyre, he gave him in
return twenty cities in Galilee, with which he was not pleased, [Kg1
9:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#010). Solomon's levies, buildings,
and the persons employed, [Kg1
9:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#015). Pharaoh's daughter comes to
the city of David, [Kg1 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#024). He
sacrifices thrice a year at the temple, [Kg1
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#025). Solomon's navy, and the gold
they brought from Ophir, [Kg1 9:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#026).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 9:2</span></span>

The Lord appeared to Solomon - The design of this appearance, which was
in a dream, as that was at Gibeon, was to assure Solomon that God had
accepted his service, and had taken that house for his dwelling-place,
and would continue it, and establish him and his descendants upon the
throne of Israel for ever, provided they served him with an upright
heart; but, on the contrary, if they forsook him, he would abandon both
them and his temple.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 9:7</span></span>

A proverb and a by - word among all people - And so they are to the
present; the unbelieving Jews, the stubborn, stiff-necked Jews, are
words still in common use. They forsook the Lord, rejected his Christ,
and are cast off, their temple destroyed, and they scattered over the
face of the earth.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 9:9</span></span>

Have taken hold upon other gods - When an indigent person claims the
protection of a superior, he casts himself down before him, and lays
hold of his feet; and this expression is frequently used when there is
no prostration: I have taken hold of thy feet. When a person is called
into the presence of the Burman monarch, he is said to go to the golden
foot. - Ward's Customs.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 9:10</span></span>

At the end of twenty years - He employed seven years and a half in
building the temple, and twelve years and a half in building the king's
house; see [Kg1 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#001); [Ch2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#001).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 9:11</span></span>

Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities - It is very likely that Solomon did
not give those cities to Hiram so that they should be annexed to his
Tyrian dominions, but rather gave him the produce of them till the money
was paid which he had advanced to Solomon for his buildings. It appears
however that either Hiram did not accept them, or that having received
the produce till he was paid, he then restored them to Solomon; for in
the parallel place, [Ch2 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#002), it is
said, The cities which Hiram had restored to Solomon, Solomon built
them, and caused the children of Israel to dwell there. Some think that
they were heathen cities which Solomon had conquered, and therefore had
a right to give them if he pleased, as they were not any part of the
land given by promise to the Israelites.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 9:13</span></span>

Called them the land of Cabul - Whether this epithet was given to this
land by Hiram as a mark of disapprobation, or what is its proper
meaning, the learned are not agreed. That there was a country of this
name in the promised land in the time of Joshua, is evident enough from
[Jos 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#027), as it was one part of the
boundary of the tribe of Asher; hence some interpret the word border or
boundary, and so, the Septuagint understood it, for they have translated
the Hebrew word ὁριον, which signifies the same. The margin gives
another meaning.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 9:14</span></span>

Sixscore talents of gold - This was the sum which Hiram had lent, and in
order to pay this Solomon had laid a tax upon his people, as we
afterward learn. The whole is very darkly expressed.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 9:15</span></span>

This is the reason of the levy - That is, in order to pay Hiram the
sixscore talents of gold which he had borrowed from him (Hiram not being
willing to take the Galilean cities mentioned above; or, having taken
them, soon restored them again) he was obliged to lay a tax upon the
people; and that this was a grievous and oppressive tax we learn from
[Kg1 12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001), where the elders of
Israel came to Rehoboam, complaining of their heavy state of taxation,
and entreating that their yoke might be made lighter.

And Millo - This is supposed to have been a deep valley between Mount
Sion and what was called the city of Jebus, which Solomon filled up, and
it was built on, and became a sort of fortified place, and a place for
public assemblies. - See Calmet.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 9:16</span></span>

Pharaoh - had gone up, and taken Gezer - This city Joshua had taken from
the Canaanites, [Jos 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#033); [Jos
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#012), and it was divided by lot to
the tribe of Ephraim, and was intended to be one of the Levitical
cities; but it appears that the Canaanites had retaken it, and kept
possession till the days of Solomon, when his father-in-law, Pharaoh
king of Egypt, retook it, and gave it to Solomon in dowry with his
daughter.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 9:18</span></span>

And Tadmor in the wilderness - This is almost universally allowed to be
the same with the celebrated Palmyra, the ruins of which remain to the
present day, and give us the highest idea of Solomon's splendor and
magnificence. Palmyra stood upon a fertile plain surrounded by a barren
desert, having the river Euphrates on the east. The ruins are well
described by Messrs. Dawkes and Wood, of which they give fine
representations. They are also well described in the ancient part of the
Universal History, vol. i., p. 367-70. The description concludes thus:
"The world never saw a more glorious city; the pride, it is likely, of
ancient times, and the reproach of our own; a city not more remarkable
for the state of her buildings and unwontedness of her situation than
for the extraordinary personages who once flourished there, among whom
the renowned Zenobia and the incomparable Longinus must for ever be
remembered with admiration and regret."

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 9:19</span></span>

And all the cities of store - Though, by the multitude and splendor of
his buildings, Solomon must have added greatly to the magnificence of
his reign; yet, however plenteous silver and gold were in his times, his
subjects must have been greatly oppressed with the taxation necessary to
defray such a vast public expenditure.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 9:21</span></span>

A tribute of bond-service - He made them do the most laborious part of
the public works, the Israelites being generally exempt. When Sesostris,
king of Egypt, returned from his wars, he caused temples to be built in
all the cities of Egypt, but did not employ one Egyptian in the work,
having built the whole by the hands of the captives which he had taken
in his wars. Hence he caused this inscription to be placed upon each
temple: -

Ουδεις εγχωριος εις αυτα μεμοχθηκε.

No native has labored in these

Diodor. Sic. Bibl., lib. i., c. 56.

It appears that Solomon might with propriety have placed a similar
inscription on most of his works.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 9:25</span></span>

Three times in a year did Solomon offer - These three times were:

1\. The passover.

2\. The feast of pentecost.

3\. The feast of tabernacles.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 9:26</span></span>

A navy of ships - Literally, אני oni, a ship: in the parallel place,
[Ch2 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#017), it is said that Hiram sent
him אניות oniyoth, ships; but it does not appear that Solomon in this
case built more than one ship, and this was manned principally by the
Tyrians.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg1 9:28</span></span>

And they came to Ophir - No man knows certainly, to this day, where this
Ophir was situated. There were two places of this name; one somewhere in
India, beyond the Ganges, and another in Arabia, near the country of the
Sabaeans, mentioned by Job, [Job 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#024)
: Then shalt thou lay up gold as dust; and the gold of Ophir as the
stones of the brooks. And [Job 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#016) :
It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx, or
the sapphire. Calmet places this country at the sources of the Euphrates
and Tigris.

But there are several reasons to prove that this was not the Ophir of
the Bible, which it seems was so situated as to require a voyage of
three years long to go out, load, and return. Mr. Bruce has discussed
this subject at great length; see his Travels, vol. ii., chap. iv., p.
354, etc. He endeavors to prove

1\. That Ezion-geber is situated on the Elanitic branch of the Arabian
Gulf or Red Sea.

2\. That Tharshish is Moka, near to Melinda, in the Indian Ocean, in
about three degrees south latitude.

3\. That Ophir lies somewhere in the land of Sofala, or in the vicinity
of the Zimbeze river, opposite the island of Madagascar, where there
have been gold and silver mines in great abundance from the remotest
antiquity. And he proves,

4\. That no vessel could perform this voyage in less than Three years,
because of the monsoons; that more time need not be employed, and that
this is the precise time mentioned in [Kg1
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#022).

5\. That this is the country of the queen of Sheba, or Sabia, or Azeba,
who on her visit to Solomon, brought him one hundred and twenty talents
of gold, and of spices and precious stones great store, [Kg1
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#010). And that gold, ivory, silver,
etc., are the natural productions of this country.

To illustrate and prove his positions he has given a map on a large
scale, "showing the track of Solomon's fleet in their three years'
voyage from the Elanitic Gulf to Ophir and Tharshish;" to which, and his
description, I must refer the reader.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 10](kg1010)

</div>
