<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1010)  [Next](kg1012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 11:0</span></span>

Solomon's attachment to strange women, and consequent idolatry, [Kg1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001), [Kg1
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#002). Number of his wives and
concubines, [Kg1 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003). In his old age
they turn away his heart from God, [Kg1
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#004). He builds temples to idols,
burns incense and sacrifices to them, [Kg1
11:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005). The Lord is angry with him,
and threatens to deprive him of the kingdom, but will leave one tribe
for David's sake, [Kg1 11:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#009). The
Lord stirs up Hadad, the Edomite, to be his enemy; the history of this
man, [Kg1 11:14-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014). He stirs another
adversary against him, Rezon the son of Eliadah. He and Hadad plague
Israel, [Kg1 11:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#023). Jeroboam also
becomes his enemy, and the reason why, [Kg1
11:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026). Ahijah the prophet meets
Jeroboam, and promises, in the name of the Lord, that God will rend
Israel from the family of Solomon, and give him ten tribes, [Kg1
11:29-39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#029). Solomon, hearing of this,
seeks to put Jeroboam to death, who escapes to Egypt, where he continues
till the death of Solomon, [Kg1 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#040).
Solomon dies, after having reigned over Israel forty years; and his son
Rehoboam reigns in his stead, [Kg1
11:41-43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#041).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 11:1</span></span>

Many strange women - That is, idolaters; together with the daughter of
Pharaoh: she was also one of those strange women and an idolater. But
many think she became a proselyte to the Jewish religion; of this there
is no evidence.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 11:3</span></span>

He had seven hundred wives, princesses - How he could get so many of the
blood royal from the different surrounding nations, is astonishing; but
probably the daughters of noblemen, generals, etc., may be included.

And three hundred concubines - These were wives of the second rank, who
were taken according to the usages of those times; but their offspring
could not inherit. Sarah was to Abraham what these seven hundred
princesses were to Solomon; and the three hundred concubines stood in
the same relation to the Israelitish king as Hagar and Keturah did to
the patriarch.

Here then are one thousand wives to form this great bad man's harem! Was
it possible that such a person could have any piety to God, who was
absorbed by such a number of women? We scarcely allow a man to have the
fear of God who has a second wife or mistress; in what state then must
the man be who has one thousand of them? We may endeavor to excuse all
this by saying, "It was a custom in the East to have a multitude of
women, and that there were many of those whom Solomon probably never
saw," etc., etc. But was there any of them whom he might not have seen?
Was it for reasons of state, or merely court splendor, that he had so
many? How then is it said that he loved many strange women? - that he
clave to them in love? And did he not give them the utmost proofs of his
attachment when he not only tolerated their iniquitous worship in the
land, but built temples to their idols, and more, burnt incense to them
himself? As we should not condemn what God justifies, so we should not
justify what God condemns. He went after Ashtaroth, the impure Venus of
the Sidonians; after Milcom, the abomination of the Ammonites; after
Chemosh, the abomination of the Moabites; and after the murderous
Molech, the abomination of the children of Ammon. He seems to have gone
as far in iniquity as it was possible.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 11:7</span></span>

The hill that is before Jerusalem - This was the Mount of Olives.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 11:9</span></span>

The Lord was angry with Solomon - Had not this man's delinquency been
strongly marked by the Divine disapprobation, it would have had a fatal
effect on the morals of mankind. Vice is vice, no matter who commits it.
And God is as much displeased with sin in Solomon as he can be with it
in the most profligate, uneducated wretch. And although God sees the
same sin in precisely the same degree of moral turpitude as to the act
itself, yet there may be circumstances which greatly aggravate the
offense, and subject the offender to greater punishment. Solomon was
wise; he knew better; his understanding showed him the vanity as well as
the wickedness of idolatry. God had appeared unto him twice, and thus
given him the most direct proof of his being and of his providence. The
promises of God had been fulfilled to him in the most remarkable manner,
and in such a way as to prove that they came by a Divine counsel, and
not by any kind of casualty. All these were aggravations of Solomon's
crimes, as to their demerit; for the same crime has, in every case, the
same degree of moral turpitude in the sight of God; but circumstances
may so aggravate, as to require the offender to be more grievously
punished; so the punishment may be legally increased where the crime is
the same. Solomon deserved more punishment for his worship of Ashtaroth
than any of the Sidonians did, though they performed precisely the same
acts. The Sidonians had never known the true God; Solomon had been fully
acquainted with him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 11:11</span></span>

Forasmuch as this is done of thee - Was not this another warning from
the Lord? And might not Solomon have yet recovered himself? Was there
not mercy in this message which he might have sought and found?

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 11:13</span></span>

Will give one tribe - for David my servant's sake - The line of the
Messiah must be preserved. The prevailing lion must come out of the
tribe of Judah: not only the tribe must be preserved, but the regal line
and the regal right. All this must be done for the true David's sake:
and this was undoubtedly what God had in view by thus miraculously
preserving the tribe of Judah and the royal line, in the midst of so
general a defection.

And for Jerusalem's sake - As David was a type of the Messiah, so was
Jerusalem a type of the true Church: therefore the Old Jerusalem must be
preserved in the hands of the tribe of Judah, till the true David should
establish the New Jerusalem in the same land, and in the same city. And
what a series of providences did it require to do all these things!

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 11:14</span></span>

The Lord stirred up an adversary - A satan, שטן. When he sent to Hiram
to assist him in building the temple of the Lord, he could say, There
was no satan, see [Kg1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#004); and all
his kingdom was in peace and security, - every man dwelt under his vine,
and under his fig tree, [Kg1 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#025) :
but now that he had turned away from God, three satans rise up against
him at once, Hadad, Rezon, and Jeroboam.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 11:15</span></span>

Was gone up to bury the slain - The slain Edomites; for Joab had in the
course of six months exterminated all the males, except Hadad and his
servants, who escaped to Egypt. Instead of bury the slain, the Targum
has to take the spoils of the slain.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 11:17</span></span>

Hadad being yet a little child - נער קטן naar katan, a little boy; one
who was apprehensive of his danger, and could, with his father's
servants, make his escape: not an infant.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 11:18</span></span>

These arose out of Midian - They at first retired to Midian, which lay
to the southwest of the Dead Sea. Not supposing themselves in safety
there, they went afterwards to Paran in the south of Idumea, and getting
a number of persons to join them in Paran, they went straight to Egypt,
where we find Hadad became a favourite with Pharaoh, who gave him his
sister-in-law to wife; and incorporated him and his family with his own.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 11:22</span></span>

Let me go in any wise - It does not appear that he avowed his real
intention to Pharaoh; for at this time there must have been peace
between Israel and Egypt, Solomon having married the daughter of
Pharaoh.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 11:23</span></span>

Rezon the son of Eliadah - Thus God fulfilled his threatening by the
prophet Nathan: If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod
of men, and with the stripes of the children of men; [Sa2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 11:24</span></span>

And reigned in Damascus - Rezon was one of the captains of Hadadezer,
whom David defeated. It seems that at this time Rezon escaped with his
men; and; having lived, as is supposed, some time by plunder, he seized
on Damascus, and reigned there till David took Damascus, when he subdued
Syria, and drove out Rezon. But after Solomon's defection from God,
Rezon, finding that God had departed from Israel, recovered Damascus;
and joining with Hadad, harassed Solomon during the remaining part of
his reign. But some think that Hadad and Rezon were the same person.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 11:26</span></span>

Jeroboam the son of Nebat - From the context we learn that Jeroboam
while a young man was employed by Solomon to superintend the
improvements and buildings at Millo, and had so distinguished himself
there by his industry and good conduct as to attract general notice, and
to induce Solomon to set him over all the laborers employed in that
work, belonging to the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, called here the
house of Joseph. At first it appears that Solomon employed none of the
Israelites in any drudgery; but it is likely that, as he grew profane,
he grew tyrannical and oppressive: and at the works of Millo he changed
his conduct; and there, in all probability, were the seeds of
disaffection sown. And Jeroboam, being a clever and enterprising man,
knew well how to avail himself of the general discontent.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 11:29</span></span>

When Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem - On what errand he was going out of
Jerusalem, we know not.

Ahijah the Shilonite - He was one of those who wrote the history of the
reign of Solomon, as we find from [Ch2
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029), and it is supposed that it was
by him God spake twice to Solomon; and particularly delivered the
message which we find in this chapter, [Kg1
11:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#011).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 11:31</span></span>

Take thee ten pieces - The garment was the symbol of the kingdom of
Israel; the twelve pieces the symbol of the twelve tribes; the ten
pieces given to Jeroboam, of the ten tribes which should be given to
him, and afterwards form the kingdom of Israel, ruling in Samaria, to
distinguish it from the kingdom of Judah, ruling in Jerusalem.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg1 11:36</span></span>

That David my servant may have a light alway - That his posterity may
never fail, and the regal line never become extinct. This, as we have
already seen, was in reference to the Messiah. He was not only David's
light, but he was a light to enlighten the Gentiles.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">kg1 11:37</span></span>

According to all that thy soul desireth - It appears from this that
Jeroboam had affected the kingdom, and was seeking for an opportunity to
seize on the government. God now tells him, by his prophet, what he
shall have, and what he shall not have, in order to prevent him from
attempting to seize on the whole kingdom, to the prejudice of the
spiritual seed of David.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">kg1 11:38</span></span>

And build thee a sure house - He would have continued his posterity on
the throne of Israel, had he not by his wickedness forfeited the
promises of God, and thrown himself out of the protection of the Most
High.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">kg1 11:39</span></span>

But not for ever - They shall be in affliction and distress till the
Messiah come, who shall sit on the throne of David to order it and
establish it in judgment and justice for ever. Jarchi says, on this
verse,

"When the Messiah comes, the kingdom shall be restored to the house of
David.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">kg1 11:40</span></span>

Sought - to kill Jeroboam - He thought by this means to prevent the
punishment due to his crimes.

Unto Shishak king of Egypt - This is the first time we meet with the
proper name of an Egyptian king, Pharaoh being the common name for all
the sovereigns of that country. Some suppose that this Shishak was the
Sesostris so renowned for his wars and his conquests. But it is likely
that this king lived long before Solomon's time.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg1 11:41</span></span>

The book of the acts of Solomon? - These acts were written by Nathan the
prophet, Ahijah the Shilonite, and Iddo the seer; as we learn from [Ch2
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029). Probably from these were the
Books of Kings and Chronicles composed; but the original documents are
long since lost.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">kg1 11:42</span></span>

Solomon reigned - forty years - Josephus says fourscore years, which is
sufficiently absurd. Calmet supposes him to have been eighteen years old
when he came to the throne, and that he died A.M. 3029, aged fifty-eight
years; and, when we consider the excess in which he lived, and the
criminal passions which he must have indulged among his thousand wives,
and their idolatrous and impure worship, this life was as long as could
be reasonably expected.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">kg1 11:43</span></span>

Solomon slept with his fathers - He died in almost the flower of his
age, and, it appears unregretted. His government was no blessing to
Israel; and laid, by its exactions and oppressions, the foundation of
that schism which was so fatal to the unhappy people of Israel and
Judah, and was the most powerful procuring cause of the miseries which
have fallen upon the Jewish people from that time until now.

I. It may now be necessary to give a more distinct outline of the
character of this king.

1\. In his infancy and youth he had the high honor of being peculiarly
loved by the Lord; and he had a name given him by the express authority
of God himself, which to himself and others must ever call to
remembrance this peculiar favor of the Most High.

There is little doubt that he was a most amiable youth, and his whole
conduct appeared to justify the high expectations that were formed of
him.

2\. He ascended the Israelitish throne at a time the most favorable for
the cultivation of those arts so necessary to the comfort and
improvement of life. Among all the surrounding nations Israel had not
one open enemy; there was neither adversary, nor evil occurrent, [Kg1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#004). He had rest on every side, and
from the universal and profound peace which he enjoyed, the very
important name Jedidiah, "beloved of the Lord" which was given him by
Divine authority was changed to that of Solomon, the Peaceable, [Sa2
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#024), [Sa2
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025), which at once indicated the
state of the country, and the character of his own mild, pacific mind.

3\. To the dying charge of his pious father relative to the building a
temple for the Lord, he paid the most punctual attention. He was fond of
architecture, as we may learn from the account that is given of his
numerous buildings and improvements; and yet it does not appear that he
at all excelled in architectural knowledge. Hiram, the amiable king of
Tyre, and his excellent workmen, were the grand directors and executors
of the whole. By his public buildings he doubtless rendered Jerusalem
highly respectable; but his passion for such works was not on the whole
an advantage to his subjects, as it obliged him to have recourse to a
burdensome system of taxation, which at first oppressed and exasperated
his people, and ultimately led to the fatal separation of Israel and
Judah.

4\. That he improved the trade and commerce of his country is
sufficiently evident: by his public buildings vast multitudes were
employed; and knowledge in the most beneficial arts must have been
greatly increased, and the spirit of industry highly cultivated.

Commerce does not appear to have been much regarded, if even known, in
Israel, previously to the days of Solomon. The most celebrated maritime
power then in the world was that of the Tyrians. With great address and
prudence he availed himself of their experience and commercial
knowledge, sent his ships in company with theirs to make long and
dangerous but lucrative voyages, and, by getting their sailors aboard of
his own vessels, gained possession of their nautical skill, and also a
knowledge of those safe ports in which they harboured, and of the rich
countries with which they traded. His friendly alliance with the king of
Tyre was a source of advantage to Israel, and might have been much more
so had it been prudently managed. But after the time of Solomon we find
it scarcely mentioned, and therefore it does not appear that the Jews
continued to follow a track which had been so successfully opened to
them; their endless contentions, and the ruinous wars of the two
kingdoms, paralyzed all their commercial exertions: till at length all
the maritime skill which they had acquired from the expert and
industrious Tyrians, dwindled down to the puny art of managing a few
boats on the internal lakes of their own country. Had it not been for
the destructive feuds that reigned between the two kingdoms of Israel
and Judah, that country might have become one of the best and richest
maritime powers of either Asia or Europe. Their situation was grand and
commanding, but their execrable jealousies deprived them of its
advantages, exposed them to the aggressions of their enemies, and
finally brought them to ruin.

5\. I have intimated that Solomon was truly pious in his youth; of this
there can be no doubt; it was on this account that the Lord loved him,
and his zeal in the cause of true religion, and high respect for the
honor of God, are strong indications of such a frame of mind. Had we no
other proof of this than his prayer for wisdom, and his prayer at the
dedication of the temple, it would put the matter for ever beyond
dispute, independently of the direct testimonies we have from God
himself on the subject. He loved the worship and ordinances of God, and
was a pattern to his subjects of the strictest attention to religious
duties. He even exceeded the requisitions of the law in the multitude of
his sacrifices, and was a careful observer of those annual festivals so
necessary to preserve the memory of the principal facts of the
Israelitish history, and those miraculous interventions of God in the
behalf of that people.

6\. There can be no doubt that Solomon possessed the knowledge of
governing well; of the importance of this knowledge he was duly aware,
and this was the wisdom that he so particularly sought from God. "I am,"
said he, "but a little child; I know not how to go out or come in; and
thy servant is in the midst of a great people that cannot be counted for
multitude. Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge
thy people, and that I may discern between good and bad; for who is able
to judge this thy so great a people? And the speech pleased the Lord
that Solomon had asked this thing;" [Kg1
3:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#008). This wisdom he did receive
from God; and he is here a pattern to all kings, who, as they are the
vicegerents of the Lord, should earnestly seek that wisdom which is from
above, that they may be able to know how to govern the people intrusted
to their care; because, in every civil government, there are a multitude
of things on which a king may be called to decide, concerning which
neither the laws, nor the commonly received political maxims by which,
in particular cases, the conduct of a governor is to be regulated, can
give any specific direction.

7\. But the wisdom of Solomon was not confined to the art of government,
he appears to have possessed a universal knowledge. The sages of the
East were particularly distinguished by their accurate knowledge of
human nature, from which they derived innumerable maxims for the
regulation of man in every part of his moral conduct, and in all the
relations in which he could possibly be placed. Hence their vast
profusion of maxims, proverbs, instructive fables, apologues, enigmas,
etc.; great collections of which still remain locked up in the languages
of Asia, particularly the Sanscrit, Arabic, and Persian; besides those
which, by the industry of learned men, have been translated and
published in the languages of Europe. Much of this kind appears in the
books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus in the Apocrypha, and in the very
excellent collections of D'Herbelot, Visdelou, and Galand, in the
Bibliotheque Orientale. That Solomon possessed this wisdom in a very
high degree, the book of Proverbs bears ample testimony, leaving
Ecclesiastes for the present out of the consideration.

8\. As a poet, Solomon stands deservedly high, though of his one
thousand and five poems not one, except the book of Song of Solomon,
remains. This ode alone, taken in a literary point of view, is
sufficient to raise any man to a high degree of poetic fame. It is a
most interesting drama, where what Racine terms the genie createur, the
creative genius, every where appears; in which the imagery, which is
always borrowed from nature, is impressive and sublime; the characters
accurately distinguished and defined, the strongest passion, in its
purest and most vigorous workings, elegantly portrayed; and in which
allusions the most delicate, to transactions of the tenderest
complexion, while sufficiently described to make them intelligible, are
nevertheless hidden from the eye of the gross vulgar by a tissue as
light as a gossamer covering. Such is the nature of this inimitable ode,
which, had it not been perverted by weak but well designing men to
purposes to which it can never legitimately apply, would have ranked
with the highest productions of the Epithalamian kind that ever came
from the pen of man. But alas! for this exquisite poem, its true sense
has been perverted; it has been forced to speak a language that was
never intended, a language far from being honorable to the cause which
it was brought to support, and subversive of the unity and simplicity of
the ode itself. By a forced mode of interpretation it has been hackneyed
to death, and allegorized to destruction. It is now little read, owing
to the injudicious manner in which it has been interpreted.

It was scarcely to be expected that the son of such a father should not,
independently of inspiration, have caught a portion of the pure poetic
fire. Though the spirit of poetry, strictly speaking, is not
transmissible by ordinary generation, yet most celebrated poets have had
poetical parents; but in many cases the talent has degenerated into that
of music, and the spirit of poetry in the sire has become a mere musical
instrument in the hands of the son. This however was not the case with
the son of David, for though vastly inferior to his father in this gift,
he had nevertheless the spirit and powers of a first-rate poet.

9\. His knowledge in natural history must have been very extensive; it
is said, "He spake of trees, from the cedar that is in Lebanon even unto
the hyssop that springeth out of the wall. He spake also of beasts, of
fowls, of reptiles, and of fishes;" [Kg1
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#033). All this knowledge has perished;
his countrymen, the prophets excepted, were without taste, and took no
pains to preserve what they did not relish. A man of such mental power
and comprehension under the direction of Divine light must have spoken
of things as they are. His doctrine therefore of generation and
corruption, of nutrition, vegetation, production, aliments, tribes,
classes, families, and habits, relative to the different subjects in
botany, zoology, ornithology, entomology, and ichthyology, which are all
evidently referred to here, must have been at once correct, instructive,
and delightful. I have already lamented the labor it has cost our Rays,
Tourneforts, Linnes, Buffons, Willoughbys, Swammerdams, and Bloschs, to
regain those sciences which possibly were possessed in their highest
degree by the Israelitish king, and which, alas! are all lost, except a
few traces in the book of Ecclesiastes, if that work can be traced to so
remote an age as that of Solomon.

10\. As a moral philosopher the author of the book of Ecclesiastes
occupies no mean rank. At present we may consider this work as a
production of Solomon, though this is disputed, and the question shall
be considered in its proper place. This book contains such a fund of
wisdom, applied to the regulation of life, and all referred to the
proper end, that it most deservedly occupies a high place in Biblical
ethics, and deserves the closest attention of every reader.

11\. The proofs of Solomon's vast wisdom, as brought into practical
effect, lie in a very small compass, because his history in the Bible is
short, his own writings in general lost, and the annals of his reign, as
compiled by Nathan the prophet, Ahijah the Shilonite, and Iddo the seer,
long since perished. The decision between the two harlots is almost the
only instance.

Of his interesting interview with the queen of Sheba, and the
discussions into which they entered, we have only the fact stated,
without the least detail of particulars. Those who have read the
Concessus of Harari, or the Heetopadesa, of Veeshnoo Sarma, will regret
that the conversations of the wisest of men, with probably the most
intelligent of women, should have been lost to the world, which may be
reasonably concluded to have been as far superior to the excellent works
above referred to, as they are beyond the maxims of Rochefoucault, and
the sayings of Madame Maintenon.

12\. The wisdom of the East has ever been celebrated; and if we may
believe their own best writers, much of what they possess has been
derived from Solomon. Encomiums of his wisdom are everywhere to be met
with in the Asiatic writers; and his name is famous in every part of the
East. Most of the oriental historians, poets, and philosophers, mention
Soliman ben Daoud, "Solomon the son of David." They relate that he
ascended the throne of Israel at the death of his father, when he was
only twelve years of age, and that God subjected to his government, not
only men, but good and evil spirits, the fowls of the air, and the winds
of heaven. They agree with the sacred writers in stating that he
employed seven years in building the temple at Jerusalem.

Solomon's seal, and Solomon's ring, are highly celebrated by them, and
to these they attribute a great variety of magical effects. They state
that without his ring he had not the science of government; and having
once lost it, he did not remount his throne for forty days, as being
destitute of that wisdom without which he could not decide according to
truth and equity. But these things are probably spoken allegorically by
their oldest writers. Of the throne of this prince they speak in terms
of the most profound admiration. I have met with the most minute
description of its magnificence, its ivory, gold, and jewels, and an
estimate of its cost in lacs of rupees! According to those writers it
had 12,000 seats of gold on the right hand for patriarchs and prophets,
and as many on the left for the doctors of the law, who assisted him in
the distribution of justice.

In various parts of the Koran Solomon is spoken of in terms of the
highest respect, and is represented as a true believer; though, through
the envy of demons, magic and sorcery were attributed to him. Mohammed
speaks of this in the second surat of his Koran. The story, in sum, is
this: The devils, by God's permission, having tempted Solomon without
success, made use of the following stratagem to blast his reputation:
they wrote several books of magic, and hid them under his throne; and,
after his death, told the chief men that if they wished to know by what
means Solomon had obtained absolute dominion over men, genii, and the
winds, they should dig under his throne. This they did, and found the
aforesaid books full of impious superstitions. The better sort would not
learn these incantations; but the common people did, and published them
as the genuine works of Solomon. From this imputation the Koran
justifies him, by saying, Solomon was not an unbeliever, surat 2. From
the wonder-working signet and ring of the Asiatics came the Clavicle of
Solomon, so celebrated among the Jewish rabbins, and the Christian
occult philosophers; for such things found in Cornelius Agrippa, and
such like writers, are not late inventions, but have descended from a
very remote antiquity, as the Koran and the various commentators on it
sufficiently prove. See Calmet and Sale.

The oriental traditions concerning this prince have been embodied in the
Soliman Nameh of Ferdusi, in Persian, and in the Soliman Nameh of
Uscobi, in Turkish. D'Herbelot mentions one of these histories in
Persian verse, containing 1571 couplets.

Indeed, the traditions concerning the wonderful knowledge of Solomon,
which abound so much in the East, are at least an indirect proof that
many things relative to this prince have been preserved among them which
are not mentioned in our sacred books, but which they have blended so
miserably with fables that it is impossible now to distinguish the
precious from the vile.

Works attributed to Solomon have existed in different ages, from his
time till the present. Eusebius states that Hezekiah, finding the Jews
putting too much confidence in the books of Solomon, relative to cures
and different occult arts, ordered them to be suppressed. Josephus
positively says that Solomon did compose books of charms to cure
diseases, and conjurations to expel demons, Antiq., lib. viii., cap. 2.
He states farther, that a Jew named Eliezar cured several demoniacs in
the presence of Vespasian, by reciting the charms which had been
invented by Solomon. R. D. Kimchi speaks of a book of Solomon entitled
The Cure of Diseases, which Genebrard supposes to be the same work of
which Josephus speaks. And Origen speaks of conjurations which were used
by the Jews in his time, and which they professed to derive from the
books of Solomon.

There are still extant books of this kind attributed to Solomon, such as
The Enchantments, The Clavicle, The Ring, The Hygromantia, The New
Moons, and The Shadows of Ideas; but these, as they now stand, are the
inventions of quacks and impostors, and entitled to no regard. If there
were any books containing the wisdom of Solomon, they are either
irrecoverably lost, or exist in mutilated fragments among the Asiatic
sages; and are disfigured by being connected with improbable tales, and
pretended mantras or charms.

II\. Hitherto we have looked only at the bright side of Solomon's
character: we must now take a much less satisfactory view of this
singular man; one in whom every thing great, glorious, wise, and holy,
and every thing little, mean, foolish and impious, predominated by
turns. He forsook the God of his mercies in a great variety of ways.

1\. Whatever may be thought of the step in a political point of view, he
most assuredly went out of the way of God's providence, and acted
contrary to his law, in making affinity with Pharaoh's daughter. The
sacred writers frequently refer to this; and it is never mentioned with
approbation: it is rather associated with circumstances that place it in
a reprehensible point of view. She was doubtless an idolater; and the
question of her becoming a proselyte is far from being satisfactorily
settled. I believe she was the first means of drawing off his heart from
the true God.

2\. His expensive buildings obliging him to have recourse to a system of
oppressive taxation, was another flaw in his character. Though with
great zeal and honorable industry, and at great expense, he built a
temple for the Lord, which he completed in seven years, yet the expense
here was little in comparison of what was incurred by his own house,
called the house of the forest of Lebanon, in which he spent incredible
sums, and consumed nearly thirteen years; almost twice the time employed
in building the temple at Jerusalem. This would have had no evil
operation provided he had not been obliged to impose heavy taxes on his
subjects, which produced an almost universal disaffection. Add to this,
he had a most expensive household; one thousand women, part wives, part
mistresses, would require immense riches to support their pomp and
gratify their ambition. The people therefore justly complained of an
establishment which, notwithstanding the riches brought into the
country, must be both odious and oppressive.

3\. He began his reign by an inauspicious act, the death of his brother
Adonijah. This was a sin against God and nature: and no art of man can
ever wash out its guilt. If state policy required it, which is very
questionable, what had that to do with the feelings of humanity, and the
love of God? On no pretense whatever is Solomon justified in this act.

4\. His inordinate love of women. He had no doubt formed matrimonial
alliances with all kingdoms and neighboring states, by taking their
sisters and daughters to be his wives, to the fearful amount of no less
than seven hundred! Politicians may endeavor to justify these acts by
asserting, that in the Asiatic countries they were matters of a sound
policy, rather than an argument of the prevalence of an irregular and
unbridled passion. Let this stand for its value; but what can such
apologists say for the additional three hundred concubines, for the
taking of whom no such necessity can be pleaded? But even allowing that
state policy might require such extensive alliances, what are we to say
to the flagrant breaches of a most positive law of God? Most solemnly
and most authoritatively had he said that his people should not give
their daughters to the heathen, nor take the daughters of the heathen to
be their wives; lest they should turn their hearts away from serving the
Lord. In the face of this most positive declaration, Solomon took wives
of the most idolatrous of the surrounding nations; who succeeded,
according to what was foretold in turning his heart away from God.

5\. He became an idolater. He worshipped "Ashtaroth, the Venus of the
Sidonians; Milcom, the abomination of the Ammonites; Chemosh, the
abomination of the Moabites; and Molech, the abomination of the children
of Ammon." He did more: he built a temple to each of these; "and to all
the gods of all his strange wives which burned incense, and sacrificed
unto their gods," [Kg1 11:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005).

6\. By this time we may suppose that the light of God had entirely
departed from his mind. He who knew so well the true God, now served him
not; or, if he did, it was in conjunction with those idols, thus
bringing the Supreme Being on a level with demons, or the figments of
impure hearts and disordered fancies. We need not wonder at the tale of
the mighty Samson betraying his life's secret in the lap of Delilah; or
of the unconquerable Hercules handling the distaff among the maids of
Omphale, queen of Lydia; when we see the son of David, the once
well-beloved of the Lord, the wisest of human beings, for the love of
his millenary of wives and concubines, erecting temples to devils, and
burning incense to them that were no gods; not considering that an idol
is nothing in the world. To what an indescribable state of blindness and
fatuity must this man have been brought, before he could have been
capable of such acts as these! O Lucifer, son of the morning, how art
thou fallen!

7\. I have already hinted that Solomon's oppressive taxation laid the
foundation of that discontent which shortly after his death produced the
separation of Israel and Judah; also the long and ruinous wars which
drenched these states in blood: and this was doubtless the cause that
ten-twelfths of the Jewish people became idolaters; which crime was
punished, by the just judgments of God, by the Babylonish captivity,
which lasted seventy years; and by the carrying away of the ten
Israelitish tribes by the Assyrians, who are lost from the map of the
universe, and no longer numbered among the children of men!

8\. What greatly aggravates the whole of this most dismal tale is, that
this strange defection from God, truth, reason, and common sense, was
persisted in to his old age; or that in his old age, meaning undoubtedly
his latter days, his wives turned away his heart from God. But his
idolatry must have been of many years' standing; he meddled with it in
his connection with the princes of Egypt; each of his idolatrous wives
in succession increased the propensity: to chastise him for this very
idolatry the Lord stirred up an adversary unto him, Hadad, the Edomite,
and Rezon, the son of Eliadah, who was an adversary to Israel all the
days of Solomon, [Kg1 11:14-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014), which
surely intimates that this idolatry was not the sin merely of his old
age; as to chastise him for it Rezon was an adversary to Israel all his
days. And as Solomon reigned forty years, we may fairly presume that a
principal part of that time was spent in idolatrous practices.

9\. This dismal account has a more dismal close still; for, in the same
place in which we are informed of his apostasy, we are informed of his
death, without the slightest intimation that he ever repented and turned
to God. It is true that what is wanting in fact is supplied by
conjecture; for it is firmly believed that "he did repent, and wrote the
book of Ecclesiastes after his conversion, which is a decided proof of
his repentance." I am sorry I cannot strengthen this opinion; of which I
find not the shadow of a proof.

1\. The book of Ecclesiastes, though it speaks much of the vanity of the
creatures, yet speaks little or nothing of the vanity or sin of
idolatry.

2\. It is not the language of a man who was recovering from a state of
the most awful backsliding. Is there any direct confession of sin in it?
Is there any thing in it like the penitential confessions of his father,
or like the lamentations of Jeremiah? Is there any where to be heard in
it the sighing of a broken heart, or strong crying and tears to
deprecate the justice and implore the mercy of a deeply offended God?
Does it any where exhibit the language of a penitent, or expressions
suitable to the state and circumstances of this supposed penitent king
of Israel? Excellent as it is in its kind, is it any thing more than a
valuable collection of experimental ethics, relative to the emptiness of
the creature, and the folly of earthly pursuits and worldly anxieties?

3\. Nor is it even past doubt that Solomon wrote this book: it certainly
does in several places bear evidences of times posterior to those of
Solomon. Eminent scholars have discerned a deterioration in the style
from the pure classical Hebrew, with an admixture of exotic terms that
did not exist in the Hebrew language previously to the Babylonish
captivity. But supposing that they are mistaken here, I still contend
that it is not the language of a penitent soul.

4\. It has been supposed, that, as Solomon was a type of Christ, it is
not likely that he has finally perished. To this I answer, (1). I know
not that Solomon was a type of Christ. The reference to [Sol
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#007); [Sol
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#011), [Sol
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#012), is to me no proof whatever of
the point. (2). Were it even otherwise, this would be no proof of his
repentance, when the Scriptures are silent on the subject. The brazen
serpent was a type of Christ, [Joh
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014), and was held in great veneration
for a considerable time among the Jews; but when it became an incitement
to idolatry, it was called nehushtan, a brazen trifle, taken down, and
destroyed; [Kg2 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004). Typical persons
and typical things may perish as well as others; the antitype alone will
infallibly remain.

5\. Finally, there seems every evidence that he died in his sins. His
crimes were greatly aggravated: he forsook the Lord, who had appeared to
him twice; his wives turned away his heart in his old age: there is not
a single testimony in the Old or New Testament that intimates he died in
a safe state. That awful denunciation of Divine justice stands point
blank in the way of all contrary suppositions: "If thou forsake the
Lord, he will cast thee off for ever," [Ch1
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#009). He did forsake the Lord; and he
forsook him in his very last days; and there is no evidence that he ever
again clave to him. Ergo.

Reader, let him that standeth take heed lest he fall; not only foully
but finally. Certainly, unconditional final perseverance will find
little support in the case of Solomon. He was once most incontrovertibly
in grace. He lost that grace and sinned most grievously against God. He
was found in this state in his old age. He died, as far as the Scripture
informs us, without repentance. Even the doubtfulness in which the bare
letter of the Scripture leaves the eternal state of this man, is a blast
of lightning to the syren song of "Once in grace, and still in grace;"
"Once a child, and a child for ever."

I shall close these observations with the account given by Abul Farage,
an Arabic writer of the thirteenth century, in his work entitled The
History of the Dynasties, p. 55. "But in this Solomon transgressed,
because towards the end of his life he took other women of foreign
nations besides the daughter of Pharaoh; nations with whom God had
forbidden the children of Israel to form matrimonial alliances; but
leaning towards their gods, he worshipped their idols. In the
thirty-fourth year of his reign he built a house for idols in the mount
which is opposite to Jerusalem; and the length of it was one hundred
cubits, its breadth fifty, and its height thirty. He made also for
himself golden shields, and a brazen sea, supported on the horns of
brazen oxen. God reproved him for his infidelity, and gave him for
punishment in this world that he took away from his son the greater part
of the kingdom. Moreover, the duration of his reign was forty years; and
he died without repentance, and was buried in the sepulcher of his
father David."

For other particulars relative to the different transactions of this
reign, the reader is referred to the notes in the order of their
occurrence; and to those treatises which have been written on the
probability that Solomon did or did not repent of his idolatry: and also
to the notes on Ecclesiastes, where the subject will be again reviewed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 12](kg1012)

</div>
