<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1005)  [Next](kg1007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 6:0</span></span>

In the four hundred and eightieth year from the exodus, in the fourth
year of Solomon's reign, and in the second month, he laid the
foundations of the temple; the length sixty cubits, the breadth twenty,
and the height thirty cubits; besides the porch, which was twenty cubits
in length, and ten cubits in height, [Kg1
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001). A description of its different
external parts, [Kg1 6:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#004). God's
promise to Solomon, [Kg1 6:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#011).
Description of its internal parts and contents, vv. 14-36. Temple
finished in the eighth month of the eleventh year of Solomon's reign,
being seven years in building, [Kg1
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#037), [Kg1
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#038).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 6:1</span></span>

In the four hundred and eightieth year - The Septuagint has the four
hundred and fortieth year. It need scarcely be noticed, that among
chronologists there is a great difference of opinion concerning this
epocha. Glycas has 330 years; Melchior Canus, 590 years; Josephus, 592
years; Sulpicius Severus, 588; Clemens Alexandrinus, 570; Cedrenus, 672;
Codomanus, 598; Vossius and Capellus, 580; Serarius, 680; Nicholas
Abraham, 527; Maestlinus, 592; Petavius and Valtherus, 520. Here are
more than a dozen different opinions; and after all, that in the common
Hebrew text is as likely to be the true one as any of the others.

The month Zif - This answers to a part of our April and May; and was the
second month of the sacred year, but the eighth month of the civil year.
Before the time of Solomon, the Jews do not appear to have had any names
for their months, but mentioned them in the order of their consecutive
occurrence, first month, second month, third month, etc. In this chapter
we find Zif and Bul; and in [Kg1 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#002),
we find another, Ethanim; and these are supposed to be borrowed from the
Chaldeans; and consequently this book was written after the Babylonish
captivity. Before this time we find only the word Abib mentioned as the
name of a month, [Exo 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#004). Whether
there were any others at that time, or whether Abib was really intended
as the name of a month, we cannot absolutely say. The present names of
the Hebrew months are: - Tisri, answering to a part of September and
October, Marchesvan, Cisleu, Tebeth, Shebat, Adar, Nisan, Ijar, Sivan,
Tamuz, Ab, and Elul.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 6:2</span></span>

The length thereof was threescore cubits - A cubit, according to Bishop
Cumberland, is 21 inches, and 888 decimals, or 1 foot, 9 inches, and 888
decimals. According to this

Yds. Ft. Inch. The length, 60 cubits, was 36 1 5.28 The breadth, 20
cubits, was 12 0 5.76 The height, 30 cubits, was 18 0 8.64 This
constituted what was called the temple or house, the house of God, etc.
But, besides this, there were courts and colonnades, where the people
might assemble to perform their devotions and assist at the sacrifices,
without being exposed to the open air. The court surrounded the temple,
or holy place, into which the priests alone entered. Sometimes the whole
of the building is called the temple; at other times that, the
measurement of which is given above. But as no proper account can be
given of such a building in notes; and as there is a great variety of
opinion concerning the temple, its structure, ornaments, etc., as
mentioned in the books of Kings and Chronicles, in Ezekiel, and by
Josephus; and as modern writers, such as Vilalpandus, Dr. Lightfoot, and
Dr. Prideaux, professing to be guided by the same principles, have
produced very different buildings; I think it best to hazard nothing on
the subject, but give that description at the end of the chapter which
Calmet with great pains and industry has collected: at the same time,
pledging myself to no particular form or appearance, as I find I cannot
give any thing as the likeness of Solomon's temple which I could say,
either in honor or conscience, bears any affinity to it. For other
particulars I must refer the reader to the three large volumes of
Vilalpandus, Dr. Lightfoot's Works, and to the Connections of Dr.
Prideaux.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 6:4</span></span>

Windows of narrow lights - The Vulgate says, fenestras obliquas, oblique
windows; but what sort of windows could such be?

The Hebrew is חלוני שקפים אטמים challoney shekuphim atumim, windows to
look through, which shut. Probably latticed windows: windows through
which a person within could see well; but a person without, nothing.
Windows, says the Targum, which were open within and shut without. Does
he mean windows with shutters; or, are we to understand, with the
Arabic, windows opening wide within, and narrow on the outside; such as
we still see in ancient castles? This sense our margin expresses. We
hear nothing of glass or any other diaphanous substance. Windows,
perhaps originally windore, a door to let the wind in, in order to
ventilate the building, and through which external objects might be
discerned.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 6:7</span></span>

The house - was built of stone - It appears that every stone was hewn
and squared, and its place in the building ascertained, before it came
to Jerusalem: the timbers were fitted in like manner. This greatly
lessened the trouble and expense of carriage. On this account, that all
was prepared at Mount Lebanon, there was neither hammer, axe, nor any
tool of iron heard in the building; nothing except mallets to drive the
tenons into the mortises, and drive in the pins to fasten them, was
necessary: therefore there was no noise. But why is this so particularly
marked? Is it not because the temple was a type of the kingdom of God;
and the souls of men are to be prepared here for that place of
blessedness? There, there is no preaching, exhortations, repentance,
ears, cries, nor prayers; the stones must be all squared and fitted here
for their place in the New Jerusalem, and, being living stones, must be
built up a holy temple for a habitation of God through the Spirit.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 6:9</span></span>

Covered the house with beams and boards of cedar - The Eastern custom is
very different from ours: we ceil with plaster, and make our floors of
wood; they make their floors of plaster or painted tiles, and make their
ceilings of wood. But it may not be improper to observe that, in ancient
times, our buildings were somewhat similar. Westminster Hall is a proof
of this.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 6:11</span></span>

The word of the Lord came to Solomon - Some think that this is the same
revelation as that mentioned [Kg1 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#002),
etc., which took place after the dedication of the temple: but to me it
appears different; it was a word to encourage him while building; to
warn him against apostasy, and to assure him of God's continued
protection of him and his family, if they continued faithful to the
grace which God had given.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 6:15</span></span>

The walls of the ceiling - See the note on [Kg1
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#009).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 6:19</span></span>

The oracle he prepared - See the description of the temple at the end of
this chapter, [Kg1 6:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#038) (note).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 6:22</span></span>

The whole house he overlaid with gold - It is impossible to calculate
this expense, or the quantity of gold employed in this sacred building.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 6:26</span></span>

The height of the one cherub was ten cubits - Concerning the cherubs,
their form, etc., see my note on [Exo
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#018) (note). The height of each
cherub was about eighteen feet and three inches.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg1 6:36</span></span>

Three rows of hewed stone, and a row of cedar beams - Does not this
intimate that there were three courses of stone, and then one course of
timber all through this wall? Three strata of stone and one stratum of
timber, and so on. If so, could such a building be very durable? This is
also referred to in the succeeding chapter, [Kg1
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#011); and as both the temple and
Solomon's house were built in the same manner, we may suppose that this
was the ordinary way in which the better sort of buildings were
constructed. Calmet thinks that to this mode of building the prophet
alludes, [Hab 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#011) : The stone shall
cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it. But
it should be observed that this was in the inner court, and therefore
the timber was not exposed to the weather. The outer court does not
appear to have been built stratum super stratum of stone and wood.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">kg1 6:38</span></span>

In the eleventh year - was the house finished - It is rather strange
that this house required seven years and about six months to put all the
stones and the timbers in their places, for we have already seen that
they were all prepared before they came to Jerusalem; but the
ornamenting, gilding, or overlaying with gold, making the carved work,
cherubim, trees, flowers, etc., must have consumed a considerable time.
The month Bul answers to a part of our October and November, as Zif, in
which it was begun, answers to a part of April and May.

The dedication did not take place till the following year, the twelfth
of Solomon, because then, according to Archbishop Usher, the jubilee
happened.

So was he seven years in building it - Properly seven years and six
months; but the Scripture generally expresses things in round numbers.

Diana's temple at Ephesus was one of the seven wonders of the world. It
is said that almost all Asia was employed in the building of it for
about two hundred years; but it was certainly more extensive than the
temple at Jerusalem, for it may be justly questioned, notwithstanding
the profusion of gold, silver, precious stones, etc., employed in the
temple of Solomon, whether it cost any thing like the money expended on
the temple of Diana.

Pliny informs us, Hist. Nat., lib. xxxvi., cap. 12, that, in order to
build one of the pyramids in Egypt, no less than three hundred and sixty
thousand men were employed for the space of twenty years. But neither
was the temple any such work as this. We may also observe that the
temple was never intended to hold a vast concourse of people; it was
only for the service of the Lord, and the priests were those alone who
were employed in it. The courts, chambers, and other apartments, were
far more extensive than the temple itself; it was never designed to be a
place to worship in, but a place to worship at. There God was known to
have a peculiar residence, and before him the tribes came, and the
priests were a sort of mediators between him and the people. In short,
the temple was to the Jews in the promised land what the tabernacle was
to the Hebrews in the wilderness; the place where God's honor dwelt, and
whither the people flocked to pay their adoration.

"Solomon laid the foundation of the temple in the year of the world
2992, before Christ 1008, before the vulgar era, 1012; and it was
finished in the year of the world 3000, and dedicated in 3001, before
Christ 999, before the vulgar era 1003; [Kg1
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#001) etc.; [Ch2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#001); [Ch2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001); [Ch2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#001) etc. The place that was pitched on
for erecting this magnificent structure was on the side of Mount Sion
called Moriah. Its entrance or frontispiece stood towards the east, and
the most holy or most retired part was towards the west. The author of
the first book of Kings, and of the second of Chronicles has chiefly
made it his business to describe the temple properly so called, that is
the sanctuary, the sanctum, and the apartments belonging to them, as
also the vessels, the implements, and the ornaments of the temple,
without giving any description scarcely of the courts and open areas,
which, however, made a principal part of the grandeur of this august
edifice.

"But Ezekiel has supplied this defect by the exact plan he has
delineated of these necessary parts. Indeed it must be owned that the
temple as described by Ezekiel was never restored after the captivity of
Babylon, according to the model and the mensuration that this prophet
has given of it. But as the measures he sets down for the sanctum and
the sanctuary are, within a small matter, the same as those of the
temple of Solomon; and as this prophet, who was himself a priest, had
seen the first temple; it is to be supposed that the description he
gives us of the temple of Jerusalem is the same as that of the temple of
Solomon.

"The ground-plot upon which the temple was built was a square of six
hundred cubits, or twenty-five thousand royal feet; [Eze
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001) etc. This space was encompassed
with a wall of the height of six cubits, and of the same breadth. Beyond
this wall was the court of the Gentiles, being fifty cubits wide. After
this was seen a great wall, which encompassed the whole court of the
children of Israel. This wall was a square of five hundred cubits. The
court of Israel was a hundred cubits square, and was encompassed all
round with magnificent galleries supported by two or three rows of
pillars. It had four gates or entrances; one to the east, another to the
west, a third to the north, and the fourth to the south. They were all
of the same form and largeness, and each had an ascent of seven steps.
The court was paved with marble of divers colors, and had no covering;
but the people in case of need could retire under the galleries that
were all round about. These apartments were to lodge the priests in, and
to lay up such things as were necessary for the use of the temple. There
were but three ways to come in, to the east, to the north, and to the
south, and they went to it by an ascent of eight steps. Before, and over
against the gate of the court of the priests, in the court of Israel,
was erected a throne for the king, being a magnificent alcove, where the
king seated himself when he came into the temple. Within the court of
the priests, and over against the same eastern gate, was the altar of
burnt-offerings, of twelve cubits square, according to [Eze
43:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#016), or of ten cubits high and
twenty broad, according to [Ch2 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#001).
They went up to it by stairs on the eastern side.

"Beyond this, and to the west of the altar of burnt-offerings was the
temple, properly so called, that is to say, the sanctuary, the sanctum,
and the porch of entrance. The porch was twenty cubits wide and six
cubits deep. Its gate was fourteen cubits wide. The sanctum was forty
cubits wide and twenty deep. There stood the golden candlestick, the
table of shew-bread, and the golden altar, upon which the incense was
offered. The sanctuary was a square of twenty cubits. There was nothing
in the sanctuary but the ark of the covenant, which included the tables
of the law. The high priest entered here but once a year, and none but
himself was allowed to enter. Solomon had embellished the inside of this
holy place with palm trees in relief, and cherubim of wood covered with
plates of gold, and in general the whole sanctuary was adorned, and as
it were overlaid, with plates of gold.

"Round the sanctum and sanctuary were three stories of chambers, to the
number of thirty-three. Ezekiel makes them but four cubits wide; but the
first book of Kings, [Kg1 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#006), allows
five cubits to the first story, six to the second, and seven to the
third.

"Since the consecration or dedication of the temple by Solomon in the
year of the world 3001, this edifice has suffered many revolutions,
which it is proper to take notice of here.

"In the year of the world 3033, before Christ 967, before the vulgar era
971, Shishak, king of Egypt, having declared war with Rehoboam, king of
Judah, took Jerusalem, and carried away the treasures of the temple;
[Kg1 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#025), [Kg1
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#026); [Ch2
12:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001).

"In 3146, Jehoash, king of Judah, got silver together to go upon the
repairs of the temple; they began to work upon it in earnest in 3148,
before Christ 852, before the vulgar era 856; [Kg2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#004), [Kg2
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#005), and [Ch2
24:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#007), etc.

"Ahaz king of Judah having called to his assistance Tiglath-pileser king
of Assyria, against the kings of Israel and Damascus, who were at war
with him, robbed the temple of the Lord of its riches to give away to
this strange king, [Ch2 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#021), [Ch2
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#022), etc., in the year of the world
3264, before Christ 736, before the vulgar era 740, and not contented
with this, he profaned this holy place by setting up there an altar like
one he had seen at Damascus, and taking away the brazen altar that
Solomon had made; [Kg2 16:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#010), etc.
He also took away the brazen sea from off the brazen oxen that supported
it, and the brazen basons from their pedestals, and the king's throne or
oratory, which was of brass. These he took away to prevent their being
carried away by the king of Assyria. Nor did he stop here, but carried
his wickedness so far as to sacrifice to strange gods, and to erect
profane altars in all the corners of the streets of Jerusalem; [Ch2
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#024), [Ch2
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#025). He pillaged the temple of the
Lord, broke the sacred vessels, and, lastly, shut up the house of God.
This happened in the year of the world 3264, before Christ 736, before
the vulgar era 740, to his death, which happened in 3278, before Christ
722, before the vulgar era 726.

"Hezekiah, the son and successor of Ahaz, opened again and repaired the
gates of the temple which his father had shut up and robbed of their
ornaments; [Ch2 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003), [Ch2
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#004), etc., in the year of the world
3278, before Christ 722, before the vulgar era 726. He restored the
worship of the Lord and the sacrifices, and made new sacred vessels in
the place of those that Ahaz had destroyed. But in the fourteenth year
of his reign, [Kg2 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#015), [Kg2
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#016), in the year of the world 3291,
before Christ 709, before the vulgar era 713, Sennacherib, king of
Assyria, coming with an army into the land of Judah, Hezekiah was forced
to take all the riches of the temple, and even the plates of gold that
he himself had put upon the gates of the temple, and give them to the
king of Assyria. But when Sennacherib was gone back into his own
country, there is no doubt that Hezekiah restored all these things to
their first condition.

"Manasseh, son and successor of Hezekiah, profaned the temple of the
Lord, by setting up altars to all the host of heaven, even in the courts
of the house of the Lord; [Kg2 21:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#004);
[Ch2 33:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#005); in the year of the world
3306, and the following years. He set up idols there, and worshipped
them. God delivered him into the hands of the king of Babylon, who
loaded him with chains, and carried him away beyond the Euphrates; [Ch2
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#011), [Ch2
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#012), etc.; in the year of the world
3328, before Christ 672, before the vulgar era 676. There he
acknowledged and repented of his sins; and being sent back to his own
dominions, he redressed the profanations he had made of the temple of
the Lord, by taking away the idols, destroying the profane altars, and
restoring the altar of burnt-offering, upon which he offered his
sacrifices.

"Josiah, king of Judah, labored with all his might in repairing the
edifices of the temple, ([Kg2 22:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#004),
etc.; [Ch2 34:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#008); in the year of the
world 3380, before Christ 620, before the vulgar era 624), which had
been either neglected or demolished by the kings of Judah, his
predecessors. He also commanded the priests and Levites to replace the
ark of the Lord in the sanctuary, in its appointed place; and ordered
that it should not any more be removed from place to place as it had
been during the reigns of the wicked kings, his predecessors, [Ch2
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#003).

"Nebuchadnezzar took away a part of the sacred vessels of the temple of
the Lord, and placed them in the temple of his god at Babylon, under the
reign of Jehoiakim, king of Judah; [Ch2
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006), [Ch2
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#007), in the year of the world 3398,
before Christ 602, before the vulgar era 606. He also carried away
others under the reign of Jehoiachin, [Ch2
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#010); in the year of the world 3405,
before Christ 595, before the vulgar era 599. Lastly, he took the city
of Jerusalem, and entirely destroyed the temple, in the eleventh year of
Zedekiah, in the year of the world 3416, before Christ 584, before the
vulgar era 588; [Kg2 25:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001), etc.;
[Ch2 36:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#018), [Ch2
36:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#019).

"The temple continued buried in its ruins for the space of fifty-two
years, till the first year of Cyrus at Babylon, in the year of the world
3468, before Christ 532, before the vulgar era 536. Then Cyrus gave
permission to the Jews to return to Jerusalem, and there to rebuild the
temple of the Lord, [Ezr 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001), etc.
The following year they laid the foundation of the second temple; but
they had hardly been at work upon it one year, when either Cyrus or his
officers, being gained over by the enemies of the Jews, forbade them to
go on with their work; [Ezr 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005); in
the year of the world 3470, before Christ 530, before the vulgar era
534. After the death of Cyrus and Cambyses, they were again forbidden by
the magian, who reigned after Cambyses, and whom the Scripture calls by
the name of Artaxerxes; [Ezr 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007), [Ezr
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#017), [Ezr
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#018), etc.; in the year of the world
3483, before Christ 517, before the vulgar era 521. Lastly, these
prohibitions being superseded, under the reign of Darius, son of
Hystaspes, ([Ezr 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001); [Ezr
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014); [Hag
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001), etc.; in the year of the world
3485, before Christ 515, before the vulgar era 519), the temple was
finished and dedicated four years after, in the year of the world 3489,
before Christ 511, before the vulgar era 515, twenty years after the
return from the captivity.

"This temple was profaned by order of Antiochus Epiphanes in the year of
the world 3837. The ordinary sacrifices were discontinued therein, and
the idol of Jupiter Olympus was set up upon the altar. It continued in
this condition for three years; then Judas Maccabeus purified it, and
restored the sacrifice and the worship of the Lord, 1 Maccabees 4:36; in
the year of the world 8840, before Christ 160, before the vulgar era
164.

"Herod the Great undertook to rebuild the whole temple of Jerusalem
anew, in the eighteenth year of his reign, and in the year of the world
3986; Joseph., Antiq., lib. xv., cap. 14. He began to lay the foundation
of it in the year of the world 3987, forty-six years before the first
passover of Jesus Christ, as the Jews observe to him by saying, Forty
and six years was this temple in building, and wilt thou rear it up in
three days? [Joh 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#020). This is not
saying that Herod had employed six and forty years in building it; for
Josephus assures us that he finished it in nine years and a half;
Joseph., Antiq., lib. xv., cap. 14. But, after the time of this prince,
they all continued to make some new addition to it; and the same
Josephus tells us that they went on working upon it, even to the
beginning of the Jewish war; Joseph., Antiq., lib. xx., cap. 8.

"This temple, built by Herod, did not subsist more than seventy-seven
years, being destroyed in the year of the world 4073, of Christ 73, of
the vulgar era 69. It was begun by Herod in 3987, finished in 3996,
burnt and destroyed by the Romans in 4073.

"This temple of Herod was very different from that of Solomon, and from
that which was rebuilt by Zerubbabel after the captivity. This is the
description that Josephus has left us of it, who himself had seen it: -
"The temple, properly so called, was built sixty cubits high, and as
many broad; but there were two sides of front, like two arms or
shoulderings, which advanced twenty cubits on each side, which gave in
the whole front a hundred cubits wide, as well as in height. The stones
made use of in this building were white and hard, twenty-five cubits
long, eight in height, and twelve in width; Joseph., de Bell., lib. vi.,
p. 917.

"The front of this magnificent building resembled that of a royal
palace. The two extremes of each face were lower than the middle, which
middle was so exalted that those who were over against the temple, or
that approached towards it at a distance, might see it, though they were
many furlongs from it. The gates were almost of the same height as the
temple; and on the top of the gates were veils or tapestry of several
colors, embellished with purple flowers. On the two sides of the doors
were two pillars, the cornices of which were adorned with the branches
of a golden vine, which hung down with their grapes and clusters, and
were so well imitated, that art did not at all yield to nature. Herod
made very large and very high galleries about the temple, which were
suitable to the magnificence of the rest of the building, and exceeded
in beauty and sumptuousness all of the kind that had been seen before.

"The temple was built upon a very irregular mountain, and at first there
was hardly place enough on the top of it for the site of the temple and
altar. The rest of it was steep and sloping: Joseph., de Bell, lib. vi.,
p. 915, εκφιδ.; Antiq., lib. xv., c. 14. But when King Solomon built it,
he raised a wall towards the east, to support the earth on that side;
and after this side was filled up, he then built one of the porticoes or
galleries. At that time this face only was cased with stone, but in
succeeding times, the people endeavoring to enlarge this space, and the
top of the mountain being much extended, they broke down the wall which
was on the north side, and enclosed another space as large as that which
the whole circumference of the temple contained at first. So that at
last, against all hope and expectation, this work was carried so far
that the whole mountain was surrounded by a treble wall. But, for the
completing of this great work whole ages were no more than sufficient;
and all the sacred treasures were applied to this use, that the devotion
of the people had brought to the temple from all the provinces of the
world. In some places these walls were above three hundred cubits high,
and the stones used in these walls were some forty cubits long. They
were fastened together by iron cramps and lead, to be able to resist the
injuries of time. The platform on which the temple was built was a
furlong square, or one hundred and twenty-five paces." Thus far Calmet
and Josephus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 7](kg1007)

</div>
