<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2016)  [Next](kg2018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 17:0</span></span>

Hoshea's wicked reign, [Kg2 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001), [Kg2
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#002). Shalmaneser comes up against
him, makes him tributary, and then casts him into prison, [Kg2
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#003), [Kg2
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#004). He besieges Samaria three years;
and at last takes it, and carries Israel captive into Assyria, and
places them in different cities of the Assyrians and Medes, [Kg2
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#005), [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006). The reason why Israel was thus
afflicted; their idolatry, obstinacy, divination, etc., [Kg2
17:7-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#007). Judah copies the misconduct
of Israel, [Kg2 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#019). The Lord
rejects all the seed of Israel, [Kg2
17:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#020). The king of Assyria brings
different nations and places them in Samaria, and the cities from which
the Israelites had been led away into captivity, [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024). Many of these strange people
are destroyed by lions, [Kg2 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#025).
The king of Assyria sends back some of the Israelitish priests to teach
these nations the worship of Jehovah; which worship they incorporate
with their own idolatry, [Kg2
17:26-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#026). The state of the Israelites,
and strange nations in the land of Israel, [Kg2
17:34-41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#034).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 17:3</span></span>

Shalmaneser - This was the son and successor of Tiglath-pileser. He is
called Shalman by Hosea, [Hos 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#014),
and Enemessar, in the book of Tobit, 1:2.

Gave him presents - Became tributary to him.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 17:4</span></span>

Found conspiracy to Hoshea - He had endeavored to shake off the Assyrian
yoke, by entering into a treaty with So, King of Egypt; and having done
so, he ceased to send the annual tribute to Assyria.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 17:5</span></span>

Besieged it three years - It must have been well fortified, well
provisioned, and well defended, to have held out so long.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 17:6</span></span>

Took Samaria - According to the prophets Hosea, [Hos
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#016), and Micah, [Mic
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#006). He exercised great cruelties on
this miserable city, ripping up the women with child, dashing young
children against the stones, etc. etc.

Carried Israel away into Assyria - What were the places to which the
unfortunate Israelites were carried, or where their successors are now
situated, have given rise to innumerable conjectures, dissertations,
discourses, etc. Some maintain that they are found on the coast of
Guinea; others, in America; the Indian tribes being the descendants of
those carried away by the Assyrians. In vol. i. of the Supplement to Sir
Wm. Jones's works, we find a translation of the History of the Afghans,
by Mr. H. Vansittart; from which it appears that they derive their own
descent from the Jews. On this history Sir Wm. Jones writes the
following note: -

"This account of the Afghans may lead to a very interesting discovery.
We learn from Esdras, that the ten tribes, after a wandering journey,
came to a country called Arsaret, where we may suppose they settled. Now
the Afghans are said by the best Persian historians to be descended from
the Jews; they have traditions among themselves of such a descent, and
it is even asserted that their families are distinguished by the names
of Jewish tribes; although, since their conversion to the Islam, they
studiously conceal their origin. The Pushtoo, of which I have seen a
dictionary, has a manifest resemblance to the Chaldaic; and a
considerable district under their dominion is called Hazarek or Hazaret,
which might easily have been changed into the word used by Esdras. I
strongly recommend an inquiry into the literature and history of the
Afghans."

Every thing considered, I think it by far the most probable that the
Afghans are the descendants of the Jews, who were led away captives by
the Assyrian kings.

Thus ended the kingdom of Israel, after it had lasted two hundred and
fifty-four years, from the death of Solomon and the schism of Jeroboam,
till the taking of Samaria by Shalmaneser, in the ninth year of Hoshea;
after which the remains of the ten tribes were carried away beyond the
river Euphrates.

The rest of this chapter is spent in vindicating the Divine providence
and justice; showing the reason why God permitted such a desolation to
fall on a people who had been so long his peculiar children.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 17:9</span></span>

Did secretly those things - There was much hidden iniquity and private
idolatry among them, as well as public and notorious crimes.

From the tower of the watchmen to the fenced city - That is, the
idolatry was universal; every place was made a place for some idolatrous
rite or act of worship; from the largest city to the smallest village,
and from the public watchtower to the shepherd's cot.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 17:10</span></span>

Images and groves - Images of different idols, and places for the
abominable rites of Ashtaroth or Venus.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 17:13</span></span>

Yet the Lord testified against Israel - What rendered their conduct the
more inexcusable was, that the Lord had preserved among them a
succession of prophets, who testified against their conduct, and
preached repentance to them, and the readiness of God to forgive,
provided they would return unto him, and give up their idolatries.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 17:17</span></span>

Sold themselves to do evil - Abandoned themselves to the will of the
devil, to work all iniquity with greediness.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 17:18</span></span>

Removed them out of his sight - Banished them from the promised land,
from the temple, and from every ordinance of righteousness, as wholly
unworthy of any kind of good.

None left but the tribe of Judah only - Under this name all those of
Benjamin and Levi, and the Israelites, who abandoned their idolatries
and joined with Judah, are comprised. It was the ten tribes that were
carried away by the Assyrians.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 17:24</span></span>

The king of Assyria brought men from Babylon - He removed one people
entirely, and substituted others in their place; and this he did to cut
off all occasion for mutiny or insurrection; for the people being
removed from their own land, had no object worthy of attention to
contend for, and no patrimony in the land of their captivity to induce
them to hazard any opposition to their oppressors.

By men from Babylon, we may understand some cities of Babylonia then
under the Assyrian empire; for at this time Babylon had a king of its
own; but some parts of what was called Babylonia might have been still
under the Assyrian government.

From Cuthah - This is supposed to be the same as Cush, the Chaldeans and
Syrians changing ש shin into ת tau; thus they make כוש Cush into כות
Cuth; and אשור Ashshur, Assyria, into אתור Attur. From these came the
Scythae; and from these the Samaritans were called Cuthaeans, and their
language Cuthite. The original language of this people, or at least the
language they spoke after their settlement in Israel, is contained in
the Samaritan version of the Pentateuch, printed under the
Hebraeo-Samaritan in vol. i. of the London Polyglot. This Cuthah was
probably the country in the land of Shinar, first inhabited by Cush.

From Ava - The Avim were an ancient people, expelled by the Caphtorim
from Hazerim, [Deu 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#023).

From Hamath - This was Hemath or Emath of Syria, frequently mentioned in
the sacred writings.

From Sepharvaim - There was a city called Syphera, near the Euphrates;
others think the Saspires, a people situated between the Colchians and
the Medes, are meant. There is much uncertainty relative to these
places: all that we know is, that the Assyrians carried away the
Israelites into Assyria, and placed them in cities and districts called
Halah and Habor by the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes,
[Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006); and it is very likely that
they brought some of the inhabitants of those places into the cities of
Israel.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 17:25</span></span>

The Lord sent lions among them - The land being deprived of its
inhabitants, wild beasts would necessarily increase, even without any
supernatural intervention; and this the superstitious new comers
supposed to be a plague sent upon them, because they did not know how to
worship him who was the God of the land; for they thought, like other
heathens that every district had its own tutelary deity. Yet it is
likely that God did send lions as a scourge on this bad people.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 17:26</span></span>

The manner of the God of the land - משפט mishpat, the judgment; the way
in which the God of the land is to be worshipped.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg2 17:27</span></span>

Carry thither one of the priests - Imperfect as this teaching was, it,
in the end, overthrew the idolatry of these people, so that soon after
the Babylonish captivity they were found to be as free from idolatry as
the Jews themselves, and continue so to the present day. But they are
now nearly annihilated: the small remains of them is found at Naplouse
and Jaffa; they are about thirty families; and men, women, and children,
amount to about two hundred persons! They have a synagogue, which they
regularly attend every Sabbath; and they go thither clothed in white
robes. The reader may find much curious information relative to this
people, in a Memoire sur L'Etat actuel des Samaritains, by Baron
Sylvestre de Sacy, 8vo., Paris, 1812.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg2 17:29</span></span>

Every nation made gods of their own - That is, they made gods after the
fashion of those which they had worshipped in their own country.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg2 17:30</span></span>

The men of Babylon made Succoth-benoth - This, literally, signifies the
tabernacles of the daughters or young women, and most evidently refers
to those public prostitutions of young virgins at the temple of Melitta
or Venus among the Babylonians. See at the end of the chapter, [Kg2
17:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#041) (note). From benoth it is
probable that the word Venus came, the B being changed into V, as is
frequently the case, and the th into s, benoth, Venos. The rabbins say
that her emblem was a hen with her chickens; see Jarchi on the place.

The men of Cuth made Nergal - This is supposed to have been the solar
orb or light. According to the rabbins, his emblem was a cock. See at
the end of the chapter, [Kg2 17:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#041)
(note).

The men of Hamath made Ashima - Perhaps the fire; from אשם asham, to
make atonement or to purify. Jarchi says this was in the form of a goat.
See below on [Kg2 17:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#041) (note).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg2 17:31</span></span>

The Avites made Nibhaz - This was supposed to be the same as the Anubis
of the Egyptians; and was in form partly of a dog, and partly of a man.
A very ancient image of this kind now lies before me: it is cut out of
stone, about seven inches high; has the body, legs, and arms, of a man;
the head and feet of a dog; the thighs and legs covered with scales; the
head crowned with a tiara; the arms crossed upon the breasts, with the
fingers clenched. The figure stands upright, and the belly is very
protuberant. See below.

And Tartak - This is supposed by some to be another name of the same
idol; Jarchi says it was in the shape of an ass. Some think these were
the representations of the sun in his chariot; Nibhaz representing the
solar orb, and Tartak the chariot. See below.

Adrammelech - From אדר adar, glorious, and מלך melech, king. Probably
the sun.

Anammelech - From anah, to return, and מלך melech, king. Probably, the
Moloch of the Ammonites. Jarchi says, the first was in the form of a
mule, the second in the form of a horse; this was probably the moon.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg2 17:32</span></span>

Of the lowest of them priests - One priest was not enough for this
motley population; and, as the priesthood was probably neither
respectable nor lucrative, it was only the lowest of the people who
would enter into the employment.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg2 17:33</span></span>

They feared the Lord, and served their own gods - They did not
relinquish their own idolatry but incorporated the worship of the true
God with that of their idols. They were afraid of Jehovah, who had sent
lions among them; and therefore they offered him a sort of worship that
he might not thus afflict them: but they served other gods, devoted
themselves affectionately to them, because their worship was such as
gratified their grossest passions, and most sinful propensities.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg2 17:36</span></span>

But the Lord - Jehovah, the supreme, self-existent, and eternal Being;
author of all being and life. This was to be the sole object of their
adoration.

Who brought you up - This was a strong reason why they should adore Him
only: he had saved them from the hands of their enemies, and he did it
in such a way as to show his power to be irresistible; in such a Being
they might safely confide.

Him shall ye fear - Here is the manner in which he is to be worshipped.
Him ye shall reverence as your Lawgiver and Judge; ye shall respect and
keep all his commandments; doing what he has enjoined, and avoiding what
he has forbidden.

Him shall ye worship - Before Him ye shall bow the knee; living in the
spirit of obedience, and performing every religious act in the deepest
humility.

And to him shall ye do sacrifice - Ye shall consider that, as ye have
sinned, so ye deserve death; ye shall therefore bring your living
victims to the altar of the Lord, and let their life's blood be poured
out there, as an atonement for your souls. We see in this verse three
important points:

1\. The object of their worship.

2\. The reasons of that worship; and,

3\. The spirit and manner in which it was to be performed: viz.,

1\. In fear,

2\. Humility; and,

3\. By sacrifice.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 17:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg2 17:41</span></span>

So do they unto this day - This must have been written before the
Babylonish captivity; because, after that time, none of the Israelites
ever lapsed into idolatry. But this may chiefly refer to the heathenish
people who were sent to dwell among the remains of the ten tribes.

On these nations and the objects of their worship, I present my readers
with the following extracts from Dodd and Parkhurst.

[Kg2 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#030). The men of Babylon made
Succoth-benoth. We have here an account of the idols which were
consecrated by the different nations, transplanted by the king of
Assyria to Samaria. It is difficult, however, and has afforded a large
field for conjecture, to give any satisfactory account concerning them.
The reader will find in Selden, Vossius, and Jurieu, much upon the
subject. Succoth-benoth may be literally translated, The Tabernacles of
the Daughters, or Young Women; or if Benoth be taken as the name of a
female idol, from בנה to build up, procreate children, then the words
will express the tabernacles sacred to the productive powers feminine.
And, agreeably to this latter exposition, the rabbins say that the
emblem was a hen and chickens. But however this may be, there is no room
to doubt that these succoth were tabernacles wherein young women exposed
themselves to prostitution in honor of the Babylonish goddess Melitta.
Herodotus, (lib. i., c. 199), gives us a particular account of this
detestable service. "Every young woman," says he, "of the country of
Babylon must once in her life sit at the temple of Venus, \[whom he
afterwards tells us the Assyrians called Melitta\], and prostitute
herself to some stranger. Those who are rich, and so disdain to mingle
with the crowd, present themselves before the temple in covered
chariots, attended by a great retinue. But the generality of the women
sit near the temple, having crowns upon their heads, and holding a cord,
some continually coming, others going. \[See Baruch 6:43\]. The cords
are held by them in such a manner as to afford a free passage among the
women, that the strangers may choose whom they like. A woman who has
once seated herself in this place must not return home till some
stranger has cast money into her lap, and led her from the temple, and
defiled her. The stranger who throws the money must say, 'I invoke the
goddess Melitta for thee.' The money, however small a sum it may be,
must not be refused, because it is appointed to sacred uses. \[See [Deu
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018)\]. The woman must follow the
first man that offers, and not reject him; and after prostitution,
having now duly honored the goddess, she is dismissed to her own house.
In Cyprus," adds the historian, "they have the same custom." This
abomination, implied by Succoth-benoth, the men of Babylon brought with
them into the country of Samaria; and both the name of the idol Melitta,
and the execrable service performed to her honor, show that by Melitta
was originally intended the procreative or productive power of nature,
the Venus of the Greeks and Romans. See the beginning of Lucretius's
first book De Rerum Natura. Mr. Selden imagines that some traces of the
Succoth-benoth may be found in Sicca Veneria, the name of a city of
Numidia, not far from the borders of Africa Propria. The name itself
bears a near allusion to the obscene custom above taken notice of, and
seems to have been transported from Phoenicia: nor can this well be
disputed, when we consider that here was a temple where women were
obliged to purchase their marriage-money by the prostitution of their
bodies. See Univ. Hist., vol. xvii., p. 295, and Parkhurst's Lexicon on
the word סך.

The men of Cuth made Nergal. - Cuth was a province of Assyria, which,
according to some, lies upon the Araxis: but others rather think it to
be the same with Cush, which is said by Moses to be encompassed with the
river Gihon; and must, therefore, be the same with the country which the
Greeks call Susiana, and which to this day is called by the inhabitants
Chusesta. Their idol, Nergal, seems to have been the sun, as the causer
of the diurnal and annual revolutions of the planets; for it is
naturally derived from נר ner, light, and by גל gal, to revolve. The
rabbins say that the idol was represented in the shape of a cock; and
probably they tell us the truth, for this seems a very proper emblem.
Among the latter heathens we find the cock was sacred to Apollo or the
sun, (see Pierii Hieroglyph., p. 223), "because," says Heliodorus,
speaking of the time when cocks crow, "by a natural sensation of the
sun's revolution to us, they are incited to salute the god." Aethiop.
lib. i. And perhaps under this name, Nergal, they meant to worship the
sun, not only for the diurnal return of its light upon the earth, but
also for its annual return or revolution. We may observe that the
emblem, a cock, is affected by the latter as well as by the former, and
is frequently crowing both day and night, when the days begin to
lengthen. See Calmet's Dictionary under the word, and Parkhurst's
Lexicon.

The men of Hamath made Ashima. - There are several cities and countries
which go under the name of Hamath; but what we take to be here meant is
that province of Syria which lies upon the Orontes, wherein there was a
city of the same name; which when Shalmaneser had taken, he removed the
inhabitants from thence into Samaria. Their idol Ashima signifies the
atoner or expiator, from אשם asham. The word is in a Chaldee form, and
seems to be the same as אשמת שמרון ashmath Shomeron, the sin of Samaria,
mentioned [Amo 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#014), where ashmath is
rendered by the Lxx. propitiation. It is known to every one who has the
least acquaintance with the mythology of the heathen, how strongly and
universally they retained the tradition of an atonement or expiation for
sin, although they expected it from a false object and wrong means. We
find it expressed in very clear terms among the Romans even so late as
the time of Horace, lib. i., ode 2: -

Cui dabit partes scelus expiandi Jupiter?

And whom, to expiate the horrid guilt, Will Jove appoint?

The answer is, "Apollo," the god of light. Some think that, as Asuman or
Suman, asman, in the Persian language, signifies heaven, the Syrians
might from hence derive the name of this god; who, they suppose, was
represented by a large stone pillar terminating in a conic or
pyramidical figure, whereby they denoted fire. See Parkhurst on the word
אשם asham, Calmet's Dictionary, and Tennison on Idolatry.

[Kg2 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#031). The Avites made Nibhaz and
Tartak. - It is uncertain who these Avites were. The most probable
opinion seems to be that which Grotius has suggested by observing that
there are a people in Bactriana, mentioned by Ptolemy, under the name of
Avidia, who possibly might be those transported at this time into
Palestine by Shalmaneser. Nibhaz, according to the rabbins, had the
shape of a dog, much like the Anubis of the Egyptians. In Pierius's
Hieroglyphics, p. 53, is the figure of a cunocephalus, a kind of ape,
with a head like a dog, standing upon his hinder feet, and looking
earnestly at the moon. Pierius there teaches us that the cunocephalus
was an animal eminently sacred amongst the Egyptians, hieroglyphical of
the moon, and kept in their temples to inform them of the moon's
conjunction with the sun, at which time this animal is strangely
affected, being deprived of sight, refusing food, and lying sick on the
ground; but on the moon's appearance seeming to return thanks, and
congratulate the return of light both to himself and her. See Johnston's
Nat. Hist. de Quadruped., p. 100. This being observed, the נבחז nibchaz,
(which may well be derived from נבח nabach, to bark, and חזה chazah, to
see), gives us reason to conclude that this idol was in the shape of a
cunocephalus, or a dog looking, barking, or howling at the moon. It is
obvious to common observation that dogs in general have this property;
and an idol of the form just mentioned seems to have been originally
designed to represent the power or influence of the moon on all
sublunary bodies, with which the cunocephaluses and dogs are so
eminently affected. So, as we have observed upon Nergal, the influence
of the returning solar light was represented by a cock; and the
generative power of the heavens by Dagon, a fishy idol. See Parkhurst on
נבחז who is of opinion that Tartak תרתק is compounded of תר tar, to
turn, go round, and רתק rathak, to chain, tether; and plainly denotes
the heavens, considered as confining the planets in their respective
orbits, as if they were tethered. The Jews have a tradition that the
emblem of this idol was an ass; which, considering the propriety of that
animal when tethered to represent this idol, is not improbable; and from
this idolatrous worship of the Samaritans, joined perhaps with some
confused account of the cherubim, seems to have sprung that stupid story
by the heathens, that the Jews had an ass's head in their holy of
holies, to which they paid religious worship. See Bochart, vol. ii., p.
221. Jurieu is of opinion that as the word Nibhaz, both in the Hebrew
and Chaldee, with a small variation, denotes quick, swift, rapid; and
tartak, in the same languages, signifies a chariot, these two idols may
both together denominate the sun mounted on his car, as the fictions of
the poets and the notions of the mythologists were wont to represent
that luminary.

The Sepharvites burned their children - to Adrammelech and Anammelech. -
As these Sepharvites probably came from the cities of the Medes, whither
the Israelites were carried captive, and as Herodotus tells us that
between Colchis and Media are found a people called Saspires, in all
likelihood they were the same with those here named Sepharvites. Moloch,
Milcom, and Melech, in the language of different nations, all signify a
king, and imply the sun, which was called the king of heaven; and
consequently the addition of אדר adar, which signifies powerful,
illustrious, to the one, and of ענה anah, which implies to return, to
answer, to the other, means no more than the mighty or the oracular
Moloch. And as the children were offered to him, it appears that he was
the same with the Moloch of the Ammonites. See Univ. Hist. and Calmet.
Mr. Locke is also of opinion that these two names were expressive of one
and the same deity. What they were, or in what form, and how worshipped,
we have not light from antiquity to determine.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 18](kg2018)

</div>
