<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2006)  [Next](kg2008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 7:0</span></span>

Elisha foretells abundant relief to the besieged inhabitants of Samaria,
[Kg2 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#001). One of the lords questions
the possibility of it; and is assured that he shall see it on the
morrow, but not taste of it, [Kg2 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#002).
Four lepers, perishing with hunger, go to the camp of the Syrians to
seek relief and find it totally deserted, [Kg2
7:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#003). How the Syrians were alarmed,
and fled, [Kg2 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#006), [Kg2
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#007). The lepers begin to take the
spoil, but at last resolve to carry the good news to the city, [Kg2
7:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#008). The king, suspecting some
treachery, sends some horsemen to scour the country, and see whether the
Syrians are not somewhere concealed; they return, and confirm the report
that the Syrians are totally fled, [Kg2
7:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#012). The people go out and spoil
the camp, in consequence of which provisions become as plentiful as
Elisha had foretold, [Kg2 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#016). The
unbelieving lord, having the charge of the gate committed to him, is
trodden to death by the crowd, [Kg2
7:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#017).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 7:1</span></span>

To-morrow about this time - This was in reply to the desponding language
of the king, and to vindicate himself from the charge of being author of
this calamity. See the end of the preceding chapter, [Kg2
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#033) (note).

A measure of fine flour - for a shekel - A seah of fine flour: the seah
was about two gallons and a half; the shekel, two shillings and
four-pence at the lowest computation. A wide difference between this and
the price of the ass's head mentioned above.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 7:2</span></span>

Then a lord - שליש shalish. This word, as a name of office, occurs
often, and seems to point out one of the highest offices in the state.
So unlikely was this prediction to be fulfilled, that he thought God
must pour out wheat and barley from heaven before it could have a
literal accomplishment.

But shalt not eat thereof - This was a mere prediction of his death, but
not as a judgment for his unbelief; any person in his circumstances
might have spoken as he did. He stated in effect that nothing but a
miracle could procure the plenty predicted, and by a miracle alone was
it done; and any person in his place might have been trodden to death by
the crowd in the gate of Samaria.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 7:3</span></span>

There were four leprous men - The Gemara in Sota, R. Sol. Jarchi, and
others, say that these four lepers were Gehazi and his three sons.

At the entering in of the gate - They were not permitted to mingle in
civil society.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 7:5</span></span>

The uttermost part of the camp - Where the Syrian advanced guards should
have been.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 7:6</span></span>

The Lord had made the - Syrians to hear a noise - This threw them into
confusion; they imagined that they were about to be attacked by powerful
auxiliaries, which the king of Israel had hired against them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 7:12</span></span>

The king arose in the night - This king had made a noble defense; he
seems to have shared in all the sufferings of the besieged, and to have
been ever at his post. Even in vile Ahab there were some good things!

They know that we be hungry - This was a very natural conclusion; the
Syrians by the closest blockade could not induce them to give up the
city, but knowing that they were in a starving condition, they might
make use of such a stratagem as that imagined by the king, in order to
get possession of the city.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 7:13</span></span>

And one of his servants answered - This is a very difficult verse, and
the great variety of explanations given of it cast but little light on
the subject. I am inclined to believe, with Dr. Kennicott, that there is
an interpolation here which puzzles, if not destroys, the sense.
"Several instances," says he, "have been given of words improperly
repeated by Jewish transcribers, who have been careless enough to make
such mistakes, and yet cautious not to alter or erase, for fear of
discovery. This verse furnishes another instance in a careless
repetition of seven Hebrew words, thus: -

הנשארים אשר נשארו בה הנם ככל ההמון ישראל אשר נשארו בה הנם ככל המון ישראל
אשר תמי

The exact English of this verse is this: And the servant said, Let them
take now five of the remaining horses, which remain in it; behold they
are as all the multitude of Israel, which \[remain in it; behold they
are as all the multitude of Israel which\] are consumed; and let us send
and see.

"Whoever considers that the second set of these seven words is neither
in the Septuagint nor Syriac versions, and that those translators who
suppose these words to be genuine alter them to make them look like
sense, will probably allow them to have been at first an improper
repetition; consequently to be now an interpolation strangely continued
in the Hebrew text." They are wanting in more than forty of Kennicott's
and De Rossi's MSS. In some others they are left without points; in
others they have been written in, and afterwards blotted out; and in
others four, in others five, of the seven words are omitted. De Rossi
concludes thus: Nec verba haec legunt Lxx., Vulg., Syrus simplex, Syrus
Heptaplaris Parisiensis, Targum. They stand on little authority, and the
text should be read, omitting the words enclosed by brackets, as above.

They are consumed - The words אשר תמו asher tamu should be translated,
which are perfect; i.e., fit for service. The rest of the horses were
either dead of the famine, killed for the subsistence of the besieged,
or so weak as not to be able to perform such a journey.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 7:14</span></span>

They took - two chariot horses - They had at first intended to send
five; probably they found on examination that only two were effective.
But if they sent two chariots, each would have two horses, and probably
a single horse for crossing the country.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 7:15</span></span>

All the way was full of garments and vessels - A manifest proof of the
hurry and precipitancy with which they fled.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 7:17</span></span>

And the people trode upon him - This officer being appointed by the king
to have the command of the gate, the people rushing out to get spoil,
and in to carry it to their houses, he was borne down by the multitude
and trodden to death. This also was foreseen by the spirit of prophecy.
The literal and exact fulfillment of such predictions must have acquired
the prophet a great deal of credit in Israel.

Dr. Lightfoot remarks that, between the first and last year of Jehoram
son of Jehoshaphat, there are very many occurrences mentioned which are
not referred nor fixed to their proper year; and, therefore, they must
be calculated in a gross sum, as coming to pass in one of these years.
These are the stories contained in chapters 4, 5, 6, and 7, of this
book; and in [Ch2 21:6-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#006). They may be
calculated thus: In the first year of Jehoram, Elisha, returning out of
Moab into the land of Israel, multiplies the widow's oil; he is lodged
in Shunem, and assures his hostess of a child. The seven years' famine
was then begun, and he gives the Shunammite warning of its continuance.

The second year she bears her child in the land of the Philistines, [Kg2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#002). And Elisha resides among the
disciples of the prophets at Gilgal, heals the poisoned pottage, and
feeds one hundred men with twenty barley loaves and some ears of corn.
That summer he cures Naaman of his leprosy, the only cure of this kind
done till Christ came.

The third year he makes iron to swim, prevents the Syrians' ambushments,
strikes those with blindness who were sent to seize him, and sends them
back to their master.

The fourth year Jehoshaphat dies, and Edom rebels and shakes off the
yoke laid upon them by David: Libnah also rebels.

The fifth year Samaria is besieged by Ben-hadad, the city is most
grievously afflicted; and, after being nearly destroyed by famine, it is
suddenly relieved by a miraculous interference of God, which had been
distinctly foretold by Elisha.

The sixth year the Philistines and Arabians oppress Jehoram, king of
Judah, and take captive his wives and children, leaving only one son
behind.

The seventh year Jehoram falls into a grievous sickness, so that his
bowels fall out, [Ch2 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#019). And in
the same year the seven years' famine ends about the time of harvest;
and at that harvest, the Shunammite's son dies, and is restored to life
by Elisha, though the story of his birth and death is related together;
and yet some years must have passed between them. Not long after this
the Shunammite goes to the king to petition to be restored to her own
land, which she had left in the time of the famine, and had sojourned in
the land of the Philistines.

This year Elisha is at Damascus, Ben-hadad falls sick; Hazael stifles
him with a wet cloth, and reigns in his stead. All these things Dr.
Lightfoot supposes happened between A.M. 3110 and 3117. - See
Lightfoot's Works, vol. i., p. 88. In examining the facts recorded in
these books, we shall always find it difficult, and sometimes
impossible, to ascertain the exact chronology. The difficulty is
increased by a custom common among these annalists, the giving the whole
of a story at once, though several incidents took place at the distance
of some years from the commencement of the story: as they seem unwilling
to have to recur to the same history in the chronological order of its
facts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 8](kg2008)

</div>
