<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2002)  [Next](kg2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 3:0</span></span>

The reign and idolatry of Jehoram, king of Israel, [Kg2
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001). Mesha, king of Moab, rebels
against Israel, [Kg2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004), [Kg2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#005). Jehoram, Jehoshaphat, and the
king of Edom join against the Moabites, and are brought into great
distress for want of water, [Kg2
3:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#006). The three kings go to Elisha
to inquire of the Lord; who promises them water, and a complete victory,
[Kg2 3:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#011). Water comes the next
morning, and fills the trenches which these kings had made in the
valley, [Kg2 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#020). The Moabites arm
against them; and suppose, when they see the sun shining upon the
waters, which look like blood, that the confederate kings have fallen
out, and slain each other; and that they have nothing to do but take the
spool, [Kg2 3:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#021). The Israelites
attack and completely rout then, beat down their cities, and mar their
land, [Kg2 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#024), [Kg2
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#025). The king of Moab, having made an
unsuccessful attack on the king of Edom, takes his eldest son, and of
offers him for a burnt-offering upon the wall; and there is great
indignation against Israel, [Kg2 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#026),
[Kg2 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#027).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 3:2</span></span>

He put away the image of Baal - He abolished his worship; but he
continued that of the calves at Dan and Beth-el.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 3:4</span></span>

Was a sheepmaster - The original is נקד naked, of which the Septuagint
could make nothing, and therefore retained the Hebrew word νωκηδ: but
the Chaldee has מרי גיתי marey githey, "a sheepmaster;" Aquila has
ποιμνιοτροφος; and Symmachus, τρεφων βοσκηματα; all to the same sense.
The original signifies one who marks or brands, probably from the
marking of sheep. He fed many sheep, etc., and had them all marked in a
particular way, in order to ascertain his property.

A hundred thousand lambs - The Chaldee and Arabic have a hundred
thousand fat oxen.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 3:7</span></span>

My people as thy people - We find that Jehoshaphat maintained the same
friendly intercourse with the son, as he did with the father. See [Kg1
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#004).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 3:8</span></span>

Through the wilderness of Edom - Because he expected the king of Edom to
join them, as we find he did; for, being tributary to Judah, he was
obliged to do it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 3:9</span></span>

A compass of seven days' journey - By taking a circuitous route, to go
round the southern part of the Dead Sea, they probably intended to
surprise the Moabites; but it appears their journey was ill planned, as
they at last got into a country in which it was impossible to obtain
water, and they were brought in consequence to the utmost extremity.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 3:10</span></span>

The Lord hath called these three kings together - That is, This is a
Divine judgment; God has judicially blinded us, and permitted us to take
this journey to our destruction.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 3:11</span></span>

Is there not here a prophet of the Lord - The kings of Judah still
acknowledged the true God, and him only.

Poured water on the hands of Elijah - That is, was his constant and
confidential servant.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 3:12</span></span>

The word of the Lord is with him - He has the gift of prophecy.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 3:13</span></span>

Get thee to the prophets of thy father - This was a just, but cutting
reproof.

Nay - The Chaldee adds here, I beseech thee, do not call the sins of
this impiety to remembrance, but ask mercy for us; because the Lord hath
called, etc. The Arabic has, I beseech thee, do not mention of our
transgressions, but use kindness towards us. It is very likely that some
such words were spoken on the occasion; but these are the only versions
which make this addition.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 3:14</span></span>

Were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat - He worshipped
the true God; Jehoram was an idolater.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 3:15</span></span>

Bring me a minstrel - A person who played on the harp. The rabbins, and
many Christians, suppose that Elisha's mind was considerably irritated
and grieved by the bad behavior of the young men at Beth-el, and their
tragical end, and by the presence of the idolatrous king of Israel; and
therefore called for Divine psalmody, that it might calm his spirits,
and render him more susceptible of the prophetic influence. To be able
to discern the voice of God, and the operation of his hand, it is
necessary that the mind be calm, and the passions all in harmony, under
the direction of reason; that reason may be under the influence of the
Divine Spirit.

The hand of the Lord came upon him - The playing of the harper had the
desired effect; his mind was calmed, and the power of God descended upon
him. This effect of music was generally acknowledged in every civilized
nation. Cicero, in his Tusculan Questions, lib. iv., says, that "the
Pythagoreans were accustomed to calm their minds, and soothe their
passions, by singing and playing upon the harp." Pythagoraei mentes suas
a cogitationum intentione cantu fidibusque ad tranquillitatem
traducebant. I have spoken elsewhere of the heathen priests who
endeavored to imitate the true prophets, and were as actually filled
with the devil as the others were with the true God. The former were
thrown into violent agitations and contortions by the influence of the
demons which possessed them, while the latter were in a state of the
utmost serenity and composure.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 3:16</span></span>

Make this valley full of ditches - The word נחל nachal may be translated
brook, as it is by the Vulgate and Septuagint. There probably was a
river here, but it was now dry; and the prophet desires that they would
enlarge the channel, and cut out various canals from it, and reservoirs,
where water might be collected for the refreshment of the army and of
the cattle; and these were to be made so wide that the reflection of the
sun's rays from this water might be the means of confounding and
destroying the Moabites.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 3:17</span></span>

Ye shall not see wind - There shall be no wind to collect vapours, and
there shall be no showers, and yet the whole bed of this river, and all
the new made canals, shall be filled with water.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 3:19</span></span>

Shall fell every good tree - Every tree by which your enemies may serve
themselves for fortifications, etc. But surely fruit trees are not
intended here; for this was positively against the law of God, [Deu
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019), [Deu
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#020) : "When thou shalt besiege a
city - thou shalt not destroy the trees thereof - for the tree of the
field is man's life - only the trees which thou knowest that they be not
trees for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut them down."

Stop all wells of water - In those hot countries this would lead sooner
than any thing else to reduce an enemy.

Mar every good piece of land with stones - Such a multitude of men, each
throwing a stone on a good field as they passed, would completely
destroy it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 3:20</span></span>

When the meat-offering was offered - This was the first of all
offerings, and was generally made at sun-rising.

There came water - This supply was altogether miraculous, for there was
neither wind nor rain, nor any other natural means by which it could be
supplied.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg2 3:22</span></span>

Saw the water on the other side as red as blood - This might have been
an optical deception; I have seen the like sight when there was no
reason to suspect supernatural agency. The Moabites had never seen that
valley full of water, and therefore did not suspect that their eyes
deceived them, but took it for the blood of the confederate hosts, who
they thought might have fallen into confusion in the darkness of night
and destroyed each other, as the Midianites had formerly done, [Jdg
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#022), and the Philistines lately, [Sa1
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#020).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 3:23</span></span>

Therefore, Moab, to the spoil - Thus they came on in a disorderly
manner, and fell an easy prey to their enemies.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 3:25</span></span>

On every good piece of land - On all cultivated ground, and especially
fields that were sown.

Only in Kir-haraseth - This was the royal city of the Moabites, and, as
we learn from Scripture, exceedingly strong; (see [Isa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#007), [Isa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011)); so that it is probable the
confederate armies could not easily reduce it. The slingers, we are
informed, went about the wall, and smote all the men that appeared on
it, while no doubt the besieging army was employed in sapping the
foundations.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 3:26</span></span>

Seven hundred men - These were no doubt the choice of all his troops,
and being afraid of being hemmed up and perhaps taken by his enemies,
whom he found on the eve of gaining possession of the city, he made a
desperate sortie in order to regain the open country; and supposing that
the quarter of the Edomites was weakest, or less carefully guarded, he
endeavored to make his impression there; but they were so warmly
received by the king of Edom that they failed in the attempt, and were
driven back into the city. Hence he was led to that desperate act
mentioned in the following verse.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg2 3:27</span></span>

Took his eldest son - The rabbins account for this horrible sacrifice in
the following way: -

When the king of Moab found himself so harassed, and the royal city on
the point of being taken, he called a council of his servants, and asked
them how it was these Israelites could perform such prodigies, and that
such miracles were wrought for them? His servants answered, that it was
owing to their progenitor Abraham, who, having an only son, was
commanded by Jehovah to offer him in sacrifice. Abraham instantly
obeyed, and offered his only son for a burnt-offering; and the
Israelites being his descendants, through his merits the holy blessed
God wrought such miracles in their behalf. The king of Moab answered, I
also have an only son, and I will go and offer him to my God. Then he
offered him for a burnt-offering upon the wall.

Upon the wall - על החמה al hachamah. Rab. Sol. Jarchi says that the
letter ו vau is wanting in this word, as it should be written חומה
chomah, to signify a wall; but חמה chammah signifies the sun, and this
was the god of the king of Moab: "And he offered his first-born son for
a burnt-offering unto the sun." This is not very solid.

There was great indignation - The Lord was displeased with them for
driving things to such an extremity: or the surrounding nations held
them in abomination on the account; and they were so terrified
themselves at this most horrid sacrifice, that they immediately raised
the siege and departed. In cases of great extremity it was customary in
various heathen nations to offer human sacrifices, or to devote to the
infernal gods the most precious or excellent thing or person they
possessed. This was frequent among the Phoenicians, Romans, and Greeks;
and it was the natural fruit of a religious system which had for the
objects of its worship cruel and merciless divinities. How different the
Christian system! "Wilt thou that we shall bring down fire from heaven
and destroy them? Ye know not what manner of spirits ye are of; the Son
of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 4](kg2004)

</div>
