<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2004)  [Next](kg2006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 5:0</span></span>

The history of Naaman, captain of the host of the king of Syria, a
leper; who was informed by a little Israelitish captive maid that a
prophet of the Lord, in Samaria, could cure him, [Kg2
5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001). The king of Syria sends him,
with a letter and rich presents, to the king of Israel, that he should
recover him of his leprosy, [Kg2 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#005),
[Kg2 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#006). On receiving the letter, the
king of Israel is greatly distressed, supposing that the Syrian king
designed to seek a quarrel with him; in desiring him to cleanse a leper,
when it was well known that none could cure that disorder but God, [Kg2
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#007). Elisha, hearing this, orders
Naaman to be sent to him, [Kg2 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#008). He
comes to Elisha's house in great state, [Kg2
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#009). And the prophet sends a messenger
to him, ordering him to wash in Jordan seven times, and he should be
made clean, [Kg2 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#010). Naaman is
displeased that he is received with so little ceremony, and departs in a
rage, [Kg2 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#011), [Kg2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#012). His servants reason with him; he
is persuaded, goes to Jordan, washes, and is made clean, [Kg2
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#013), [Kg2
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#014). He returns to Elisha;
acknowledges the true God; and offers him a present, which the prophet
refuses, [Kg2 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#015), [Kg2
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#016). He asks directions, promises
never to sacrifice to any other god, and is dismissed, [Kg2
5:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#017). Gehazi runs after him,
pretends he is sent by his master for a talent of silver and two changes
of raiment; which he receives, brings home, and hides, [Kg2
5:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#020). Elisha questions him;
convicts him of his wickedness; pronounces a curse of leprosy upon him,
with which he is immediately afflicted; and departs from his master a
leper, as white as snow, [Kg2 5:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#025).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 5:1</span></span>

Naaman, captain of the host - Of Naaman we know nothing more than is
related here. Jarchi and some others say that he was the man who drew
the bow at a venture, as we term it, and slew Ahab: see [Kg1
22:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#034) (note), and the notes there. He
is not mentioned by Josephus, nor has he any reference to this history;
which is very strange, as it exists in the Chaldee, Septuagint, and
Syriac.

King of Syria - The Hebrew is מלך ארם melech Aram, king of Aram; which
is followed by the Chaldee and Arabic. The Syriac has Adom; but as the
Syriac dolath is the same element as the Syriac rish, differing only in
the position of the diacritic point, it may have been originally Aram.
The Septuagint and Vulgate have Syria, and this is a common meaning of
the term in Scripture. If the king of Syria be meant, it must be
Ben-hadad; and the contemporary king of Israel was Jehoram.

A great man - He was held in the highest esteem.

And honorable - Had the peculiar favor and confidence of his master; and
was promoted to the highest trusts.

Had given deliverance unto Syria - That is, as the rabbins state, by his
slaying Ahab, king of Israel; in consequence of which the Syrians got
the victory.

A mighty man in valor - He was a giant, and very strong, according to
the Arabic. He had, in a word, all the qualifications of an able
general.

But he was a leper - Here was a heavy tax upon his grandeur; he was
afflicted with a disorder the most loathsome and the most humiliating
that could possibly disgrace a human being. God often, in the course of
his providence, permits great defects to be associated with great
eminence, that he may hide pride from man; and cause him to think
soberly of himself and his acquirements.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 5:2</span></span>

The Syrians had gone out by companies - גדודים gedudim, troops. When one
hundred or two hundred men go out by themselves to make prey of whatever
they can get, that is called, says Jarchi, גדוד gedud, a troop. They had
gone out in marauding parties; and on such occasions they bring away
grain, cattle, and such of the inhabitants as are proper to make slaves.

A little maid - Who, it appears, had pious parents, who brought her up
in the knowledge of the true God. Behold the goodness and the severity
of the Divine providence! affectionate parents are deprived of their
promising daughter by a set of lawless freebooters, without the smallest
prospect that she should have any lot in life but that of misery,
infamy, and wo.

Waited on Naaman's wife - Her decent orderly behavior, the consequence
of her sober and pious education, entitled her to this place of
distinction; in which her servitude was at least easy, and her person
safe.

If God permitted the parents to be deprived of their pious child by the
hands of ruffians, he did not permit the child to be without a guardian.
In such a case, were even the father and mother to forsake her, God
would take her up.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 5:3</span></span>

Would God my lord - אחלי achaley, I wish; or, as the Chaldee, Syrian,
and Arabic have, "Happy would it be for my master if he were with the
prophet," etc.

Here the mystery of the Divine providence begins to develop itself. By
the captivity of this little maid, one Syrian family at least, and that
one of the most considerable in the Syrian empire, is brought to the
knowledge of the true God.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 5:4</span></span>

Thus and thus said the maid - So well had this little pious maid
conducted herself, that her words are credited; and credited so fully,
that an embassy from the king of Syria to the king of Israel is founded
upon them!

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 5:5</span></span>

The king of Syria said - He judged it the best mode of proceeding to
send immediately to the king, under whose control he supposed the
prophet must be, that he would order the prophet to cure his general.

Ten talents of silver - This, at 353 11s. 10 1/2d. the talent, would
amount to 3,535 18s. 9d.

Six thousand pieces of gold - If shekels are here meant, as the Arabic
has it, then the six thousand shekels, at 1 16s. 5d. will amount to
10,925; and the whole, to 14,460 18s. 9d. sterling: besides the value of
the ten caftans, or changes of raiment. This was a princely present, and
shows us at once how high Naaman stood in the esteem of his master.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 5:7</span></span>

Am I God, to kill and to make alive - He spoke thus under the conviction
that God alone could cure the leprosy; which, indeed, was universally
acknowledged: and must have been as much a maxim among the Syrians as
among the Israelites, for the disorder was equally prevalent in both
countries; and in both equally incurable. See the notes on Leviticus 13
(note) and Leviticus 14 (note). And it was this that led the king of
Israel to infer that the Syrian king sought a quarrel with him, in
desiring him to do a work which God only could do; and then declaring
war upon him because he did not do it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 5:8</span></span>

Let him come now to me - Do not be afflicted; the matter belongs to me,
as the prophet of the Most High; send him to me, and he shall know that
I am such.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 5:9</span></span>

Came with his horses and with his chariot - In very great pomp and
state. Closely inspected, this was preposterous enough; a leper sitting
in state, and affecting it!

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 5:10</span></span>

Sent a messenger - Did not come out to speak with him: he had got his
orders from God, and he transmitted them to Naaman by his servant.

Wash in Jordan seven times - The waters of Jordan had no tendency to
remove this disorder but God chose to make them the means by which he
would convey his healing power. He who is the author of life, health,
and salvation, has a right to dispense, convey, and maintain them, by
whatsoever means he pleases.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 5:11</span></span>

Naaman was wroth - And why? Because the prophet treated him without
ceremony; and because he appointed him an expenseless and simple mode of
cure.

Behold, I thought - God's ways are not as our ways; he appoints that
mode of cure which he knows to be best. Naaman expected to be treated
with great ceremony; and instead of humbling himself before the Lord's
prophet, he expected the prophet of the Lord to humble himself before
him! Behold I thought; - and what did he think? Hear his words, for they
are all very emphatic: -

1\. "I thought, He will surely come Out to Me. He will never make his
servant the medium of communication between Me and himself.

2\. And stand - present himself before me, and stand as a servant to
hear the orders of his God.

3\. And call on the name of Jehovah his God; so that both his God and
himself shall appear to do me service and honor.

4\. And strike his hand over the place; for can it be supposed that any
healing virtue can be conveyed without contact? Had he done these
things, then the leper might have been recovered."

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 5:12</span></span>

Are not Abana and Pharpar - At present these rivers do not exist by
these names; and where they are we know not; nor whether they were the
Orontes and Chrysorroes. Mr. Maundrell, who traveled over all this
ground, could find no vestige of the names Abana and Pharpar. The river
Barrady he accurately describes: it has its source in Antilibanus; and,
after having plentifully watered the city of Damascus and the gardens,
dividing into three branches, (one of which goes through the city, and
the two others are distributed among the gardens), it is lost in the
marshy country about five or six leagues from Damascus. Two of these
branches were doubtless called in the time of Elisha Abana, or Amana, as
many copies have it; and Pharpar. And in the time in which the Arabic
version was made, one of these branches were called Barda and Toura, for
these are the names by which this version translates those of the text.

May I not wash in them, and be clean? - No, for God has directed thee to
Jordan! and by its waters, or none, shalt thou be cleansed. Abana and
Pharpar may be as good as Jordan; and in respect to thy cleansing, the
simple difference is, God will convey his influence by the latter, and
not by the former.

There is often contention among the people of Bengal and other places,
concerning the superior efficacy of rivers; though the Ganges bears the
bell in Bengal, as the Thames does in England, and the Nile in Egypt.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 5:13</span></span>

My father - A title of the highest respect and affection.

Had bid thee do some great thing - If the prophet had appointed thee to
do something very difficult in itself, and very expensive to thee,
wouldst thou not have done it? With much greater reason shouldst thou do
what will occupy little time, be no expense, and is easy to be
performed.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 5:14</span></span>

Then went he down - He felt the force of this reasoning, and made a
trial, probably expecting little success.

Like unto the flesh of a little child - The loathsome scurf was now
entirely removed; his flesh assumed the appearance and health of youth;
and the whole mass of his blood, and other juices, became purified,
refined, and exalted! How mighty is God! What great things can he do by
the simplest and feeblest of means!

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 5:15</span></span>

He returned to the man of God - He saw that the hand of the Lord was
upon him; he felt gratitude for his cleansing; and came back to
acknowledge, in the most public way, his obligation to God and his
servant.

Stood before him - He was now truly humbled, and left all his state
behind him. It is often the case that those who have least to value
themselves on are proud and haughty; whereas the most excellent of the
earth are the most humble, knowing that they have nothing but what they
have received. Naaman, the leper, was more proud and dictatorial than he
was when cleansed of his leprosy.

There is no God in all the earth - Those termed gods are no gods; the
God of Israel is sole God in all the earth. See my sermon on this
subject.

Take a blessing - Accept a present. Take an expiatory gift. - Arabic. He
desired to offer something for his cleansing. He thought it right thus
to acknowledge the hand from which he had received his healing, and thus
honor the Lord by giving something to his servant.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 5:16</span></span>

I will receive none - It was very common to give presents to all great
and official men; and among these, prophets were always included: but as
it might have appeared to the Syrians that he had taken the offered
presents as a remuneration for the cure performed, he refused; for as
God alone did the work, he alone should have all the glory.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 5:17</span></span>

Shall there not then, I pray thee - This verse is understood two
different ways. I will give them both in a paraphrase: -

1\. Shall there not then be given unto thy servant \[viz., Naaman\] two
mules' burden of this Israelitish earth, that I may build an altar with
it, on which I may offer sacrifices to the God of Israel? For thy
servant, etc.

2\. Shall there not be given to thy \[Elisha's\] servant \[Gehazi\] two
mules' burden of this earth? i.e., the gold and silver which he brought
with him; and which he esteemed as earth, or dust, in comparison of the
cure he received. For thy servant \[Naaman\] will henceforth, etc.

Each of these interpretations has its difficulties. Why Naaman should
ask for two mules' burden of earth, which he might have taken up any
where on the confines of the land, without any such liberty, is not easy
to see. As to the prophet's permission, though the boon was ever so
small, it was not his to give; only the king of Israel could give such a
permission: and what sort of an altar could he build with two mules'
burden of earth, carried from Samaria to Damascus? If this be really the
meaning of the place, the request was exceedingly foolish, and never
could have come from a person enjoying the right use of his reason. The
second opinion, not without its difficulties, seems less embarrassed
than the former. It was natural for Naaman to wish to give something to
the prophet's servant, as the master had refused his present. Again,
impressed with the vast importance of the cure he had received, to take
away all feeling of obligation, he might call two or ten talents of
silver by the name of earth, as well as Habakkuk, [Hab
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#006), calls silver and gold thick clay;
and by terms of this kind it has been frequently denominated, both by
prophets and heathen writers: "Tyrus heaped up silver as the dust, and
fine gold as the mire of the streets;" [Zac
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#003). And the king made silver and gold
at Jerusalem as stones; [Ch2 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#015).
Which is agreeable to the sentiments of the heathen: Χρυσος τις κονις
εστι, και αργυρος, Gold and silver are only a certain kind of earth. -
Arist. Eth. Nicomach.

Should it be said, The gold and silver could not be two mules' burden; I
answer, Let the quantity that Naaman brought with him be only
considered, and it will be found to be as much, when put into two bags,
as could be well lifted upon the backs of two mules, or as those beasts
could conveniently carry. The silver itself would weigh 233lbs. 9oz. 15
1/2dwts., and the gold 1,140lbs. 7oz. 10dwts.; in the whole 1,3741bs.
50Z. 5 1/2dwts. Troy weight. Should it be objected that, taken in this
sense, there is no visible connection between the former and latter
clauses of the verse, I answer that there is as much connection between
the words taken in this sense as in the other, for something must be
brought in to supply both; besides, this makes a more complete sense
than the other: "Shall there not, I pray thee, be given to thy servant
two mules' burden of this silver and gold, \[to apply it as he may think
proper; I regard it not\], for thy servant will henceforth offer neither
burnt-offering nor sacrifice unto other gods, \[for the cure he has now
received; or by way of worship at any time\]; but unto Jehovah." The
reader may choose which of these interpretations he pleases.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 5:18</span></span>

In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant - It is useless to enter into
the controversy concerning this verse. By no rule of right reasoning,
nor by any legitimate mode of interpretation, can it be stated that
Naaman is asking pardon for offenses which he may commit, or that he
could ask or the prophet grant indulgence to bow himself in the temple
of Rimmon, thus performing a decided act of homage, the very essence of
that worship which immediately before he solemnly assured the prophet he
would never practice. The original may legitimately be read, and ought
to be read, in the past, and not in the future tense. "For this thing
the Lord pardon thy servant, for that when my master Hath Gone into the
house of Rimmon to worship there, and he Hath Leaned upon mine hand,
that I also Have Bowed myself in the house of Rimmon; for my worshipping
in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing." This
is the translation of Dr. Lightfoot, the most able Hebraist of his time
in Christendom.

To admit the common interpretation is to admit, in effect, the doctrine
of indulgences; and that we may do evil that good may come of it; that
the end sanctifies the means; and that for political purposes we may do
unlawful acts.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 5:19</span></span>

And he said unto him - There is a most singular and important reading in
one of De Rossi's MSS., which he numbers 191. It has in the margin לא ק
that is, "read לא lo, not, instead of לו lo, to him." Now this reading
supposes that Naaman did ask permission from the prophet to worship in
Rimmon's temple; to which the prophet answers, No; go in peace: that is,
maintain thy holy resolutions, be a consistent worshipper of the true
God, and avoid all idolatrous practices. Another MS., No. 383, appears
first to have written לו to him, but to have corrected it immediately by
inserting an א aleph after the ו vau; and thus, instead of making it לא
no, it has made it לוא lu, which is no word.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 5:20</span></span>

My master hath spared - this Syrian - He has neither taken any thing
from him for himself, nor permitted him to give any thing to me.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 5:21</span></span>

He lighted down from the chariot - He treats even the prophet's servant
with the profoundest respect, alights from his chariot, and goes to meet
him.

Is all well? - השלום hashalom; Is it peace, or prosperity?

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg2 5:22</span></span>

And he said - שלום shalom. It is peace; all is right. This was a common
mode of address and answer.

There be come to me from mount Ephraim - There was probably a school of
the prophets at this mount.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 5:23</span></span>

He - bound two talents of silver - It required two servants to carry
these two talents, for, according to the computation above, each talent
was about 120lbs. weight.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 5:24</span></span>

When he came to the tower - The Chaldee, Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic
understand the word עפל ophel, which we translate tower, as signifying a
secret, dark, or hiding place. He was doing a deed of darkness, and he
sought darkness to conceal it. He no doubt put them in a place little
frequented, or one to which few had access besides himself. But the
prophet's discerning spirit found him out.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 5:26</span></span>

Went not mine heart with thee - The Chaldee gives this a good turn: By
the prophetic spirit it was shown unto me, when the man returned from
his chariot to meet thee.

Is it a time to receive money - He gave him farther proof of this
all-discerning prophetic spirit in telling him what he designed to do
with the money; he intended to set up a splendid establishment, to have
men-servants and maid-servants, to have oliveyards and vineyards, and
sheep and oxen, This, as the Chaldee says, he had thought in his heart
to do.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg2 5:27</span></span>

The leprosy of Naaman - shall cleave unto thee - Thou hast got much
money, and thou shalt have much to do with it. Thou hast got Naaman's
silver, and thou shalt have Naaman's leprosy. Gehazi is not the last who
has got money in an unlawful way, and has got God's curse with it.

A leper as white as snow - The moment the curse was pronounced, that
moment the signs of the leprosy began to appear. The white shining spot
was the sign that the infection had taken place. See on [Lev
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#002) (note), and the notes at [Lev
13:58](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#058) (note).

1\. Some have thought, because of the prophet's curse, The leprosy of
Naaman shall cleave unto thee and thy seed for ever, that there are
persons still alive who are this man's real descendants, and afflicted
with this horrible disease. Mr. Maundrell when he was in Judea made
diligent inquiry concerning this, but could not ascertain the truth of
the supposition. To me it appears absurd; the denunciation took place in
the posterity of Gehazi till it should become extinct, and under the
influence of this disorder this must soon have taken place. The for ever
implies as long as any of his posterity should remain. This is the
import of the word לעולם leolam. It takes in the whole extent or
duration of the thing to which it is applied. The for ever of Gehazi was
till his posterity became extinct.

2\. The god Rimmon, mentioned [Kg2
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#018), we meet with nowhere else in the
Scriptures, unless it be the same which Stephen calls Remphan. See [Act
7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043) (note), and the note there.
Selden thinks that Rimmon is the same with Elion, a god of the
Phoenicians, borrowed undoubtedly from the עליון Elion, the Most High,
of the Hebrews, one of the names of the supreme God, which attribute
became a god of the Phoenicians. Hesychius has the word Ῥαμας Ramas,
which he translates ὁ ὑψιστος Θεος, the Most High God, which agrees very
well with the Hebrew רמון Rimmon, from רמה ramah, to make high or exalt.
And all these agree with the sun, as being the highest or most exalted
in what is called the solar system. Some think Saturn is intended, and
others Venus. Much may be seen on this subject in Selden De Diis Syris.

3\. Let us not suppose that the offense of Gehazi was too severely
punished.

1\. Look at the principle, covetousness.

2\. Pride and vanity; he wished to become a great man.

3, His lying, in order to impose on Naaman: Behold even now there be
come to me, etc.

4\. He in effect sells the cure of Naaman for so much money; for if
Naaman had not been cured, could he have pretended to ask the silver and
raiment?

5\. It was an act of theft; he applied that to his own use which Naaman
gave him for his master.

6\. He dishonored his master by getting the money and raiment in his
name, who had before so solemnly refused it.

7\. He closed the whole by lying to his master, denying that he had gone
after Naaman, or that he had received any thing from him. But was it not
severe to extend the punishment of his crime to his innocent posterity?
I answer, it does not appear that any of Gehazi's children, if he had
any prior to this, were smitten with the leprosy; and as to those whom
he might beget after this time, their leprosy must be the necessary
consequence of their being engendered by a leprous father.

Reader, see the end of avarice and ambition; and see the truth of those
words, "He that Will be rich, shall fall into temptation, and a snare,
and into divers hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction and
perdition." - St. Paul.

4\. We have already remarked the apparently severe and manifestly kind
providence of God in this business.

1\. A marauding party was permitted to spoil the confines of the land of
Israel.

2\. They brought away, to reduce to captivity, a little maid, probably
the hope of her father's house.

3\. She became Naaman's property, and waited on his wife.

4\. She announced God and his prophet.

5\. Naaman, on the faith of her account, took a journey to Samaria.

6\. Gets healed of his leprosy.

7\. Is converted to the Lord; and, doubtless, brought at least his whole
family to believe to the saving of their souls. What was severe to the
parents of the little maid was most kind to Naaman and his family; and
the parents lost their child only a little time, that they might again
receive her with honor and glory for ever. How true are the words of the
poet!

"Behind a frowning providence he hides a smiling face."

And see the benefits of a religious education! Had not this little maid
been brought up in the knowledge of the true God, she had not been the
instrument of so great a salvation. See my sermon on this subject [Kg2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#012) (note).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 6](kg2006)

</div>
