<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2003)  [Next](kg2005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 4:0</span></span>

A widow of one of the prophets, oppressed by a merciless creditor,
applies to Elisha, who multiplies her oil; by a part of which she pays
her debt, abut subsists on the rest, [Kg2
4:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#001). His entertainment at the house
of a respectable woman in Shunem, [Kg2
4:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#008). He foretells to his hostess
the birth of a son, [Kg2 4:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#011).
After some years the child dies, and the mother goes to Elisha at
Carmel; he comes to Shunem, and raises the child to life, vv. 18-37. He
comes to Gilgal, and prevents the sons of the prophets from being
poisoned by wild gourds, [Kg2 4:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#038).
He multiplies a scanty provision, so as to make it sufficient to feed
one hundred men, [Kg2 4:42-44](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#042).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 4:1</span></span>

Now there cried a certain woman - This woman, according to the Chaldee,
Jarchi, and the rabbins, was the wife of Obadiah.

Sons of the prophets - תלמידי נבייא talmidey nebiyaiya, "disciples of
the prophets:" so the Targum here, and in all other places where the
words occur, and properly too.

The creditor is come - This, says Jarchi, was Jehoram son of Ahab, who
lent money on usury to Obadiah, because he had in the days of Ahab fed
the Lord's prophets. The Targum says he borrowed money to feed these
prophets, because he would not support them out of the property of Ahab.

To take unto him my two sons to be bondmen - Children, according to the
laws of the Hebrews, were considered the property of their parents, who
had a right to dispose of them for the payment of their debts. And in
cases of poverty, the law permitted them, expressly, to sell both
themselves and their children; [Exo
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#007), and [Lev
25:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#039). It was by an extension of this
law, and by virtue of another, which authorized them to sell the thief
who could not make restitution, [Exo
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#003), that creditors were permitted to
take the children of their debtors in payment. Although the law has not
determined any thing precisely on this point, we see by this passage,
and by several others, that this custom was common among the Hebrews.
Isaiah refers to it very evidently, where he says, Which of my creditors
is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold
yourselves; [Isa 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001). And our Lord
alludes to it, [Mat 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#025), where he
mentions the case of an insolvent debtor, Forasmuch as he had not to
pay, his lord commanded Him to be Sold, and his Wife and Children, and
all that he had; which shows that the custom continued among the Jews to
the very end of their republic. The Romans, Athenians, and Asiatics in
general had the same authority over their children as the Hebrews had:
they sold them in time of poverty; and their creditors seized them as
they would a sheep or an ox, or any household goods. Romulus gave the
Romans an absolute power over their children which extended through the
whole course of their lives, let them be in whatever situation they
might. They could cast them into prison, beat, employ them as slaves in
agriculture, sell them for slaves, or even take away their lives! -
Dionys. Halicarn. lib. ii., pp. 96, 97.

Numa Pompilius first moderated this law, by enacting, that if a son
married with the consent of his father, he should no longer have power
to sell him for debt.

The emperors Diocletian and Maximilian forbade freemen to be sold on
account of debt:

Ob aes alienum servire liberos creditoribus, jura non patiuntur.

\- Vid. Lib. ob. aes C. de obligat.

The ancient Athenians had the same right over their children as the
Romans; but Solon reformed this barbarous custom. - Vid. Plutarch in
Solone.

The people of Asia had the same custom, which Lucullus endeavored to
check, by moderating the laws respecting usury.

The Georgians may alienate their children; and their creditors have a
right to sell the wives and children of their debtors, and thus exact
the uttermost farthing of their debt. - Tavernier, lib. iii., c. 9. And
we have reason to believe that this custom long prevailed among the
inhabitants of the British isles. See Calmet here.

In short, it appears to have been the custom of all the inhabitants of
the earth. We have some remains of it yet in this country, in the
senseless and pernicious custom of throwing a man into prison for debt,
though his own industry and labor be absolutely necessary to discharge
it, and these cannot be exercised within the loathsome and contagious
walls of a prison.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 4:2</span></span>

Save a pot of oil - Oil was used as aliment, for anointing the body
after bathing, and to anoint the dead. Some think that this pot of oil
was what this widow had kept for her burial: see [Mat
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#012).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 4:6</span></span>

And the oil stayed - While there was a vessel to fill, there was oil
sufficient; and it only ceased to flow when there was no vessel to
receive it. This is a good emblem of the grace of God. While there is an
empty, longing heart, there is a continual overflowing fountain of
salvation. If we find in any place or at any time that the oil ceases to
flow, it is because there are no empty vessels there, no souls hungering
and thirsting for righteousness. We find fault with the dispensations of
God's mercy, and ask, Why were the former days better than these? Were
we as much in earnest for our salvation as our forefathers were for
theirs, we should have equal supplies, and as much reason to sing aloud
of Divine mercy.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 4:7</span></span>

Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt - He does not inveigh against the
cruelty of this creditor, because the law and custom of the country gave
him the authority on which he acted; and rather than permit a poor
honest widow to have her children sold, or that even a Philistine should
suffer loss who had given credit to a genuine Israelite, he would work a
miracle to pay a debt which, in the course of providence, it was out of
her power to discharge.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 4:8</span></span>

Elisha passed to Shunem - This city was in the tribe of Issachar, to the
south of the brook Kishon, and at the foot of Mount Tabor.

Where was a great woman - In Pirkey Rab. Eliezer, this woman is said to
have been the sister of Abishag, the Shunammite, well known in the
history of David.

Instead of great woman, the Chaldee has, a woman fearing sin; the
Arabic, a woman eminent for piety before God. This made her truly great.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 4:9</span></span>

This is a holy man of God - That is, a prophet, as the Chaldee
interprets it.

Which passeth by us continually - It probably lay in his way to some
school of the prophets that he usually attended.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 4:10</span></span>

Let us make a little chamber - See the note upon [Jdg
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#020) (note). As the woman was
convinced that Elisha was a prophet, she knew that he must have need of
more privacy than the general state of her house could afford; and
therefore she proposes what she knew would be a great acquisition to
him, as he could live in this little chamber in as much privacy as if he
were in his own house. The bed, the table, the stool, and the
candlestick, were really every thing he could need, by way of
accommodation, in such circumstances.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 4:12</span></span>

Gehazi his servant - This is the first time we hear of this very
indifferent character.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 4:13</span></span>

Wouldest thou be spoken for to the king - Elisha must have had
considerable influence with the king, from the part he took in the late
war with the Moabites. Jehoram had reason to believe that the prophet,
under God, was the sole cause of his success, and therefore he could
have no doubt that the king would grant him any reasonable request.

Or to the captain of the host? - As if he had said, Wilt thou that I
should procure thee and thy husband a place at court, or get any of thy
friends a post in the army?

I dwell among mine own people - I am perfectly satisfied and contented
with my lot in life; I live on the best terms with my neighbors, and am
here encompassed with my kindred, and feel no disposition to change my
connections or place of abode.

How few are there like this woman on the earth! Who would not wish to be
recommended to the king's notice, or get a post for a relative in the
army, etc.? Who would not like to change the country for the town, and
the rough manners of the inhabitants of the villages for the polished
conversation and amusements of the court? Who is so contented with what
he has as not to desire more? Who trembles at the prospect of riches; or
believes there are any snares in an elevated state, or in the company
and conversation of the great and honorable? How few are there that will
not sacrifice every thing - peace, domestic comfort, their friends,
their conscience, and their God - for money, honors, grandeur, and
parade?

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 4:14</span></span>

What then is to be done for her? - It seems that the woman retired as
soon as she had delivered the answer mentioned in the preceding verse.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 4:16</span></span>

Thou shalt embrace a son - This promise, and the circumstances of the
parties, are not very dissimilar to that relative to the birth of Isaac,
and those of Abraham and Sarah.

Do not lie - That is, Let thy words become true; or, as the rabbins
understand it, Do not mock me by giving me a son that shall soon be
removed by death; but let me have one that shall survive me.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 4:18</span></span>

When the child was grown - We know not of what age he was, very likely
four or six, if not more years; for he could go out to the reapers in
the harvest field, converse, etc.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 4:19</span></span>

My head, my head - Probably affected by the coup de soleil, or sun
stroke, which might, in so young a subject, soon occasion death,
especially in that hot country.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 4:21</span></span>

Laid him on the bed of the man of God - She had no doubt heard that
Elijah had raised the widow's son of Zarephath to life; and she believed
that he who had obtained this gift from God for her, could obtain his
restoration to life.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 4:23</span></span>

Wherefore wilt thou go - She was a very prudent woman; she would not
harass the feelings of her husband by informing him of the death of his
son till she had tried the power of the prophet. Though the religion of
the true God was not the religion of the state, yet there were no doubt
multitudes of the people who continued to worship the true God alone,
and were in the habit of going, as is here intimated, on new moons and
Sabbaths, to consult the prophet.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 4:24</span></span>

Drive, and go forward - It is customary in the East for a servant to
walk along side or drive the ass his master rides. Sometimes he walks
behind, and goads on the beast; and when it is to turn, he directs its
head with the long pole of the goad. It is probably to this custom that
the wise man alludes when he says, "I have seen servants on horses, and
princes walking as servants on the earth," on the ground.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 4:26</span></span>

It is well - How strong was her faith in God and submission to his
authority! Though the heaviest family affliction that could befall her
and her husband had now taken place; yet, believing that it was a
dispensation of Providence which was in itself neither unwise nor
unkind, she said, It is well with me, with my husband, and with my
child. We may farther remark that, in her days, the doctrine of
reprobate infants had not disgraced the pure religion of the God of
endless compassion. She had no doubts concerning the welfare of her
child, even with respect to another world; and who but a pagan or a
stoic can entertain a contrary doctrine?

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg2 4:27</span></span>

The Lord hath hid it from me, and hath not told me - In reference to
this point he had not now the discernment of spirits. This, and the gift
of prophecy, were influences which God gave and suspended as his
infinite wisdom saw good.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg2 4:28</span></span>

Did I desire a son of my lord? - I expressed no such wish to thee; I was
contented and happy; and when thou didst promise me a son, did I not
say, Do not deceive me? Do not mock me with a child which shall grow up
to be attractive and engaging, but of whom I shall soon be deprived by
death.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg2 4:29</span></span>

Salute him not - Make all the haste thou possibly canst, and lay my
staff on the face of the child; he probably thought that it might be a
case of mere suspended animation or a swoon, and that laying the staff
on the face of the child might act as a stimulus to excite the animal
motions.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg2 4:30</span></span>

I will not leave thee - The prophet it seems had no design to accompany
her; he intended to wait for Gehazi's return; but as the woman was well
assured the child was dead, she was determined not to return till she
brought the prophet with her.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg2 4:32</span></span>

Behold, the child was dead - The prophet then saw that the body and
spirit of the child were separated.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg2 4:33</span></span>

Prayed unto the Lord - He had no power of his own by which he could
restore the child.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg2 4:34</span></span>

Lay upon the child - Endeavored to convey a portion of his own natural
warmth to the body of the child; and probably endeavored, by blowing
into the child's mouth, to inflate the lungs, and restore respiration.
He uses every natural means in his power to restore life, while praying
to the Author of it to exert a miraculous influence. Natural means are
in our power; those that are supernatural belong to God. We should
always do our own work, and beg of God to do his.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">kg2 4:35</span></span>

The child sneezed seven times - That is, it sneezed abundantly. When the
nervous influence began to act on the muscular system, before the
circulation could be in every part restored, particular muscles, if not
the whole body, would be thrown into strong contractions and shiverings,
and sternutation or sneezing would be a natural consequence;
particularly as obstructions must have taken place in the head and its
vessels, because of the disorder of which the child died. Most people,
as well as philosophers and physicians, have remarked how beneficial
sneezings are to the removal of obstructions in the head. Sternutamenta,
says Pliny, Hist. Nat., lib. xxviii., cap. 6, gravedinem capitis
emendant; "Sneezing relieves disorders of the head."

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">kg2 4:37</span></span>

She went in and fell at his feet - Few can enter into the feelings of
this noble woman. What suspense must she have felt during the time that
the prophet was employed in the slow process referred to above! for slow
in its own nature it must have been, and exceedingly exhausting to the
prophet himself.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">kg2 4:38</span></span>

Came again to Gilgal - He had been there before with his master, a short
time prior to his translation.

Set on the great pot and seethe pottage for the sons of the prophets -
It was in a time of dearth, and all might now stand in need of
refreshment; and it appears that the prophet was led to put forth the
power he had from God to make a plentiful provision for those who were
present. The father of the celebrated Dr. Young, author of the Night
Thoughts, preaching a charity sermon for the benefit of the sons of the
clergy, took the above words for his text; nor could they be said to be
inappropriate.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">kg2 4:39</span></span>

Wild gourds - This is generally thought to be the coloquintida, the
fruit of a plant of the same name, about the size of a large orange. It
is brought hither from the Levant, and is often known by the name of the
bitter apple; both the seeds and pulp are intensely bitter, and
violently purgative. It ranks among vegetable poisons, as all intense
bitters do; but, judiciously employed, it is of considerable use in
medicine.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">kg2 4:40</span></span>

There is death in the pot - As if they had said, "We have here a deadly
mixture; if we eat of it, we shall all die."

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg2 4:41</span></span>

Bring meal - Though this might, in some measure, correct the strong
acrid and purgative quality; yet it was only a miracle which could make
a lapful of this fruit shred into pottage salutary.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">kg2 4:42</span></span>

Bread of the first-fruits - This was an offering to the prophet, as the
first-fruits themselves were an offering to God.

Corn in the husk - Probably parched corn or corn to be parched, a very
frequent food in the East; full ears, before they are ripe, parched on
the fire.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">kg2 4:43</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, They shall eat, and shall leave thereof - It was
God, not the prophet, who fed one hundred men with these twenty loaves,
etc. This is something like our Lord's feeding the multitude
miraculously. Indeed, there are many things in this chapter similar to
facts in our Lord's history: and this prophet might be more aptly
considered a type of our Lord, than most of the other persons in the
Scriptures who have been thus honored.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 5](kg2005)

</div>
