<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2022)  [Next](kg2024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 23:0</span></span>

Josiah reads in the temple to the elders of Judah, the priests, the
prophets, and the people, the book of the covenant which had been found,
[Kg2 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#001), [Kg2
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#002). He makes a covenant, and the
people stand to it, [Kg2 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#003). He
destroys the vessels of Baal and Asherah, and puts down the idolatrous
priests; breaks down the houses of the sodomites, and the high places;
defiles Topheth; takes away the horses of the sun; destroys the altars
of Ahaz; breaks in pieces the images; and breaks down and burns
Jeroboam's altar at Beth-el, [Kg2
23:4-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#004). Fulfills the word of the
prophet, who cried against the altar at Beth-el, [Kg2
23:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#016). Destroys the high places in
Samaria, slays the idolatrous priests, and celebrates a great passover,
[Kg2 23:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#019); and puts away all the
dealers with familiar spirits, etc., [Kg2
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#024). His eminent character; he is
mortally wounded at Megiddo, and buried at Jerusalem, [Kg2
23:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#025). Jehoahaz reigns in his
stead, and does evil in the sight of the Lord, [Kg2
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#031), [Kg2
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#032). Is dethroned by Pharaoh-nechoh;
and Eliakim, his brother, called also Jehoiakim, made king in his stead;
the land is laid under tribute by the king of Egypt, and Jehoiakim
reigns wickedly, [Kg2 23:33-37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 23:2</span></span>

The king went up into the house of the Lord - Here is another very
singular circumstance. The high priest, scribes, priest, and prophets,
are gathered together, with all the elders of the people, and the king
himself reads the book of the covenant which had been lately found! It
is strange that either the high priest, Jeremiah, Zephaniah, or some
other of the prophets, who were certainly there present, did not read
the sacred book! It is likely that the king considered himself a
mediator between God and them, and therefore read and made the covenant.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 23:3</span></span>

Stood by a pillar - He stood, על העמוד al haammud, "upon the stairs or
pulpit." This is what is called the brazen scaffold or pulpit which
Solomon made, and on which the kings were accustomed to stand when they
addressed the people. See [Ch2 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#013),
and the parallel places.

Made a covenant - This was expressed,

1\. In general. To walk after Jehovah; to have no gods besides him.

2\. To take his law for the regulation of their conduct.

3\. In particular. To bend their whole heart and soul to the observance
of it, so that, they might not only have religion without, but, piety
within.

To this all the people stood up, thus giving their consent, and binding
themselves to obedience.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 23:4</span></span>

The priests of the second order - These were probably such as supplied
the place of the high priest when he was prevented: from fulfilling the
functions of his office. So the Chaldee understood the place - the sagan
of the high priests. But the words may refer to those of the second
course or order established by David: though it does not appear that
those orders were now in use, yet the distinction was continued even to
the time of our Lord. We find the course of Abia, which was the eighth,
mentioned [Luk 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005) (note); where see
the note.

All the vessels - These had been used for idolatrous purposes; the king
is now to destroy them; for although no longer used in this way, they
might, if permitted to remain, be an incentive to idolatry at a future
time.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 23:5</span></span>

The idolatrous priests - הכמרים hakkemarim. Who these were is not well
known. The Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic, call them the priests simply,
which the kings of Judah had ordained. Probably they were an order made
by the idolatrous kings of Judah, and called kemarim, from כמר camar,
which signifies to be scorched, shriveled together, made dark, or black,
because their business was constantly to attend sacrificial fires, and
probably they were black garments; hence the Jews in derision call
Christian ministers kemarim, because of their black clothes and
garments. Why we should imitate, in our sacerdotal dress, those priests
of Baal, is strange to think and hard to tell.

Unto Baal, to the sun - Though Baal was certainly the sun, yet here they
are distinguished; Baal being worshipped under different forms and
attributes, Baal-peor, Baal-zephon, Baal-zebub, etc.

The planets - מזלות mazzaloth. The Vulgate translates this the twelve
signs, i.e., the zodiac. This is as likely as any of the other
conjectures which have been published relative to this word. See a
similar word [Job 37:9](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#009); [Job
38:32](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#032).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 23:6</span></span>

He brought out the grove - He brought out the idol Asherah. See at the
end of [Kg2 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#026) (note).

Upon the graves of the children of the people - I believe this; means
the burial-place of the common people.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 23:7</span></span>

The houses of the sodomites - We have already often met with these קדשים
kedeshim or consecrated persons. The word implies all kinds of
prostitutes, as well as abusers of themselves with mankind.

Wove hangings for the grove - For Asherah; curtains or tent coverings
for the places where the rites of the impure goddess were performed. See
at the end of [Kg2 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#026) (note).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 23:8</span></span>

The gate of Joshua - The place where he, as governor of the city, heard
and decided causes. Near this we find there were public altars, where
sometimes the true God, at other times false gods, were honored.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 23:9</span></span>

The priests of the high places came not up - As these priests had
offered sacrifices on the high places, though it was to the true God,
yet they were not thought proper to be employed immediately about the
temple; but as they were acknowledged to belong to the priesthood, they
had a right to their support; therefore a portion of the tithes,
offerings, and unleavened bread, shew-bread, etc., was appointed to them
for their support. Thus they were treated as priests who had some
infirmity which rendered it improper for them to minister at the altar.
See [Lev 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#017), etc., and particularly
[Lev 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#022), [Lev
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#023).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 23:10</span></span>

He defiled Topheth - St. Jerome says that Topheth was a fine and
pleasant place, well watered with fountains, and adorned with gardens.
The valley of the son of Hinnom, or Gehenna, was in one part; here it
appears the sacred rites of Molech were performed, and to this all the
filth of the city was carried, and perpetual fires were kept up in order
to consume it. Hence it has been considered a type of hell; and in this
sense it is used in the New Testament.

It is here said that Josiah defiled this place that no man might make
his son or his daughter to pass through the fire. He destroyed the image
of Molech, and so polluted the place where he stood, or his temple, that
it was rendered in every way abominable. The rabbins say that Topheth
had its name from תף toph, a drum, because instruments of this kind were
used to drown the cries of the children that were put into the burning
arms of Molech, to be scorched to death. This may be as true as the
following definition: "Topheth, or the valley of the son of Hinnom, was
a place near Jerusalem, where the filth and offal of the city were
thrown, and where a constant fire was kept up to consume the wretched
remains of executed criminals. It was a human shambles, a public
chopping-block, where the arms and legs of men and women were quartered
off by thousands." Query, On what authority do such descriptions rest?

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 23:11</span></span>

The horses that the kings of Judah had given to the sun - Jarchi says
that those who adored the sun had horses which they mounted every
morning to go out to meet the sun at his rising. Throughout the East the
horse, because of his swiftness and utility, was dedicated to the sun;
and the Greeks and Romans feigned that the chariot of the sun was drawn
by four horses - Pyroeis, Eous, Aethon, and Phlegon. See the note on
[Kg2 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011).

Whether these were living or sculptured horses, we cannot tell; the
latter is the more reasonable supposition.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 23:12</span></span>

On the top of the upper chamber - Altars built on the flat roof of the
house. Such altars were erected to the sun, moon, stars, etc.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 23:13</span></span>

Mount of corruption - This, says Jarchi, following the Chaldee, was the
mount of Olives, for this is the mount המשחה hammishchah, of unction;
but because of the idolatrous purposes for which it was used, the
Scripture changed the appellation to the mount המשחית hammashchith, of
corruption.

Ashtoreth the abomination, etc. - See on [Kg1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007) (note).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 23:14</span></span>

Filled their places with the bones of men - This was allowed to be the
utmost defilement to which any thing could be exposed.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 23:16</span></span>

And as Josiah turned himself - This verse is much more complete in the
Septuagint, and in the Hexaplar Syriac version at Paris. I shall give
the whole, making a distinction where, in those versions, any thing is
added: "And as Josiah turned himself, he spied the sepulchres that were
there in the mount, and sent and took the bones out of the sepulchres,
and burnt them upon the altar, and polluted it: according to the word of
the Lord which the man of God proclaimed \[when Jeroboam stood by the
altar at the feast. And turning about, he cast his eyes on the sepulcher
of the man of God\] who proclaimed these words." See [Kg1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#002) (note), where these things were
predicted, and see the notes there.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 23:17</span></span>

What title is that - There was either a stone, an image, or an
inscription here: the old prophet no doubt took care to have the place
made sufficiently remarkable.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 23:18</span></span>

The prophet that came out of Samaria - See the note on [Kg1
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#032).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 23:19</span></span>

That were in the cities of Samaria - Israel had now no king; and Josiah,
of the blood royal of Judah, had certainly a direct right to the
kingdom; he had, at this time, an especial commission from God, to
reform every abuse through the whole land - all that ground that was
given by the Lord as an inheritance to the twelve sons of Jacob.
Therefore he had every right to carry his plans of reformation into the
Samaritan states.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 23:20</span></span>

Slew all the priests - The lives of these, as corrupters of the people,
were forfeited to the law.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg2 23:22</span></span>

Surely there was not holden such a passover - Not one on purer
principles, more heartily joined in by the people present, more
literally consecrated, or more religiously observed. The words do not
apply to the number present, but to the manner and spirit. See the
particulars and mode of celebrating this passover in 2 Chronicles
35:1-18 (note).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 23:24</span></span>

The workers with familiar spirits - See on [Kg2
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#005) (note).

And the images - The teraphim. See the note on [Gen
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 23:25</span></span>

Like unto him was there no king - Perhaps not one from the time of
David; and, morally considered, including David himself, none ever sat
on the Jewish throne, so truly exemplary in his own conduct, and so
thoroughly zealous in the work of God. David was a greater but not a
better man than Josiah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 23:26</span></span>

The Lord turned not - It was of no use to try this fickle and radically
depraved people any longer. They were respited merely during the life of
Josiah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg2 23:29</span></span>

In his days Pharaoh-nechoh - See the note on the death of Josiah, [Kg2
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#020) (note).

Nechoh is supposed to have been the son of Psammitichus, king of Egypt;
and the Assyrian king, whom he was now going to attack, was the famous
Nabopolassar. What the cause of this quarrel was, is not known. Some say
it was on account of Carchemish, a city on the Euphrates, belonging to
the Egyptians, which Nabopolassar had seized. See [Isa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg2 23:30</span></span>

Dead from Megiddo - The word מת meth should here be considered as a
participle, dying, for it is certain he was not dead: he was mortally
wounded at Megiddo, was carried in a dying state to Jerusalem, and there
he died and was buried. See [Ch2
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#024).

Herodotus, lib. i., c. 17, 18, 25, and lib. ii. 159, appears to refer to
the same war which is here mentioned. He says that Nechoh, in the sixth
year of his reign, went to attack the king of Assyria at Magdolum,
gained a complete victory, and took Cadytis. Usher and others believe
that Magdolum and Megiddo were the same place. The exact place of the
battle seems to have been Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddo, for
there Zechariah tells us [Kg2 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#011),
was the great mourning for Josiah. Compare this with [Ch2
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#024), [Ch2
35:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#025).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg2 23:31</span></span>

Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old - This was not the eldest son of
Josiah, which is evident from this, that he was twenty-three years old
when he began to reign; that he reigned but three months; that, being
dethroned, his brother Eliakim was put in his place, who was then
twenty-five years of age. Eliakim, therefore, was the eldest brother;
but Jehoahaz was probably raised to the throne by the people, as being
of a more active and martial spirit.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg2 23:33</span></span>

Nechoh put him in bands - But what was the cause of his putting him in
bands? It is conjectured, and not without reason, that Jehoahaz,
otherwise called Shallum, raised an army, met Nechoh in his return from
Carchemish, fought, was beaten, taken prisoner, put in chains; and taken
into Egypt, where he died; [Kg2 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#034),
and [Jer 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#011), [Jer
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#012). Riblah or Diblath, the place of
this battle, was probably a town in Syria, in the land or district of
Hamath.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg2 23:34</span></span>

Turned his name to Jehoiakim - These names are precisely the same in
signification: Eliakim is God shall arise; Jehoiakim, Jehovah shall
arise; or, the resurrection of God; the resurrection of Jehovah. That
is, God's rising again to show his power, justice, etc. The change of
the name was to show Nechoh's supremacy, and that Jehoiakim was only his
vassal or viceroy. Proofs of this mode of changing the name, when a
person of greater power put another in office under himself, may be seen
in the case of Mattaniah, changed into Zedekiah; Daniel, Mishael,
Hananiah, and Azariah, into Belteshazzar, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abed-nego; and Joseph into Zaphnath-paaneah. See [Dan
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#006), [Dan
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007); [Gen
41:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#045).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">kg2 23:35</span></span>

Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold - Nechoh had placed him there as
viceroy, simply to raise and collect his taxes.

Every one according to his taxation - That is, each was assessed in
proportion to his property: that was the principle avowed: but there is
reason to fear that this bad king was not governed by it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">kg2 23:37</span></span>

He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord - He was a most
unprincipled and oppressive tyrant. Jeremiah gives us his character at
large, [Jer 22:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#013), to which the
reader will do well to refer. Jeremiah was at that time in the land, and
was an eyewitness of the abominations of this cruel king.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 24](kg2024)

</div>
