<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev006)  [Next](lev008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 7:0</span></span>

The law of the trespass-offering, and the priest's portion in it, [Lev
7:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#001). As also in the sin-offerings
and meat-offerings, [Lev 7:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#008). The
law of the sacrifice of peace-offering, [Lev
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#011), whether it was a thanksgiving -
offering, [Lev 7:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012); or a Vow or
voluntary offering, [Lev 7:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#016).
Concerning the flesh that touched any unclean thing, [Lev
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#019), [Lev
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#020), and the person who touched any
thing unclean, [Lev 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#021). Laws
concerning eating of fat, [Lev
7:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#022), and concerning eating of
blood, [Lev 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#026), [Lev
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#027). Farther ordinances concerning
the peace-offerings and the priest's portion in them, [Lev
7:28-36](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#028). Conclusion of the laws and
ordinances relative to burnt-offerings, meat-offerings, sin-offerings,
and peace-offerings, delivered in this and the preceding chapters, [Lev
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#037), [Lev
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#038).

[Leviticus 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 7:1</span></span>

Trespass-offering - See end of the chapter at [Lev
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#038) (note).

[Leviticus 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 7:2</span></span>

In the place where they kill the burnt-offering - viz., on the north
side of the altar, [Lev 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011).

[Leviticus 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 7:3</span></span>

The rump - See Clarke's note on [Lev
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#009), where the principal subjects in
this chapter are explained, being nearly the same in both.

[Leviticus 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 7:4</span></span>

The fat that is on them - Chiefly the fat that was found in a detached
state, not mixed with the muscles; such as the omentum or caul, the fat
of the mesentery, the fat about the kidneys, etc. See Clarke's note on
[Lev 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#009), etc.

[Leviticus 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 7:8</span></span>

The priest shall have to himself the skin - Bishop Patrick supposes that
this right of the priest to the skin commenced with the offering of
Adam, "for it is probable," says he, "that Adam himself offered the
first sacrifice, and had the skin given him by God to make garments for
him and his wife; in conformity to which the priests ever after had the
skin of the whole burnt-offerings for their portion, which was a custom
among the Gentiles as well as the Jews, who gave the skins of their
sacrifices to their priests, when they were not burnt with the
sacrifices, as in some sin-offerings they were among the Jews, see [Lev
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#011). And they employed them to a
superstitious use, by lying upon them in their temples, in hopes to have
future things revealed to them in their dreams.

Of this we have a proof in Virgil, Aen. lib. vii., ver. 86-95.

" - huc dona sacerdos

Cum tulit, et caesarum ovium sub nocte silenti

Pellibus incubuit stratis, somnosque petivit;

Multa modus simulncra videt volitantia miris,

Et varias audit voces, fruiturque deorum

Colloquio, atque imis Acheronta affatur Avernis.

Hic et tum pater ipse petens responsa Latinus

Centum lanigeras mactabat rite bidentes,

Atque harum effultus tergo stratisque jacebat

Velleribus. Subita ex alto vox reddita luco est."

First, on the fleeces of the slaughter'd sheep

By night the sacred priest dissolves in sleep,

When in a train, before his slumbering eye,

Thin airy forms and wondrous visions fly.

He calls the powers who guard the infernal floods,

And talks, inspired, familiar with the gods.

To this dread oracle the prince withdrew,

And first a hundred sheep the monarch slew;

Then on their fleeces lay; and from the wood

He heard, distinct, these accents of the god.

\- Pitt.

The same superstition, practiced precisely in the same way and for the
same purposes, prevail to the present day in the Highlands of Scotland,
as the reader may see from the following note of Sir Walter Scott, in
his Lady of the Lake: - "The Highlanders of Scotland, like all rude
people, had various superstitious modes of inquiring into futurity. One
of the most noted was the togharm. A person was wrapped up in the skin
of a newly-slain bullock, and deposited beside a water-fall, or at the
bottom of a precipice, or in some other strange, wild, and unusual
situation, where the scenery around him suggested nothing but objects of
horror. In this situation he revolved in his mind the question proposed;
and whatever was impressed upon him by his exalted imagination, passed
for the inspiration of the disembodied spirits who haunt these desolate
recesses. One way of consulting this oracle was by a party of men, who
first retired to solitary places, remote from any house, and there they
singled out one of their number, and wrapt him in a big cow's hide,
which they folded about him; his whole body was covered with it except
his head, and so left in this posture all night, until his invisible
friends relieved him by giving a proper answer to the question in hand;
which he received, as he fancied, from several persons that he found
about him all that time. His consorts returned to him at day-break; and
then he communicated his news to them, which often proved fatal to those
concerned in such unwarrantable inquiries. "Mr. Alexander Cooper,
present minister of North Virt, told me that one John Erach, in the Isle
of Lewis, assured him it was his fate to have been led by his curiosity
with some who consulted this oracle, and that he was a night within the
hide above mentioned, during which time he felt and heard such terrible
things that he could not express them: the impression made on him was
such as could never go off; and he said, for a thousand worlds he would
never again be concerned in the like performance, for it had disordered
him to a high degree. He confessed it ingenuously, and with an air of
great remorse, and seemed to be very penitent under a just sense of so
great a crime: he declared this about five years since, and is still
living in the Isle of Lewis for any thing I know." - Description of the
Western Isles, p. 110. See also Pennant's Scottish Tour, vol. ii., p.
301; and Sir W. Scott's Lady of the Lake.

[Leviticus 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 7:9</span></span>

Baken in the oven - See Clarke's note on [Lev
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#005), etc.

[Leviticus 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 7:12</span></span>

If he offer it for a thanksgiving - See the notes at the end of this
chapter at [Lev 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#038) (note).

[Leviticus 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 7:15</span></span>

He shall not leave any of it until the morning - Because in such a hot
country it was apt to putrefy, and as it was considered to be holy, it
would have been very improper to expose that to putrefaction which had
been consecrated to the Divine Being. Mr. Harmer supposes that the law
here refers rather to the custom of drying flesh which had been devoted
to religious purposes, which is practiced among the Mohammedans to the
present time. This, he thinks, might have given rise to the prohibition,
as the sacred flesh thus preserved might have been abused to
superstitious purposes. Therefore God says, [Lev
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#018), "If any of the flesh of the
sacrifice - be eaten at all on the third day, it shall not be accepted,
neither shall it be imputed unto him that offereth it; it is an
abomination, and the soul that eateth of it shall bear his iniquity."
That is, on Mr. Harmer's hypothesis, This sacred flesh shall avail
nothing to him that eats it after the first or second day on which it is
offered; however consecrated before, it shall not be considered sacred
after that time. See Harmer's Obs., vol. i., p. 394, edit. 1808.

[Leviticus 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 7:20</span></span>

Having his uncleanness upon him - Having touched any unclean thing by
which he became legally defiled, and had not washed his clothes, and
bathed his flesh.

[Leviticus 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 7:21</span></span>

The uncleanness of man - Any ulcer, sore, or leprosy; or any sort of
cutaneous disorder, either loathsome or infectious.

[Leviticus 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 7:23</span></span>

Fat, of ox, or of sheep, or of goat - Any other fat they might eat, but
the fat of these was sacred, because they were the only animals which
were offered in sacrifice, though many others ranked among the clean
animals as well as these. But it is likely that this prohibition is to
be understood of these animals when offered in sacrifice, and then only
in reference to the inward fat, as mentioned on [Lev
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#004). Of the fat in any other
circumstances it cannot be intended, as it was one of the especial
blessings which God gave to the people. Butter of kine, and milk of
sheep, with Fat of Lambs, and Rams of the breed of Bashan, and Goats,
were the provision that he gave to his followers. See [Deu
32:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#012).

[Leviticus 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 7:27</span></span>

Whatsoever soul - that eateth any manner of blood - See Clarke's note on
[Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004). Shall be cut off -
excommunicated from the people of God, and so deprived of any part in
their inheritance, and in their blessings. See Clarke's note on [Gen
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#014).

[Leviticus 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 7:29</span></span>

Shall bring his oblation - Meaning those things which were given out of
the peace-offerings to the Lord and to the priest - Ainsworth.

[Leviticus 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 7:30</span></span>

Wave-offering - See Clarke on [Exo
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#027) (note).

[Leviticus 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">lev 7:32</span></span>

The right shoulder - See Clarke on [Exo
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#027) (note).

[Leviticus 7:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">lev 7:36</span></span>

In the day that he anointed them - See Clarke's note on [Exo
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#015).

[Leviticus 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">lev 7:38</span></span>

In the wilderness of Sinai - These laws were probably given to Moses
while he was on the mount with God; the time was quite sufficient, as he
was there with God not less than fourscore days in all; forty days at
the giving, and forty days at the renewing of the law. As in the course
of this book the different kinds of sacrifices commanded to be offered
are repeatedly occurring, I think it best, once for all, to give a
general account of them, and a definition of the original terms, as well
as of all others relative to this subject which are used in the Old
Testament, and the reference in which they all stood to the great
sacrifice offered by Christ.

1\. אשם Asham, Trespass-offering, from אשם asham, to be guilty, or
liable to punishment; for in this sacrifice the guilt was considered as
being transferred to the animal offered up to God, and the offerer
redeemed from the penalty of his sin, [Lev
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#037). Christ is said to have made his
soul an offering for sin, (אשם), [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010).

2\. אשה Ishsheh, Fire-offering, probably from אשש ashash, to be grieved,
angered, inflamed; either pointing out the distressing nature of sin, or
its property of incensing Divine justice against the offender, who, in
consequence, deserving burning for his offense, made use of this
sacrifice to be freed from the punishment due to his transgression. It
occurs [Exo 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#018), and in many places
of this book.

3\. הבהבים Habhabim, Iterated Or Repeated offerings, from יהב yahab, to
supply. The word occurs only in [Hos
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#013), and probably means no more than
the continual repetition of the accustomed offerings, or continuation of
each part of the sacred service.

4\. זבח Zebach, A Sacrifice, (in Chaldee, דבח debach, the ז zain being
changed into ד daleth), a creature slain in sacrifice, from זבח zabach,
to slay; hence the altar on which such sacrifices were offered was
termed מזבח mizbeach, the place of sacrifice. See Clarke's note on [Gen
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020). Zebach is a common name for
sacrifices in general.

5\. חג Chag, a festival, especially such as had a periodical return,
from חגג chagag, to celebrate a festival, to dance round and round in
circles. See [Exo 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001); [Exo
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#024). The circular dance was probably
intended to point out the revolution of the heavenly bodies, and the
exact return of the different seasons. See Parkhurst.

6\. חטאת Chattath and חטאה Chattaah, Sin-offering, from חטא chata, to
miss the mark; it also signifies sin in general, and is a very apt term
to express its nature by. A sinner is continually aiming at and seeking
happiness; but as he does not seek it in God, hence the Scripture
represents him as missing his aim, or missing the mark. This is
precisely the meaning of the Greek word ἁμαρτια, translated sin and
sin-offering in our version; and this is the term by which the Hebrew
word is translated both by the Septuagint and the inspired writers of
the New Testament. The sin-offering was at once an acknowledgment of
guilt, in having forsaken the fountain of living waters, and hewed out
cisterns that could hold none; and also of the firm purpose of the
offerer to return to God, the true and pure fountain of blessedness.
This word often occurs. See Clarke's note on [Gen
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007). See Clarke's note on [Gen
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#013).

7\. כפר Copher, the Expiation or Atonement, from כפר caphar, to cover,
to smear over, or obliterate, or annul a contract. Used often to signify
the atonement or expiation made for the pardon or cancelling of
iniquity. See Clarke's note on [Exo
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#017).

8\. מועד Moed, an Appointed annual festival, from יעד yaad, to appoint
or constitute, signifying such feasts as were instituted in
commemoration of some great event or deliverance, such as the
deliverance from Egypt. See [Exo
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#010), and thus differing from the
chag mentioned above. See Clarke's note on [Gen
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014).

9\. מלאים Milluim, Consecrations or consecration-offerings, from מלא
mala, to fill; those offerings made in consecrations, of which the
priests partook, or, in the Hebrew phrase, had their hands filled, or
which had filled the hands of them that offered them. See Clarke's note
on [Exo 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#019); and see [Ch2
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#009).

10\. מנחה Minchah, Meat-offering, from נח nach, to rest, settle after
toil. It generally consisted of things without life, such as green ears
of corn, full ears of corn, flour, oil, and frankincense; (see on [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001) (note), etc.); and may be
considered as having its name from that rest from labor and toil which a
man had when the fruits of the autumn were brought in, or when, in
consequence of obtaining any rest, ease, etc., a significant offering or
sacrifice was made to God. It often occurs. See Clarke's note on [Gen
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#003). The jealousy-offering ([Num
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#015)) was a simple minchah, consisting
of barley-meal only.

11\. מסך Mesech and ממסך Mimsach, a Mixture-offering, or Mixed Libation,
called a Drink-offering, [Isa 55:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#011),
from מסך masach, to mingle; it seems in general to mean old wine mixed
with the less, which made it extremely intoxicating. This offering does
not appear to have had any place in the worship of the true God; but
from [Isa 65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011), and [Pro
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#030), it seems to have been used for
idolatrous purposes, such as the Bacchanalia among the Greeks and
Romans, "when all got drunk in honor of the god."

12\. משאת Masseeth, an Oblation, things carried to the temple to be
presented to God, from נשא nasa, to bear or carry, to bear sin;
typically, [Exo 28:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#038); [Lev
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017); [Lev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021); really, [Isa
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004), [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012). The sufferings and death of
Christ were the true masseeth or vicarious bearing of the sins of
mankind, as the passage in Isaiah above referred to sufficiently proves.
See this alluded to by the Evangelist John, [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029) (note); and see the root in
Parkhurst.

13\. נדבה Nedabah, Free-Will, or voluntary offering; from נדב nadab, to
be free, liberal, princely. An offering not commanded, but given as a
particular proof of extraordinary gratitude to God for especial mercies,
or on account of some vow or engagement voluntarily taken, [Lev
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#016).

14\. נסך Nesech, Libation, Or Drink-offering, from נסך nasach, to
diffuse or pour out. Water or wine poured out at the conclusion or
confirmation of a treaty or covenant. To this kind of offering there is
frequent allusion and reference in the New Testament, as it typified the
blood of Christ poured out for the sin of the world; and to this our
Lord himself alludes in the institution of the holy eucharist. The whole
Gospel economy is represented as a covenant or treaty between God and
man, Jesus Christ being not only the mediator, but the covenant
sacrifice, whose blood was poured out for the ratification and
confirmation of this covenant or agreement between God and man.

15\. עלה and עולה Olah, Burnt-offering, from עלה alah, to ascend,
because this offering, as being wholly consumed, ascended as it were to
God in smoke and vapor. It was a very expressive type of the sacrifice
of Christ, as nothing less than his complete and full sacrifice could
make atonement for the sin of the world. In most other offerings the
priest, and often the offerer, had a share, but in the whole
burnt-offering all was given to God.

16\. קטרת Ketoreth, Incense Or Perfume-offering, from קטר katar, to
burn, i. e., the frankincense, and other aromatics used as a perfume in
different parts of the Divine service. To this St. Paul compares the
agreeableness of the sacrifice of Christ to God, [Eph
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002) : Christ hath given himself for
us, an offering - to God for a Sweet-Smelling savor. From [Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008) we learn that it was intended also
to represent the prayers of the saints, which, offered up on the altar,
Christ Jesus, that sanctifies every gift, are highly pleasing in the
sight of God.

17\. קרבן Korban, the Gift-offering, from קרב karab to draw nigh or
approach. See this explained on [Lev
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002) (note). Korban was a general name
for any kind of offering, because through these it was supposed a man
had access to his Maker.

18\. שלמים Shelamim, Peace-offering, from שלם shalam, to complete, make
whole; for by these offerings that which was lacking was considered as
being now made up, and that which was broken, viz., the covenant of God,
by his creatures' transgression, was supposed to be made whole; so that
after such an offering, the sincere and conscientious mind had a right
to consider that the breach was made up between God and it, and that it
might lay confident hold on this covenant of peace. To this the apostle
evidently alludes, [Eph 2:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014) : He
is our peace, (i. e. our shalam or peace-offering), who has made both
one, and broken down the middle wall; having abolished in his flesh the
enmity, etc. See the whole passage, and see Clarke's note on [Gen
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018).

19\. תודה Todah, Thank-offering, from ידה yadah, to confess; offerings
made to God with public confession of his power, goodness, mercy, etc.

20\. תנופה Tenuphah, Wave-offering, from נף naph, to stretch out; an
offering of the first-fruits stretched out before God, in acknowledgment
of his providential goodness. This offering was moved from the right
hand to the left. See Clarke's note on [Exo
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#027).

21\. תרומה Terumah, Heave-offering, from רם ram, to lift up, because the
offering was lifted up towards heaven, as the wave - offering, in token
of the kindness of God in granting rain and fruitful seasons, and
filling the heart with food and gladness. As the wave-offering was moved
from right to left, so the heave-offering was moved up and down; and in
both cases this was done several times. These offerings had a blessed
tendency to keep alive in the breasts of the people a due sense of their
dependence on the Divine providence and bounty, and of their obligation
to God for his continual and liberal supply of all their wants. See
Clarke's note on [Exo 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#027).

In the above collection are comprised, as far as I can recollect, an
explanation of all the terms used in the Hebrew Scriptures which signify
sacrifice, oblation, atonement, offering, etc., etc., as well as the
reference they bear to the great and only sufficient atonement,
sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction made by Christ Jesus for the sins
of mankind. Larger accounts must be sought in authors who treat
professedly on these subjects.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 8](lev008)

</div>
