<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev003)  [Next](lev005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 4:0</span></span>

The law concerning the sin-offering for transgressions committed through
ignorance, [Lev 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#001), [Lev
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#002). For the priest thus sinning, [Lev
4:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#003). For the sins of ignorance of
the whole congregation, [Lev 4:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#013).
For the sins of ignorance of a ruler, [Lev
4:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#022). For the sins of ignorance of
any of the common people, [Lev
4:27-35](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#027).

[Leviticus 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 4:2</span></span>

If a soul shall sin through ignorance - That is, if any man shall do
what God has forbidden, or leave undone what God has commanded, through
ignorance of the law relative to these points; as soon as the
transgression or omission comes to his knowledge, he shall offer the
sacrifice here prescribed, and shall not suppose that his ignorance is
an excuse for his sin. He who, when his iniquity comes to his knowledge,
refuses to offer such a sacrifice, sins obstinately and wilfully, and to
him there remains no other sacrifice for sin - no other mode by which he
can be reconciled to God, but he has a certain fearful looking for of
judgment - which shall devour such adversaries; and this seems the case
to which the apostle alludes, [Heb
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#026), etc., in the words above
quoted. There have been a great number of subtle questions started on
this subject, both by Jews and Christians, but the above I believe to be
the sense and spirit of the law.

[Leviticus 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 4:3</span></span>

If the priest that is anointed - Meaning, most probably, the high
priest. According to the sin of the people; for although he had greater
advantages than the people could have, in being more conversant with the
law of God, and his lips should understand and preserve knowledge, yet
it was possible even for him, in that time in which the word of God had
not been fully revealed, to transgress through ignorance; and his
transgression might have the very worst tendency, because the people
might be thereby led into sin. Hence several critics understand this
passage in this way, and translate it thus: If the anointed priest shall
lead the people to sin; or, literally, if the anointed priest shall sin
to the sin of the people; that is, so as to cause the people to
transgress, the shepherd going astray, and the sheep following after
him.

[Leviticus 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 4:4</span></span>

Lay his hand upon the bullock's head - See Clarke's note on [Lev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004).

[Leviticus 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 4:6</span></span>

Seven times - See Clarke's note on [Exo
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#030). The blood of this sacrifice was
applied in three different ways:

1\. The priest put his finger in it, and sprinkled it seven times before
the veil, [Lev 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#006).

2\. He put some of it on the horns of the altar of incense.

3\. He poured the remaining part at the bottom of the altar of
burnt-offerings, [Lev 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#007).

[Leviticus 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 4:12</span></span>

Without the camp - This was intended figuratively to express the
sinfulness of this sin, and the availableness of the atonement. The
sacrifice, as having the sin of the priest transferred from himself to
it by his confession and imposition of hands, was become unclean and
abominable, and was carried, as it were, out of the Lord's sight; from
the tabernacle and congregation it must be carried without the camp, and
thus its own offensiveness was removed, and the sin of the person in
whose behalf it was offered. The apostle ([Heb
13:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#011)) applies this in the most
pointed manner to Christ: "For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is
brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned
without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the
people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth
therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach."

[Leviticus 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 4:13</span></span>

If the whole congregation of Israel sin - This probably refers to some
oversight in acts of religious worship, or to some transgression of the
letter of the law, which arose out of the peculiar circumstances in
which they were then found, such as the case mentioned [Sa1
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#032), etc., where the people, through
their long and excessive fatigue in their combat with the Philistines,
being faint, flew on the spoil, and took sheep, oxen, and calves, and
slew them on the ground, and did eat with the blood; and this was partly
occasioned by the rash adjuration of Saul, mentioned [Sa1
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#024) : Cursed be the man that eateth
any food until evening.

The sacrifices and rites in this case were the same as those prescribed
in the preceding, only here the elders of the congregation, i. e., three
of the Sanhedrin, according to Maimonides, laid their hands on the head
of the victim in the name of all the congregation.

[Leviticus 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 4:22</span></span>

When a ruler hath sinned - Under the term נשיא nasi, it is probable that
any person is meant who held any kind of political dignity among the
people, though the rabbins generally understand it of the king.

A kid of the goats was the sacrifice in this case, the rites nearly the
same as in the preceding cases, only the fat was burnt as that of the
peace-offering. See [Lev 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#026) and [Lev
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#005).

[Leviticus 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 4:27</span></span>

The common people - עם הארץ am haarets, the people of the land, that is,
any individual who was not a priest, king, or ruler among the people;
any of the poor or ordinary sort. Any of these, having transgressed
through ignorance, was obliged to bring a lamb or a kid, the ceremonies
being nearly the same as in the preceding cases. The original may denote
the very lowest of the people, the laboring or agricultural classes.

The law relative to the general cases of sins committed through
ignorance, and the sacrifices to be offered on such occasions, so amply
detailed in this chapter, may be thus recapitulated. For all sins and
transgressions of this kind committed by the people, the prince, and the
priest, they must offer expiatory offerings. The person so sinning must
bring the sacrifice to the door of the tabernacle, and lay his hands
upon its head, as in a case already referred to, acknowledging the
sacrifice to be his, that he needed it for his transgression; and thus
he was considered as confessing his sin, and the sin was considered as
transferred to the animal, whose blood was then spilt to make an
atonement. See Clarke on [Lev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004)
(note). Such institutions as these could not be considered as
terminating in themselves, they necessarily had reference to something
of infinitely higher moment; in a word, they typified Him whose soul was
made an offering for sin, [Isa 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010).
And taken out of this reference they seem both absurd and irrational. It
is obviously in reference to these innocent creatures being brought as
sin-offerings to God for the guilty that St. Paul alludes [Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021), where he says, He (God) made him
to be sin (ἁμαρτιαν, a sin-offering) for us Who Knew No Sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God - holy and pure by the power and
grace of God, in or through him. And it is worthy of remark, that the
Greek word used by the apostle is the same by which the Septuagint, in
more than fourscore places in the Pentateuch, translate the Hebrew word
הטאה hattaah, sin, which in all those places our translation renders
sin-offering. Even sins of ignorance cannot be unnoticed by a strict and
holy law; these also need the great atonement: on which account we
should often pray with David, Cleanse thou me from secret faults! [Psa
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012). How little attention is paid to
this solemn subject! Sins of this kind - sins committed sometimes
ignorantly, and more frequently heedlessly, are permitted to accumulate
in their number, and consequently in their guilt; and from this very
circumstance we may often account for those painful desertions, as they
are called, under which many comparatively good people labor. They have
committed sins of ignorance or heedlessness, and have not offered the
sacrifice which can alone avail in their behalf. How necessary in ten
thousand cases is the following excellent prayer! "That it may please
thee to give us true repentance; to forgive us all our sins,
negligences, and ignorances; and to endue us with the grace of thy Holy
Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy Holy Word." - Litany.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 5](lev005)

</div>
