<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev002)  [Next](lev004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 3:0</span></span>

The law of the peace-offering in general, [Lev
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001). That of the peace-offering
taken from the flock, [Lev 3:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#006); and
the same when the offering is a goat, [Lev
3:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#012).

[Leviticus 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 3:1</span></span>

Peace-offering - שלמים shelamim, an offering to make peace between God
and man; see on Leviticus 7 (note), and [Gen
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018) (note).

[Leviticus 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 3:2</span></span>

Lay his hand upon the head of his offering - See this rite explained in
[Exo 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#010) (note), and [Lev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004) (note). "As the burnt-offering,
(Leviticus 1).," says Mr. Ainsworth, "figured our reconciliation to God
by the death of Christ, and the meat-offering, (Leviticus 2)., our
sanctification in him before God, so this peace-offering signified both
Christ's oblation of himself whereby he became our peace and salvation,
([Eph 2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014); [Act
13:47](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#047); [Heb
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009); [Heb
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028)), and our oblation of praise,
thanksgiving, and prayer unto God."

[Leviticus 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 3:3</span></span>

The fat that covereth the inwards - The omentum, caul or web, as some
term it. The fat that is upon the inwards; probably the mesentery or
fatty part of the substance which connects the convolutions of the
alimentary canal or small intestines.

[Leviticus 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 3:5</span></span>

Aaron's sons shall burn it - As the fat was deemed the most valuable
part of the animal, it was offered in preference to all other parts; and
the heathens probably borrowed this custom from the Jews, for they burnt
the omentum or caul in honor of their gods.

[Leviticus 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 3:9</span></span>

The whole rump, it shall he take off hard by the backbone - To what has
already been said on the tails of the eastern sheep, in the note on [Exo
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#022), we may add the following
observation from Dr. Russel concerning the sheep at Aleppo. "Their
tails," says he, "are of a substance between fat and marrow, and are not
eaten separately, but mixed with the lean meat in many of their dishes,
and also often used instead of butter." He states also that a common
sheep of this kind, without the head, fat, skin, and entrails, weighs
from sixty to seventy English pounds, of which the tail usually weighs
fifteen pounds and upwards; but that those of the largest breed, when
fattened will weigh one hundred and fifty pounds, and their tails fifty,
which corresponds with the account given by Ludolf in the note referred
to above. The sheep about Jerusalem are the same with those in Abyssinia
mentioned by Ludolf, and those of Syria mentioned by Dr. Russel.

[Leviticus 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 3:11</span></span>

It is the food of the offering - We have already remarked that God is
frequently represented as feasting with his people on the sacrifices
they offered; and because these sacrifices were consumed by that fire
which was kindled from heaven, therefore they were considered as the
food of that fire, or rather of the Divine Being who was represented by
it. "In the same idiom of speech," says Dodd, "the gods of the heathens
are said, [Deu 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#038), to eat the fat
and drink the wine which were consumed on their altars.

[Leviticus 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 3:12</span></span>

A goat - Implying the whole species, he-goat, she-goat, and kid, as we
have already seen.

[Leviticus 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 3:17</span></span>

That ye eat neither fat nor blood - It is not likely that the fat should
be forbidden in the same manner and in the same latitude as the blood.
The blood was the life of the beast, and that was offered to make an
atonement for their souls; consequently, this was never eaten in all
their generations: but it was impossible to separate the fat from the
flesh, which in many parts is so intimately intermixed with the muscular
fibres; but the blood, being contained in separate vessels, the arteries
and veins, might with great ease be entirely removed by cutting the
throat of the animal, which was the Jewish method. By the fat therefore
mentioned here and in the preceding verse, we may understand any fat
that exists in a separate or unmixed state, such as the omentum or caul,
the fat of the mesentery, the fat on the kidneys, and whatever else of
the internal fat was easily separable, together with the whole of the
tail already described. And probably it was the fat of such animals only
as were offered to God in sacrifice, that was unlawful to be eaten. As
all temporal as well as spiritual blessings come from God, he has a
right to require that such of them should be dedicated to his service as
he may think proper to demand. He required the most perfect of all the
animals, and the best parts of these perfect animals. This he did, not
that he needed any thing, but to show the perfection of his nature and
the purity of his service. Had he condescended to receive the meanest
animals and the meanest parts of animals as his offerings, what opinion
could his worshippers have entertained of the perfection of his nature?
If such imperfect offerings were worthy of this God, then his nature
must be only worthy of such offerings. It is necessary that every thing
employed in the worship of God should be the most perfect of its kind
that the time and circumstances can afford. As sensible things are
generally the medium through which spiritual impressions are made, and
the impression usually partakes of the nature of the medium through
which these impressions are communicated; hence every thing should not
only be decent, but as far as circumstances will admit dignified, in the
worship of God: the object of religious worship, the place in which he
is worshipped, and the worship itself, should have the strongest and
most impressive correspondence possible.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 4](lev004)

</div>
