<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev009)  [Next](lev011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 10:0</span></span>

Nadab and Abihu offer strange fire before the Lord, and are destroyed,
[Lev 10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001). Aaron and his family
forbidden to mourn for them, [Lev
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#006), [Lev
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#007). He and his family are forbidden
the use of wine, [Lev 10:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#008).
Directions to Aaron and his sons concerning the eating of the
meat-offerings, etc., [Lev 10:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#012).
Moses chides Aaron for not having eaten the sin-offering, [Lev
10:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#016). Aaron excuses himself, and
Moses is satisfied, [Lev 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#019), [Lev
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#020).

[Leviticus 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 10:1</span></span>

And Nadab and Abihu - took either of them his censer - The manner of
burning incense in the temple service was, according to the Jews, as
follows: -

"One went and gathered the ashes from off the altar into a golden
vessel, a second brought a vessel full of incense, and a third brought a
censer with fire, and put coals on the altar, and he whose office it was
to burn the incense strewed it on the fire at the command of the
governor. At the same time all the people went out of the temple from
between the porch and the altar. Each day they burned the weight of a
hundred denaries of incense, fifty in the morning, and fifty in the
evening. The hundred denaries weighed fifty shekels of the sanctuary,
each shekel weighing three hundred and twenty barleycorns; and when the
priest had burned the incense, he bowed himself down and went his way
out. See Maimonides' Treatise of the Daily Service, chap. iii. So when
Zacharias, as his lot fell, burned incense in the temple, the whole
multitude of the people were without at prayer while the incense was
burning, [Luk 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#009), [Luk
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#010). By this service God taught them
that the prayers of his faithful people are pleasing to him, whilst our
High Priest, Christ Jesus, by his mediation puts incense to their
prayers; (see [Psa 141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002); [Rom
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034); [Heb
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001), [Heb
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002); [Heb
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024); [Rev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003), [Rev
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#004)); for the priests under the law
served unto the example and shadow of heavenly things; [Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005)." See Ainsworth in loco.

In the preceding chapter we have seen how God intended that every part
of his service should be conducted; and that every sacrifice might be
acceptable to him, he sent his own fire as the emblem of his presence,
and the means of consuming the sacrifice - Here we find Aaron's sons
neglecting the Divine ordinance, and offering incense with strange, that
is, common fire, - fire not of a celestial origin; and therefore the
fire of God consumed them. So that very fire which, if properly applied,
would have sanctified and consumed their gift, became now the very
instrument of their destruction! How true is the saying, The Lord is a
consuming fire! He will either hallow or destroy us: he will purify our
souls by the influence of his Spirit, or consume them with the breath of
his mouth! The tree which is properly planted in a good soil is
nourished by the genial influences of the sun: pluck it up from its
roots, and the sun which was the cause of its vegetative life and
perfection now dries up its juices, decomposes its parts, and causes it
to moulder into dust. Thus must it be done to those who grieve and do
despite to the Spirit of God. Reader, hast thou this heavenly fire? Hear
then the voice of God, Quench not the Spirit. Some critics are of
opinion that the fire used by the sons of Aaron was the sacred fire, and
that it is only called strange from the manner of placing the incense on
it. I cannot see the force of this opinion.

Which he commanded them not - Every part of the religion of God is
Divine. He alone knew what he designed by its rites and ceremonies, for
that which they prefigured - the whole economy of redemption by Christ -
was conceived in his own mind, and was out of the reach of human wisdom
and conjecture. He therefore who altered any part of this representative
system, who omitted or added any thing, assumed a prerogative which
belonged to God alone, and was certainly guilty of a very high offense
against the wisdom, justice, and righteousness of his Maker. This
appears to have been the sin of Nadab and Abihu, and this at once shows
the reason why they were so severely punished. The most awful judgments
are threatened against those who either add to, or take away from, the
declarations of God. See [Deu 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#002);
[Pro 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#006); and [Rev
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018), [Rev
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#019).

[Leviticus 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 10:3</span></span>

And Aaron held his peace - וידם אהרן vaiyiddom Aharon, and Aaron was
dumb. How elegantly expressive is this of his parental affection, his
deep sense of the presumption of his sons, and his own submission to the
justice of God! The flower and hope of his family was nipped in the bud
and blasted; and while he exquisitely feels as a father, he submits
without murmuring to this awful dispensation of Divine justice. It is an
awful thing to introduce innovations either into the rites and
ceremonies, or into the truths, of the religion of Christ: he who acts
thus cannot stand guiltless before his God. It has often been remarked
that excessive grief stupefies the mind, so that amazement and deep
anguish prevent at once both tears and complaints; hence that saying of
Seneca, Curae leves loquantur; graviores silent. "Slight sorrows are
loquacious; deep anguish has no voice. See Clarke on [Lev
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#019) (note).

[Leviticus 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 10:4</span></span>

Uzziel the uncle of Aaron - He was brother to Amram the father of Aaron;
see [Exo 6:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#018).

[Leviticus 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 10:5</span></span>

Carried them in their coats out of the camp - The modern impropriety of
burying the dead within towns, cities, or places inhabited, had not yet
been introduced; much less that abomination, at which both piety and
common sense shudder, burying the dead about and even within places
dedicated to the worship of God!

[Leviticus 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 10:6</span></span>

Uncover not your heads, etc. - They were to use no sign of grief or
mourning,

1\. Because those who were employed in the service of the sanctuary
should avoid every thing that might incapacitate them for that service;
and,

2\. Because the crime of their brethren was so highly provoking to God,
and so fully merited the punishment which he had inflicted, that their
mourning might be considered as accusing the Divine justice of undue
severity.

[Leviticus 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 10:7</span></span>

The anointing oil of the Lord is upon you - They were consecrated to the
Divine service, and this required their constant attendance, and most
willing and cheerful service.

[Leviticus 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 10:9</span></span>

Do not drink wine nor strong drink - The cabalistical commentator, Baal
Hatturim, and others, have supposed, from the introduction of this
command here, that Aaron's sons had sinned through excess of wine, and
that they had attempted to celebrate the Divine service in a state of
inebriation. Strong drink - The word שכר shechar, from shachar, to
inebriate, signifies any kind of fermented liquors. This is exactly the
same prohibition that was given in the case of John Baptist, [Luk
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015) : Οινον και σικερα ου μη πιῃ·
Wine and sikera he shall not drink. Any inebriating liquor, says St.
Jerome, (Epist. ad nepot)., is called sicera, whether made of corn,
apples, honey, dates, or other fruit. One of the four prohibited drinks
among the Mohammedans in India is called sakar, (see the Hedaya, vol.
iv., p. 158), which signifies inebriating drink in general, but
especially date wine or arrack. From the original word probably we have
borrowed our term cider or sider, which among us exclusively signifies
the fermented juice of apples. See on [Luk
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015) (note).

[Leviticus 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 10:10</span></span>

That we may put difference between holy and unholy - This is a strong
reason why they should drink no inebriating liquor, that their
understanding being clear, and their judgment correct, they might be
always able to discern between the clean and the unclean, and ever
pronounce righteous judgment. Injunctions similar to this were found
among the Egyptians, Carthaginians, and Greeks. Indeed, common sense
itself shows that neither a drunkard nor a sot should ever be suffered
to minister in holy things.

[Leviticus 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 10:14</span></span>

Wave-breast and heave-shoulder - See Leviticus 7 (note), and [Exo
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#027) (note).

[Leviticus 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 10:16</span></span>

Moses diligently sought the goat - The goat which was offered the same
day for the sins of the priests and the people, (see [Lev
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#015), [Lev
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#016)), and which, through the
confusion that happened on account of the death of Nadab and Abihu, was
burnt instead of being eaten. See [Lev
10:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#016).

[Leviticus 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 10:17</span></span>

To bear the iniquity of the congregation - See on [Lev
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#026) (note), etc.

[Leviticus 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 10:19</span></span>

And such things have befallen me, etc. - The excuse which Aaron makes
for not feasting on the sin-offering according to the law is at once
appropriate and dignified; as if he had said: "God certainly has
commanded me to eat of the sin-offering; but when such things as these
have happened unto me, could it be good in the sight of the Lord? Does
he not expect that I should feel as a father under such afflicting
circumstances?" With this spirited answer Moses was satisfied; and God,
who knew his situation, took no notice of the irregularity which had
taken place in the solemn service. To human nature God has given the
privilege to weep in times of affliction and distress. In his infinite
kindness he has ordained that tears, which are only external evidences
of our grief, shall be the outlets to our sorrows, and tend to exhaust
the cause from which they flow. See on [Lev
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#003) (note).

[Leviticus 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 10:20</span></span>

When Moses heard that, he was content - The argument used by Aaron had
in it both good sense and strong reason, and Moses, as a reasonable man,
felt its force; and as God evidenced no kind of displeasure at this
irregularity, which was, in a measure at least, justified by the present
necessity, he thought proper to urge the matter no farther. Though the
punishment of Nadab and Abihu may appear severe, because the sacred text
does not specify clearly the nature and extent of their crime, we may
rest assured that it was of such a nature as not only to justify but to
demand such a punishment. God has here given us a full proof that he
will not suffer human institutions to take the place of his own
prescribed worship. It is true this is frequently done, for by many what
is called natural religion is put in the place of Divine revelation; and
God seems not to regard it: but though vengeance is not speedily
executed on an evil work, and therefore the hearts of the children of
men are set to do wickedness, yet God ceases not to be just; and those
who have taken from or added to his words, or put their own inventions
in their place, shall be reproved and found liars in the great day. His
long-suffering leads to repentance; but if men will harden their hearts,
and put their own ceremonies, rites, and creeds, in the place of Divine
ordinances and eternal truths, they must expect to give an awful account
to him who is shortly to judge the quick and the dead. Were the religion
of Christ stripped of all that state policy, fleshly interest, and gross
superstition have added to it, how plain and simple, and may we not add,
how amiable and glorious, would it appear! Well may we say of human
inventions in Divine worship what one said of the paintings on old
cathedral windows, Their principal tendency is to prevent the light from
coming in. Nadab and Abihu would perform the worship of God not
according to his command, but in their own way; and God not only would
not receive the sacrifice from their hands, but, while encompassing
themselves with their own sparks, and warming themselves with their own
fire, this had they from the hand of the Lord - they lay down in sorrow,
for there went out a fire from the Lord, and devoured them. What is
written above is to be understood of persons who make a religion for
themselves, leaving Divine revelation; for, being wilfully ignorant of
God's righteousness, they go about to establish their own. This is a
high offense in the sight of God. Reader, God is a Spirit, and they who
worship him must worship him in spirit and truth. Such worshippers the
Father seeketh.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 11](lev011)

</div>
