<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev020)  [Next](lev022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 21:0</span></span>

The priests shall not mourn for the dead, except for near relatives,
such as mother, father, son, daughter, and sister if a virgin, [Lev
21:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001). They shall not shave their
heads nor beards, nor make any cuttings in the flesh, because they are
holy unto God, [Lev 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#005), [Lev
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#006). A priest shall not marry a woman
who is a whore, profane, or divorced from her husband, [Lev
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#007), [Lev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#008). Of the priest's daughter who
profanes herself, [Lev 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#009). The high
priest shall not uncover his head, or rend his clothes, [Lev
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010); nor go in unto a dead body,
[Lev 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#011); nor go out of the
sanctuary, [Lev 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#012). Of his marriage
and off-spring, [Lev 21:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#013). No
person shall be made a priest that has any blemish nor shall any person
with any of the blemishes mentioned here be permitted to officiate in
the worship of God, [Lev 21:16-24](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#016).

[Leviticus 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 21:1</span></span>

There shall none be defiled for the dead - No priest shall assist in
laying out a dead body, or preparing it for interment. Any contact with
the dead was supposed to be of a defiling nature, probably because
putrefaction had then taken place; and animal putrefaction was ever held
in detestation by all men.

[Leviticus 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 21:4</span></span>

A chief man among his people - The word בעל baal signifies a master,
chief, husband, etc., and is as variously translated here.

1\. He being a chief among the people, it would be improper to see him
in such a state of humiliation as mourning for the dead necessarily
implies.

2\. Though a husband he shall not defile himself even for the death of a
wife, because the anointing of his God is upon him. But the first sense
appears to be the best.

[Leviticus 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 21:5</span></span>

They shall not make baldness - See the note on [Lev
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#027). It is supposed that these
things were particularly prohibited, because used superstitiously by the
Egyptian priests, who, according to Herodotus, shaved the whole body
every third day, that there might be no uncleanness about them when they
ministered in their temples. This appears to have been a general custom
among the heathen. In the book of Baruch 6:31, the priests of Babylon
are represented sitting in their temples, with their clothes rent, and
their heads and beards shaven, and having nothing upon their heads.
Every person knows the tonsure of the Catholic priests. Should not this
be avoided as an approach to a heathenish custom?

[Leviticus 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 21:7</span></span>

That is a whore - A prostitute, though even reclaimed.

Profane - A heathen, or one who is not a cordial believer in the true
God. Put away from her husband - Because this very circumstance might
lead to suspicion that the priest and the divorced woman might have been
improperly connected before.

[Leviticus 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 21:9</span></span>

She shall be burnt with fire - Probably not burnt alive, but strangled
first, and then burnt afterward. Though it is barely possible that some
kind of branding may be intended.

[Leviticus 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 21:10</span></span>

He that is the high priest - This is the first place where this title is
introduced; the title is very emphatic, הכהן הגדול haccohen haggadol,
that priest, the great one. For the meaning of כהן cohen, see the note
on [Gen 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018). As the chief or high
priest was a representative of our blessed Lord, therefore he was
required to be especially holy; and he is represented as God's king
among the people.

[Leviticus 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 21:12</span></span>

The crown of the anointing oil - is upon him - By his office the priest
represented Christ in his sacrificial character; by his anointing, the
prophetic influence; and by the crown, the regal dignity of our Lord.

[Leviticus 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 21:13</span></span>

He shall take a wife in her virginity - בתוליה bethuleyha. This is a
full proof that בתולה bethulah is the proper Hebrew term for a virgin;
from the emphatic root בתל bathal, to separate; because such a person
was in her separate state, and had never been in any way united to man.

[Leviticus 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 21:17</span></span>

Whosoever - hath any blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of
his God - Never was a wiser, a more rational, and a more expedient law
enacted relative to sacred matters. The man who ministers in holy
things, who professes to be the interpreter of the will of God, should
have nothing in his person nor in his manner which cannot contribute to
render him respectable in the eyes of those to whom he ministers. If, on
the contrary, he has any personal defect, any thing that may render him
contemptible or despicable, his usefulness will be greatly injured, if
not entirely prevented. If however a man have received any damage in the
work of God, by persecution or otherwise, his scars are honorable, and
will add to his respectability. But if he be received into the ministry
with any of the blemishes specified here, he never will and never can
have that respect which is essentially necessary to secure his
usefulness. Let no man say this is a part of the Mosaic law, and we are
not bound by it. It is an eternal law, founded on reason, propriety,
common sense, and absolute necessity. The priest, the prophet, the
Christian minister, is the representative of Jesus Christ; let nothing
in his person, carriage, or doctrine, be unworthy of the personage he
represents. A deformed person, though consummate in diplomatic wisdom,
would never be employed as an ambassador by any enlightened court, if
any fit person, unblemished, could possibly be procured.

[Leviticus 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 21:18</span></span>

A blind man - That is, in one eye; for he that was utterly blind could
not possibly be employed in such a service. A flat nose, like that of an
ape; so the best versions. Any thing superfluous, such as six fingers,
six toes, etc.

[Leviticus 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 21:19</span></span>

Broken-footed, or broken-handed - Club-footed, bandy-legged, etc.; or
having the ankle, wrist, or fingers dislocated.

[Leviticus 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 21:20</span></span>

Crooked-backed - Hunch-backed or gibbous. A dwarf, דק dak, a person too
short or too thin, so as to be either particularly observable, or
ridiculous in his appearance.

A blemish in his eye - A protuberance on the eye, observable spots or
suffusions.

Scurvy, or scabbed - A bad habit of body, evidenced by scorbutic or
scrofulous affections.

Stones broken - Is ruptured; an infirmity which would render him
incapable of fulfilling the duties of his office, which might be often
very fatiguing. In the above list of blemishes we meet with some that
might render the priest contemptible in the eyes of men, and be the
means of leading them, not only to despise the man, but to despise the
ministry itself; and we meet with others that would be a very great
impediment in the discharge of his ministerial duties, and therefore any
person thus blemished is by this law precluded from the ministry. The
blemishes here enumerated have been considered by some in an allegorical
point of view, as if only referring to the necessity of moral purity;
but although holiness of heart and righteousness of life be essentially
necessary in a minister of God, yet an absence of the defects mentioned
above is, I fully believe, what God intends here, and for the reasons
too which have been already advanced. It must however be granted, that
there have been some eminent divines who have been deformed; and some
with certain blemishes have been employed in the Christian ministry, and
have been useful. The Mosaic rule, however, will admit of but few
exceptions, when even examined according to the more extended
interpretation of the Christian system. "The Hebrews say there are in
all 120 blemishes which disable the priest - eight in the head, two in
the neck, nine in the ears, five in the brows, seven in the eyelids,
nineteen in the eyes, nine in the nose, nine in the mouth, three in the
belly, three in the back, seven in the hands, sixteen in the secrets,
eight in any part of the body, eight in the skin, and seven in the
strength and in the breath." - Ainsworth. In ancient times, even among
heathens, persons of the most respectable appearance were appointed to
the priesthood; and the emperor, both among the ancient Greeks and
Romans, was both king and priest. It is reported of Metellus, that,
having lost an eye in endeavoring to save the Palladium from the flames,
when the temple of Vesta was on fire, he was denied the priesthood,
though he had rendered such an excellent piece of service to the public;
yet the public opinion was that a priest who was defective in any member
was to be avoided as ominous - See Dodd.

"At Elis, in Greece, the judges chose the finest looking man to carry
the sacred vessels of the deity; he that was next to him in beauty and
elegance led the ox; and the third in personal beauty, etc., carried the
garlands, ribbons, wine, and the other matters used for the sacrifice."
- Athen. Deipnisoph., l. xiii., c. 2.

Formerly the Church of England was very cautious in admitting to her
ministry those who had gross personal defects; but now we find the
hump-backed, the jolt-headed, bandy-legged, club-footed, one-eyed, etc.,
priests even of her high places. Why do our prelates ordain such?

[Leviticus 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 21:23</span></span>

He shall not go in unto the veil - The priest with a blemish was not
permitted to enter into the holy of holies, nor to burn incense, nor to
offer the shew-bread, nor to light the golden candlestick, etc. In
short, he was not permitted to perform any essential function of the
priesthood.

1\. The great perfection required in the Jewish high priest was intended
principally to point out the perfection of that priesthood of which the
Jewish was only the type. And yet, as the apostle assures us, that law
made nothing perfect, but pointed out that most perfect priesthood and
sacrifice by which we draw near to God.

2\. As none who had a blemish could enter into the holy of holies, and
this holy of holies was a type of the kingdom of God, so nothing that is
defiled can enter into heaven; for he gave himself for his Church that
he might purify it to himself, and present it at last before the
presence of the Divine glory having neither spot nor wrinkle, nor any
such thing, [Eph 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027); a passage which
evidently refers to the directions in the preceding verse. Reader, art
thou become a king and priest unto God and the Lamb? and hast thou
obtained, or art thou earnestly seeking, that holiness without which
thou canst not see the kingdom of heaven?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 22](lev022)

</div>
