<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev010)  [Next](lev012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 11:0</span></span>

Laws concerning clean and unclean animals, [Lev
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#001), [Lev
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#002). Of Quadrupeds, those are clean
which divide the hoof and chew the cud, [Lev
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#003). Those to be reputed unclean
which do not divide the hoof, though they chew the cud, [Lev
11:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#004). Those to be reputed unclean
also which, though they divide the hoof, do not chew the cud, [Lev
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#007). Whosoever eats their flesh, or
touches their carcasses, shall be reputed unclean, [Lev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#008). Of Fish, those are clean, and
may be eaten which have fins and scales, [Lev
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#009). Those which have not fins and
scales to be reputed unclean, [Lev
11:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#010). Of Fowls, those which are
unclean, [Lev 11:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#013). Of Insects,
the following may be eaten: the bald locust, beetle, and grasshopper,
[Lev 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#022). All others are unclean and
abominable, their flesh not to be eaten, nor their bodies touched, [Lev
11:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#023). Farther directions relative
to unclean beasts, [Lev 11:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#026). Of
Reptiles, and some small quadrupeds, those which are unclean, [Lev
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#029), [Lev
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#039). All that touch them shall be
unclean, [Lev 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#031); and the things
touched by their dead carcasses are unclean also, [Lev
11:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#032). Large fountains, or pits of
water, are not defiled by their carcasses, provided a part of the water
be drawn out, [Lev 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#036). Nor do they
defile seed by accidentally touching it, provided the water which has
touched their flesh do not touch or moisten the seed, [Lev
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#037), [Lev
11:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#038). A beast that dieth of itself is
unclean, and may not be touched or eaten, [Lev
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#039), [Lev
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#040). All creeping things are
abominable, [Lev 11:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#041). The reason
given for these laws, [Lev 11:45-47](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#045).

[Leviticus 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 11:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses - In the preceding chapter the priests are
expressly forbidden to drink wine; and the reason for this law is given
also, that they might be able at all times to distinguish between clean
and unclean, and be qualified to teach the children of Israel all the
statutes which the Lord had spoken, [Lev
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#010), [Lev
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#011); for as inebriation unfits a
person for the regular performance of every function of life, it must be
especially sinful in those who minister in holy things, and to whom the
teaching of the ignorant, and the cure of souls in general, are
entrusted. Scheuchzer has remarked that no Christian state has made any
civil law against drunkenness, (he must only mean the German states, for
we have several acts of parliament against it in England), and that it
is only punished by contempt. "Custom," says he, "that tyrant of the
human race, not only permits it, but in some sort authorizes the
practice, insomuch that we see priests and ministers of the Church
ascend the pulpit in a state of intoxication, judges seat themselves
upon the benches, physicians attend their patients, and others attempt
to perform the different avocations of life, in the same disgraceful
state." - Physic. Sacr., vol. iii., p. 64. This is a horrible picture of
German manners; and while we deplore the extensive ravages made by this
vice, and the disgrace with which its votaries are overwhelmed, we have
reason to thank God that it very rarely has ever appeared in the pulpit,
and perhaps was never once seen upon the bench, in our own country.
Having delivered the law against drinking wine, Moses proceeds to
deliver a series of ordinances, all well calculated to prevent the
Israelites from mixing with the surrounding nations, and consequently
from being contaminated by their idolatry. In Leviticus 11 he treats of
unclean Meats. In [Lev 12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001), 13, 14,
and 15, he treats of unclean Persons, Garments, and Dwellings. In
Leviticus 16 he treats of the uncleanness of the Priests and the People,
and prescribes the proper expiations and sacrifices for both. In
Leviticus 17 he continues the subject, and gives particular directions
concerning the mode of offering, etc. In Leviticus 18 he treats of
unclean matrimonial connections. In Leviticus 19 he repeats sundry laws
relative to these subjects, and introduces some new ones. In Leviticus
20 he mentions certain uncleannesses practiced among the idolatrous
nations, and prohibits them on pain of death. In Leviticus 21 he treats
of the mourning, marriages, and personal defects of the priests, which
rendered them unclean. And in Leviticus 22 he speaks of unclean
sacrifices, or such as should not be offered to the Lord. After this, to
the close of the book, many important and excellent political and
domestic regulations are enjoined, the whole forming an
eccleslastico-political system superior to any thing the world ever saw.
Bishop Wilson very properly observes that, "by these laws of clean and
unclean animals, etc., God did keep this people separated from the
idolatrous world: and this is a standing proof, even to the present day,
of the Divine authority of these Scriptures; for no power or art of man
could have obliged so great and turbulent a nation to submit to such
troublesome precepts as the Jews always have submitted to, had they not
been fully convinced, from the very first, that the command was from
God, and that it was to be obeyed at the peril of their souls."

[Leviticus 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 11:3</span></span>

Whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is cloven-footed - These two words mean
the same thing - a divided hoof, such as that of the ox, where the hoof
is divided into two toes, and each toe is cased with horn.

Cheweth the cud - Ruminates; casts up the grass, etc., which had been
taken into the stomach for the purpose of mastication. Animals which
chew the cud, or ruminate, are provided with two, three or four
stomachs. The ox has four: in the first or largest, called the
ventriculus or paunch, the food is collected without being masticated,
the grass, etc., being received into it as the beast crops it from the
earth. The food, by the force of the muscular coats of this stomach, and
the liquors poured in, is sufficiently macerated; after which, formed
into small balls, it is thrown up by the esophagus into the mouth, where
it is made very small by mastication or chewing, and then sent down into
the second stomach, into which the esophagus or gullet opens, as well as
into the first, ending exactly where the two stomachs meet. This is what
is termed chewing the cud. The second stomach, which is called the
reticulum, honeycomb, bonnet, or king's hood, has a great number of
small shallow cells on its inward surface, of a pentagonal or five-sided
form, exactly like the cells in a honey-comb; in this the food is
farther macerated, and then pushed onward into the third stomach, called
the omasum or many-plies, because its inward surface is covered with a
great number of thin membranous partitions. From this the food passes
into the fourth stomach, called the abomasum, or rede. In this stomach
it is digested, and from the digested mass the chyle is formed, which,
being absorbed by the lacteal vessels, is afterwards thrown into the
mass of blood, and becomes the principle of nutrition to all the solids
and fluids of the body. The intention of rumination, or chewing the cud,
seems to be, that the food may be sufficiently comminuted, that, being
more fully acted on by the stomachs, it may afford the greatest possible
portion of nutritive juices. The word cud is probably not originally
Saxon, though found in that language in the same signification in which
it is still used. Junius, with great show of probability, derives it
from the Cambro-British chwyd, a vomit, as it is the ball of food
vomited, or thrown up, from the first stomach or paunch through the
esophagus into the mouth, which is called by this name. Those who prefer
a Saxon derivation may have it in the verb whence our word chew; and so
cud might be considered a contraction of chewed, but this is not so
likely as the preceding.

[Leviticus 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 11:5</span></span>

The coney - שפן shaphan, not the rabbit, but rather a creature nearly
resembling it, which abounds in Judea, Palestine, and Arabia, and is
called by Dr. Shaw daman Israel, and by Mr. Bruce ashkoko. As this
creature nearly resembles the rabbit, with which Spain anciently
abounded, Bochart supposes that the Phoenicians might have given it the
name of שפניה spaniah, from the multitude of שפנים shephanim (or spanim,
as others pronounce it) which were found there. Hence the emblem of
Spain is a woman sitting with a rabbit at her feet. See a coin of
Hadrian in Scheuchzer.

[Leviticus 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 11:6</span></span>

The hare - ארנבת arnebeth, as Bochart and others suppose, from ארה arah,
to crop, and ניב nib, the produce of the ground, these animals being
remarkable for destroying the fruits of the earth. That they are
notorious for destroying the tender blade of the young corn, is well
known. It is very likely that different species of these animals are
included under the general terms שפן shaphan, and ארנבת arnebeth, for
some travelers have observed that there are four or five sorts of these
animals, which are used for food in the present day in those countries.
See Harmer, vol. iii., p. 331, edit. 1808. Some think the mountain rat,
marmot, squirrel, and hedgehog, may be intended under the word shaphan.

[Leviticus 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 11:7</span></span>

And the swine - חזיר chazir, one of the most gluttonous, libidinous, and
filthy quadrupeds in the universe; and, because of these qualities,
sacred to the Venus of the Greeks and Romans, and the Friga of our Saxon
ancestors; and perhaps on these accounts forbidden, as well as on
account of its flesh being strong and difficult to digest, affording a
very gross kind of aliment, apt to produce cutaneous, scorbutic, and
scrofulous disorders, especially in hot climates.

[Leviticus 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 11:9</span></span>

Whatsoever hath fins and scales - Because these, of all the fish tribe,
are the most nourishing; the others which are without scales, or whose
bodies are covered with a thick glutinous matter, being in general very
difficult of digestion.

[Leviticus 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 11:13</span></span>

And these - among the fowls - the eagle - נשר nesher, from nashar, to
lacerate, cut, or tear to pieces; hence the eagle, a most rapacious bird
of prey, from its tearing the flesh of the animals it feeds on; and for
this purpose birds of prey have, in general, strong, crooked talons and
a hooked beak. The eagle is a cruel bird, exceedingly ravenous, and
almost insatiable.

The ossifrage - Or bone-breaker, from os, a bone, and frango, I break,
because it not only strips off the flesh, but breaks the bone in order
to extract the marrow. In Hebrew it is called פרס peres, from paras, to
break or divide in two, and probably signifies that species of the eagle
anciently known by the name of ossifraga, and which we render ossifrage.

Ospray - עזניה ozniyah, from עזן azan, to be strong, vigorous; generally
supposed to mean the black eagle, such as that described by Homer,
Iliad. lib. xxi., ver. 252.

Αιετου οιματ' εχων μελανος, του θηρητηρος,

Ὁς θ' αμα καρτιστος τε και ωκιστος πετεηνων.

"Having the rapidity of the black eagle, that bird of prey, at once the
swiftest and the strongest of the feathered race." Among the Greeks and
Romans the eagle was held sacred, and is represented as carrying the
thunderbolts of Jupiter. This occurs so frequently, and is so well
known, that references are almost needless. See Scheuchzer.

[Leviticus 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 11:14</span></span>

The vulture - דאה daah, from the root to fly, and therefore more
probably the kite or glede, from its remarkable property of gliding or
sailing with expanded wings through the air. The דאה daah is a different
bird from the דיה daiyah, which signifies the vulture. See Bochart, vol.
iii., col. 195.

The kite - איה aiyah, thought by some to be the vulture, by others the
merlin. Parkhurst thinks it has its name from the root אוה avah, to
covet, because of its rapaciousness; some contend that the kite is
meant. That it is a species of the hawk, most learned men allow. See
Bochart, vol. iii., col..

[Leviticus 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 11:15</span></span>

Every raven - ערב oreb, a general term comprehending the raven, crow,
rook, jackdaw, and magpie.

[Leviticus 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 11:16</span></span>

The owl - בת היענה bath haiyaanah, the daughter of vociferation, the
female ostrich, probably so called from the noise they make. "In the
lonesome part of the night," says Dr. Shaw, "the ostriches frequently
make a very doleful and hideous noise, sometimes resembling the roar of
the lion; at other times, the hoarser voice of the bull or ox." He adds,
"I have heard them groan as if in the deepest agonies." - Travels, 4th
edition, p. 455. The ostrich is a very unclean animal, and eats its own
ordure as soon as it voids it, and of this Dr. Shaw observes, (see
above), it is remarkably fond! This is a sufficient reason, were others
wanting, why such a fowl should be reputed to be unclean, and its use as
an article of diet prohibited.

The night hawk - תחמס tachmas, from חמס chamas, to force away, act
violently and unjustly; supposed by Bochart and Scheuchzer to signify
the male ostrich, from its cruelty towards its young; (see [Job
39:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#013)); but others, with more
reason, suppose it to be the bird described by Hasselquist, which he
calls the strix Orientalis, or Oriental owl. "It is of the size of the
common owl, living in the ruins and old deserted houses of Egypt and
Syria; and sometimes in inhabited houses. The Arabs in Egypt call it
Massasa, the Syrians Bana. It is very ravenous in Syria, and in the
evenings, if the windows be left open, it flies into the house and kills
infants, unless they are carefully watched; wherefore the women are much
afraid of it." - Travels, p. 196. If this is the fowl intended, this is
a sufficient reason why it should be considered an abomination.

The cuckoo - שחף shachaph, supposed rather to mean the sea mew; called
shachaph, from שחפת shachepheth, a wasting distemper, or atrophy,
(mentioned [Lev 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#016); [Deu
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#022)), because its body is the
leanest, in proportion to its bones and feathers, of most other birds,
always appearing as if under the influence of a wasting distemper. A
fowl which, from its natural constitution or manner of life, is
incapable of becoming plump or fleshy, must always be unwholesome; and
this is reason sufficient why such should be prohibited.

And the hawk - נץ nets, from the root נצה natsah, to shoot forth or
spring forward, because of the rapidity and length of its flight, the
hawk being remarkable for both. As this is a bird of prey, it is
forbidden, and all others of its kind.

[Leviticus 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 11:17</span></span>

The little owl - כוס cos, the bittern, night-raven or night-owl,
according to most interpreters. Some think the onocrotalus or pelican
may be intended; for as the word כוס cos signifies a cup in Hebrew, and
the pelican is remarkable for a pouch or bag under the lower jaw, it
might have had its Hebrew name from this circumstance; but the kaath in
the following verse is rather supposed to mean this fowl, and the cos
some species of the bubo or owl. See Bochart, vol. iii., col. 272.

The cormorant - שלך shalach, from the root which signifies to cast down;
hence the Septuagint καταρρακτης, the cataract, or bird which falls
precipitately down upon its prey. It probably signifies the plungeon or
diver, a sea fowl, which I have seen at sea dart down as swift as an
arrow into the water, and seize the fish which it had discovered while
even flying, or rather soaring, at a very great height.

The great owl - ינשוף yanshuph, according to the Septuagint and the
Vulgate, signifies the ibis, a bird well known and held sacred in Egypt.
Some critics, with our translation, think it means a species of owl or
night bird, because the word may be derived from נשף nesheph, which
signifies the twilight, the time in which owls chiefly fly about. See
Bochart, vol. iii., col. 281.

[Leviticus 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 11:18</span></span>

The swan - תנשמת tinshemeth. The Septuagint translate the word by
πορφυριωνα, the porphyrion, purple or scarlet bird. Could we depend on
this translation, we might suppose the flamingo or some such bird to be
intended. Some suppose the goose to be meant, but this is by no means
likely, as it cannot be classed either among ravenous or unclean fowls.
Bochart thinks the owl is meant.

The pelican - קאת kaath. As קאת kaah signifies to vomit up, the name is
supposed to be descriptive of the pelican, who receives its food into
the pouch under its lower jaw, and, by pressing it on its breast with
its bill, throws it up for the nourishment of its young. Hence the fable
which represents the pelican wounding her breast with her bill, that she
might feed her young with her own blood; a fiction which has no
foundation but in the above circumstance. Bochart thinks the bittern is
meant, vol. iii., col. 292.

The gier eagle - רחם racham. As the root of this word signifies
tenderness and affection, it is supposed to refer to some bird
remarkable for its attachment to its young; hence some have thought that
the pelican is to be understood. Bochart endeavors to prove that it
means the vulture, probably that species called the golden vulture -
Bochart, vol. iii., col. 303.

[Leviticus 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 11:19</span></span>

The stork - חסידה chasidah, from חסד chasad, which signifies to be
abundant in kindness, or exuberant in acts of beneficence; hence applied
to the stork, because of its affection to its young, and its kindness in
tending and feeding its parents when old; facts attested by the best
informed and most judicious of the Greek and Latin natural historians.
See Bochart, Scheuchzer, and Parkhurst, under the word חסד chasad. It is
remarkable for destroying and eating serpents, and on this account might
be reckoned by Moses among unclean birds.

The heron - אנפה anaphah. This word has been variously understood: some
have rendered it the kite, others the woodcock, others the curlew, some
the peacock, others the parrot, and others the crane. The root אנף
anaph, signifies to breathe short through the nostrils, to snuff, as in
anger; hence to be angry: and it is supposed that the word is
sufficiently descriptive of the heron, from its very irritable
disposition. It will attack even a man in defense of its nest; and I
have known a case where a man was in danger of losing his life by the
stroke of a heron's bill, near the eye, who had climbed up into a high
tree to take its nest. Bochart supposes a species of the eagle to be
meant, vol. iii., col. 335.

The lapwing - דוכיפת duchiphath, the upupa, hoopoe, or hoop, a crested
bird, with beautiful plumage, but very unclean. See Bochart, and
Scheuchzer. Concerning the genuine meaning of the original, there is
little agreement among interpreters.

The bat - עטלף atalleph, so called, according to Parkhurst, from עט at,
to fly, and עלף alaph, darkness or obscurity, because it flies about in
the dusk of the evening, and in the night: so the Septuagint νυκτερις,
from νυξ, the night; and the Vulgate vespertilio, from vesper, the
evening. This being a sort of monster partaking of the nature of both a
bird and beast, it might well be classed among unclean animals, or
animals the use of which in food should be avoided.

[Leviticus 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 11:20</span></span>

All fowls that creep - Such as the bat, already mentioned, which has
claws attached to its leathern wings, and which serve in place of feet
to crawl by, the feet and legs not being distinct; but this may also
include all the different kinds of insects, with the exceptions in the
following verse.

Going upon all four - May signify no more than walking regularly or
progressively, foot after foot as quadrupeds do; for it cannot be
applied to insects literally, as they have in general six feet, many of
them more, some reputed to have a hundred, hence called centipedes; and
some a thousand, hence called millipedes; words which often signify no
more than that such insects have a great number of feet.

[Leviticus 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 11:21</span></span>

Which have legs above their feet - This appears to refer to the
different kinds of locusts and grasshoppers, which have very remarkable
hind legs, long, and with high joints, projecting above their backs, by
which they are enabled to spring up from the ground, and leap high and
far.

[Leviticus 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 11:22</span></span>

The locust - ארבה arbeh, either from ארב arab, to lie in wait or in
ambush, because often immense flights of them suddenly alight upon the
fields, vineyards, etc., and destroy all the produce of the earth; or
from רבה rabah, he multiplied, because of their prodigious swarms. See a
particular account of these insects in the notes on [Exo
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#004) (note).

The bald locust - סלעם solam, compounded, says Mr. Parkhurst, from סלע
sala, to cut, break, and עם am, contiguity; a kind of locust, probably
so called from its rugged, craggy form. See the first of Scheuchzer's
plates, vol. iii., p. 100.

The beetle - חרגל chargol. "The Hebrew name seems a derivative from חרג
charag, to shake, and רגל regel, the foot; and so to denote the
nimbleness of its motions. Thus in English we call an animal of the
locust kind a grasshopper; the French name of which is souterelle, from
the verb sauter, to leap" - Parkhurst. This word occurs only in this
place. The beetle never can be intended here, as that insect never was
eaten by man, perhaps, in any country of the universe.

The grasshopper - חגב chagab. Bochart supposes that this species of
locust has its name from the Arabic verb hajaba to veil; because when
they fly, as they often do, in great swarms, they eclipse even the light
of the sun. See the notes on [Exo
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#004), and the description of ten kinds
of locusts in Bochart, vol. iii., col. 441. And see the figures in
Scheuchzer, in whose plates 20 different species are represented, vol.
iii., p. 100. And see Dr. Shaw on the animals mentioned in this chapter.
Travels, p. 419, etc., 4th. edition; and when all these are consulted,
the reader will see how little dependence can be placed on the most
learned conjectures relative to these and the other animals mentioned in
Scripture. One thing however is fully evident, viz., that the locust was
eaten, not only in those ancient times, in the time of John Baptist,
[Mat 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#004), but also in the present day.
Dr. Shaw ate of them in Barbary "fried and salted," and tells us that
"they tasted very like crayfish." They have been eaten in Africa,
Greece, Syria, Persia, and throughout Asia; and whole tribes seem to
have lived on them, and were hence called acridophagoi, or locust-eaters
by the Greeks. See Strabo lib. xvi., and Pliny, Hist. Nat., lib. xvii.,
c. 30.

[Leviticus 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 11:27</span></span>

Whatsoever goeth upon his paws - כפיו cappaiv, his palms or hands,
probably referring to those animals whose feet resemble the hands and
feet of the human being, such as apes, monkeys, and all creatures of
that genus; together with bears, frogs, etc.

[Leviticus 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 11:29</span></span>

The weasel - חלד choled, from chalad, Syr., to creep in. Bochart
conjectures, with great propriety, that the mole, not the weasel, is
intended by the Hebrew word: its property of digging into the earth, and
creeping or burrowing under the surface, is well known.

The mouse - עחבר achbar. Probably the large field rat, or what is called
by the Germans the hamster, though every species of the mus genus may be
here prohibited.

The tortoise - צב tsab. Most critics allow that the tortoise is not
intended here, but rather the crocodile, the frog, or the toad. The frog
is most probably the animal meant, and all other creatures of its kind.

[Leviticus 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 11:30</span></span>

The ferret - אנקה anakah, from אנק anak, to groan, to cry out: a species
of lizard, which derives its name from its piercing, doleful cry. See
Bochart, vol. ii., col. 1066.

The chameleon - כח coach. Bochart contends that this is the waril or
guaril, another species of lizard, which derives its name from its
remarkable strength and vigor in destroying serpents, the Hebrew כח cach
signifying to be strong, firm, vigorous: it is probably the same with
the mongoose, a creature still well known in India, where it is often
domesticated in order to keep the houses free from snakes, rats, mice,
etc.

The lizard - לטאה letaah. Bochart contends that this also is a species
of lizard, called by the Arabs wahara, which creeps close to the ground,
and is poisonous.

The snail - חמט chomet, another species of lizard, according to Bochart,
called huluka by the Arabians, which lives chiefly in the sand - Vol.
ii., col. 1075.

The mole - תנשמת tinshameth, from נשם nasham, to breathe. Bochart seems
to have proved that this is the chameleon, which has its Hebrew name
from its wide gaping mouth, very large lungs, and its deriving its
nourishment from small animals which float in the air, so that it has
been conjectured by some to feed on the air itself - Vol. iii., col.
1073. A bird of the same name is mentioned [Lev
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#018), which Bochart supposes to be
the night-owl - Vol. iii., col. 286.

[Leviticus 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">lev 11:32</span></span>

Any vessel of wood - Such as the wooden bowls still in use among the
Arabs. Or raiment, or skin - any trunks or baskets covered with skins,
another part of the furniture of an Arab tent; the goat-skins, in which
they churn their milk, may be also intended. Or sack - any hair-cloth
used for the purpose of transporting goods from place to place.

[Leviticus 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">lev 11:33</span></span>

And every earthen vessel - Such pitchers as are commonly used for
drinking out of, and for holding liquids. M. De la Roque observes that
hair-sacks, trunks, and baskets, covered with skin, are used among the
travelling Arabs to carry their household utensils in, which are kettles
or pots, great wooden bowls, hand-mills, and pitchers. It is very likely
that these are nearly the same with those used by the Israelites in
their journeyings in the wilderness, for the customs of these people do
not change.

[Leviticus 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">lev 11:35</span></span>

Ranges for pots - To understand this, we must observe that the Arabs dig
a hole in their tent, about a foot and a half deep; three-fourths of
this, says Rauwolff, they lay about with stones, and the fourth part is
left open for the purpose of throwing in their fuel. This little
temporary building is probably what is here designed by ranges for pots;
and this was to be broken down when any unclean thing had fallen upon
it. See Harmer, vol. 1., p. 464.

[Leviticus 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">lev 11:36</span></span>

A fountain or pit, etc. - This must either refer to running water, the
stream of which soon carries off all impurities, or to large reservoirs
where the water soon purifies itself; the water in either which touched
the unclean thing, being considered as impure, the rest of the water
being clean.

[Leviticus 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">lev 11:37</span></span>

Any sowing seed - If any part of an impure carcass fall accidentally on
seed about to be sown, it shall not on that account be deemed unclean;
but if the water put to the seed to prepare it for being sown, shall be
touched by such impure carcass, the seed shall be considered as unclean,
[Lev 11:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#038). Probably this may be the
meaning of these passages.

[Leviticus 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">lev 11:42</span></span>

Whatsoever goeth upon the belly - In the word גהון gahon, the vau holem,
in most Hebrew Bibles, is much larger than the other letters; and a
Masoretic note is added in the margin, which states that this is the
middle letter of the law; and consequently this verse is the middle
verse of the Pentateuch.

Whatsoever hath more feet - Than four; that is, all many-footed
reptiles, as well as those which go upon the belly having no feet, such
as serpents; besides the four-footed smaller animals mentioned above.

[Leviticus 11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">lev 11:44</span></span>

Ye shall - sanctify yourselves - Ye shall keep yourselves separate from
all the people of the earth, that ye may be holy; for I am holy. And
this was the grand design of God in all these prohibitions and commands;
for these external sanctifications were only the emblems of the internal
purity which the holiness of God requires here, and without which none
can dwell with him in glory hereafter. See at the conclusion of this
chapter. The contents of this chapter must furnish many profitable
reflections to a pious mind.

1\. From the great difficulty of ascertaining what animals are meant in
this part of the law, we may at once see that the law itself must be
considered as abrogated; for there is not a Jew in the universe who
knows what the animals are, a very few excepted, which are intended by
these Hebrew words; and therefore he may be repeatedly breaking this law
by touching and being touched either by the animals themselves or their
produce, such as hair, wool, fur, skin, intestines, differently
manufactured, etc., etc. It therefore appears that this people have as
little law as they have gospel.

2\. While God keeps the eternal interests of man steadily in view, he
does not forget his earthly comfort; he is at once solicitous both for
the health of his body and his soul. He has not forbidden certain
aliments because he is a Sovereign, but because he knew they would be
injurious to the health and morals of his people. The close connection
that subsists between the body and the soul we cannot fully comprehend;
and as little can we comprehend the influence they have on each other.
Many moral alterations take place in the mind in consequence of the
influence of the bodily organs; and these latter are greatly influenced
by the kind of ailment which the body receives. God knows what is in
man, and he knows what is in all creatures; he has therefore graciously
forbidden what would injure both body and mind, and commanded what is
best calculated to be useful to both. Solid-footed animals, such as the
horse, and many-toed animals, such as the cat, etc., are here
prohibited. Beasts which have bifid or cloven hoofs, such as the ox and
sheep, are considered as proper for food, and therefore commanded. The
former are unclean, i. e., unwholesome, affording a gross nutriment,
often the parent of scorbutic and scrofulous disorders; the latter
clean, i. e., affording a copious and wholesome nutriment, and not
laying the foundation of any disease. Ruminating animals, i. e., those
which chew the cud, concoct their food better than the others which
swallow it with little mastication, and therefore their flesh contains
more of the nutritious juices, and is more easy of digestion, and
consequently of assimilation to the solids and fluids of the human body;
on this account they are termed clean, i. e., peculiarly wholesome, and
fit for food. The animals which do not ruminate do not concoct their
food so well, and hence they abound with gross animal juices, which
yield a comparatively unwholesome nutriment to the human system. Even
the animals which have bifid hoofs but do not chew the cud, such as the
swine, and those which chew the cud but are not bifid, such as the hare
and rabbit, are by Him who knows all things forbidden, because he knew
them to be comparatively innutritive. In all this God shows himself as
the tender Father of a numerous family, pointing out to his
inexperienced, froward, and ignorant children, those kinds of aliments
which he knows will be injurious to their health and domestic happiness,
and prohibiting them on pain of his highest displeasure. On the same
ground he forbade all fish that have not both fins and scales, such as
the conger, eel, etc., which abound in gross juices and fat which very
few stomachs are able to digest. Who, for instance, that lives solely on
swine's flesh, has pure blood and healthy juices? And is it not evident,
in many cases, that the man partakes considerably of the nature of the
brute on which he exclusively feeds? I could pursue this inquiry much
farther, and bring many proofs founded on indisputable facts, but I
forbear; for he who might stand most in need of caution, would be the
first to take offense.

3\. As the body exists only for the sake of the soul, and God feeds and
nourishes it through the day of probation, that the soul may here be
prepared for the kingdom of heaven; therefore he shows in the conclusion
of these ordinances, that the grand scope and design of all was that
they might be a holy people, and that they might resemble him who is a
holy God - God Is Holy; and this is the eternal reason why all his
people should be holy - should be purified from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. No faith in
any particular creed, no religious observance, no acts of benevolence
and charity, no mortification, attrition, or contrition, can be a
substitute for this. We must be made partakers of the Divine nature. We
must be saved from our sins - from the corruption that is in the world,
and be made holy within and righteous without, or never see God. For
this very purpose Jesus Christ lived, died, and revived, that he might
purify us unto himself; that through faith in his blood our sins might
be blotted out, and our souls restored to the image of God - Reader, art
thou hungering and thirsting after righteousness? Then blessed art thou,
for thou shalt be filled.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 12](lev012)

</div>
