<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk006)  [Next](luk008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 7:0</span></span>

Christ heals the servant of a centurion, who is commended for his faith,
[Luk 7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#001). Raises a widow's son to
life at Nain, [Luk 7:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#011). John
Baptist hears of his fame, and sends two of his disciples to inquire
whether he was the Christ, [Luk
7:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#018). Christ's character of John,
[Luk 7:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#024). The obstinate blindness
and capriciousness of the Jews, [Luk
7:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#031). A Pharisee invites him to his
house, where a woman anoints his head with oil, and washes his feet with
her tears, [Luk 7:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#036). The Pharisee
is offended, [Luk 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#039). Our Lord
reproves him by a parable, and vindicates the woman, [Luk
7:40-46](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#040); and pronounces her sins
forgiven, [Luk 7:47-50](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047).

[Luke 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 7:2</span></span>

A certain centurion's servant - See this miracle explained on [Mat
8:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#005) (note).

[Luke 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 7:3</span></span>

Elders of the Jews - These were either magistrates in the place, or the
elders of the synagogue which the centurion had built, [Luk
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#005). He sent these, probably, because
he was afraid to come to Christ himself, not being a Jew, either by
nation or religion. In the parallel place in Matthew, he is represented
as coming to Christ himself; but it is a usual form of speech in all
nations, to attribute the act to a person which is done not by himself,
but by his authority.

[Luke 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 7:5</span></span>

He loveth our nation - He is a warm friend to the Jews; and has given a
full proof of his affection to them in building them a synagogue. This
he had done at his own proper charges; having no doubt employed his own
men in the work.

[Luke 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 7:10</span></span>

Found the servant whole - This cure was the effect of the faith, prayer,
and humility of the centurion, through which the almighty energy of
Jesus Christ was conveyed to the sick man. But these very graces in the
centurion were the products of grace. It is God himself who, by the
gifts of his mercy, disposes the soul to receive its cure; and nothing
can contribute to the reception of his grace but what is the fruit of
grace itself. The apostle says, The grace of God that bringeth salvation
hath appeared unto all men, [Tit 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011).
It should therefore be our concern, not to resist the operations of this
grace: for though we cannot endue ourselves with by gracious
disposition, yet we can quench the Spirit, by whose agency these are
produced in the soul. The centurion had not received the grace of God in
vain.

[Luke 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 7:11</span></span>

Nain - A small city of Galilee, in the tribe of Issachar.

According to Eusebius, it was two miles from Mount Tabor, southward; and
near to Endor.

[Luke 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 7:12</span></span>

Carried out - The Jews always buried their dead without the city, except
those of the family of David. No burying places should be tolerated
within cities or towns; much less in or about churches and chapels. This
custom is excessively injurious to the inhabitants; and especially to
those who frequent public worship in such chapels and churches. God,
decency, and health forbid this shocking abomination.

On the impropriety of burying in towns, churches, and chapels, take the
following testimonies: Extra urbem soliti sunt alii mortuos sepelire:
Nos Christiani, eos non in urbes solum, sed et in Templa recepimus, quo
fit ut multi faetore nimis, fere exanimentur. Schoettgen. "Others were
accustomed to bury their dead without the city. We Christians not only
bury them within our cities, but receive them even into our churches!
Hence many nearly lose their lives through the noxious effluvia." "Both
the Jews and other people had their burying places without the city: -
Et certe ita postulat ratio publicae sanitatis, quae multum laedi solet
aura sepulchrorum: - and this the health of the public requires, which
is greatly injured by the effluvia from graves." - Rosenmuller. From
long observation I can attest that churches and chapels situated in
grave-yards, and those especially within whose walls the dead are
interred, are perfectly unwholesome; and many, by attending such places,
are shortening their passage to the house appointed for the living. What
increases the iniquity of this abominable and deadly work is, that the
burying grounds attached to many churches and chapels are made a source
of private gain. The whole of this preposterous conduct is as indecorous
and unhealthy as it is profane. Every man should know that the gas which
is disengaged from putrid flesh, and particularly from a human body, is
not only unfriendly to, but destructive of, animal life. Superstition
first introduced a practice which self-interest and covetousness
continue to maintain.

For a general improvement of all the circumstances of this miracle, see
the end of the chapter.

[Luke 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 7:16</span></span>

God hath visited his people - Several MSS. and versions add, εις αγαθον,
for good. Sometimes God visited his people in the way of judgment, to
consume them in their transgressions; but it was now plain that he had
visited them in the most tender compassion and mercy. This seems to have
been added by some ancient copyist, by way of explanation.

[Luke 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 7:18</span></span>

The disciples of John showed him, etc. - It is very likely that John's
disciples attended the ministry of our Lord at particular times; and
this, we may suppose, was a common case among the disciples of different
Jewish teachers. Though bigotry existed in its most formidable shape
between the Jews and Samaritans, yet we do not find that it had any
place between Jews and Jews, though they were of different sects, and
attached to different teachers.

[Luke 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 7:19</span></span>

Art thou he that should come? - That is, to save. Art thou the promised
Messiah? See on [Mat 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#003) (note).

Some have thought that this character of our Lord, ὁ ερχομενος, he who
cometh, refers to the prophecy of Jacob, [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010), where he is called שילה Shiloh,
which Grotius and others derive from שלה shalach, he sent: hence, as the
time of the fulfillment of the prophecy drew nigh, he was termed, He who
cometh, i.e. he who is just now ready to make his appearance in Judea.
In [Zac 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009), a similar phrase is used,
Behold, thy king Cometh unto thee - having Salvation. This is meant of
the Messiah only; therefore I think the words to save, are necessarily
implied.

[Luke 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 7:21</span></span>

Infirmities and plagues - The following judicious note from Bp. Pearce
is worthy of deep attention: "Luke mentions here νοσοι, μαϚιγες,
leprosias, and πνευματα πονηρα, i.e. diseases or ill habits of body,
sores or lamenesses, and evil spirits: from whence we may conclude that
evil spirits are reckoned by him (who speaks of distempers with more
accuracy than the other evangelists) as things different from any
disorders of the body, included in the two former words."

Unto many that were blind he gave light - Rather, he kindly gave sight -
εχαρισατο το βλεπειν; or, he graciously gave sight. This is the proper
meaning of the original words. In all his miracles, Jesus showed the
tenderest mercy and kindness: not only the cure, but the manner in which
he performed it, endeared him to those who were objects of his
compassionate regards.

[Luke 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 7:22</span></span>

See these verses explained at large on [Mat
11:4-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#004) (note).

[Luke 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 7:29</span></span>

Justified God - Or, declared God to be just - εδικαιωσαν τον Θεον. The
sense is this: John preached that the Divine wrath was coming upon the
Jews, from which they might flee by repentance, [Luk
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#007). The Jews, therefore, who were
baptized by him, with the baptism of repentance, did thereby acknowledge
that it is but justice in God to punish them for their wickedness unless
they repented, and were baptized in token of it. Bp. Pearce proves that
this is the sense in which the word δικαιοω is used here and in [Psa
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004), compared with [Job
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#002), and by this evangelist again in
[Luk 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#029), and [Luk
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#015).

[Luke 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 7:30</span></span>

Rejected the counsel of God - Or, frustrated the will of God - την
βουλην του Θεου ηθετησαν. Kypke says the verb αθετειν has two meanings:
- 1, to disbelieve; 2, despise, or disobey: and that both senses may be
properly conjoined here. The will of God was that all the inhabitants of
Judea should repent at the preaching of John, be baptized, and believe
in Christ Jesus. Now as they did not repent, etc., at John's preaching,
so they did not believe his testimony concerning Christ: thus the will,
gracious counsel, or design of God, relative to their salvation, was
annulled or frustrated. They disbelieved his promises, despised the
Messiah, and disobeyed his precepts.

[Luke 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 7:31</span></span>

And the Lord said - Almost every MS. of authority and importance, with
most of the versions, omit these words. As the Evangelistaria (the books
which contained those portions of the Gospels which were read in the
Churches) began at this verse, the words were probably at first used by
them, to introduce the following parable. There is the fullest proof
that they never made a part of Luke's text. Every critic rejects them.
Bengel and Griesbach leave them out of the text.

[Luke 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 7:32</span></span>

They are like unto children - See on [Mat
11:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#016) (note). It is probable that
our Lord alludes here to some play or game among the Jewish children, no
account of which is now on record.

[Luke 7:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 7:35</span></span>

Wisdom is justified, etc. - Probably the children of wisdom is a mere
Hebraism here for the products or fruits of wisdom; hence the Vatican
MS., one other, and some versions, have εργων, works, instead of τεκνων,
sons, in the parallel place, [Mat
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019). True wisdom shows itself by its
works; folly is never found in the wise man's way, any more than wisdom
is in the path of a fool. Theophylact's note on this place should not be
overlooked. Εδικαιωθη, τουτ' εστιν ετιμηθη, Wisdom Is Justified, that
is, Is Honored, by all her children.

[Luke 7:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 7:36</span></span>

One of the Pharisees - Called Simon, [Luk
7:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#040). This account is considered by
many critics and commentators to be the same with that in [Mat
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#006), etc., [Mar
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003); and [Joh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003). This subject is considered
pretty much at large in the notes on [Mat
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#006), etc., to which the reader is
requested to refer.

[Luke 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 7:37</span></span>

A woman - which was a sinner - Many suppose that this woman had been a
notorious public prostitute; but this is taking the subject by the very
worst handle. My own opinion is, that she had been a mere heathen who
dwelt in this city, (probably Capernaum), who, through the ministry of
Christ, had been before this converted to God, and came now to give this
public testimony of her gratitude to her gracious deliverer from the
darkness and guilt of sin. I am inclined to think that the original
word, ἁμαρτωλος, is used for heathen or Gentile in several places of the
sacred writings. I am fully persuaded that this is its meaning in [Mat
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#010), [Mat
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#011), [Mat
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013); [Mat
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019); and [Mat
26:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#045). The Son of man is betrayed into
the hands of sinners, i.e. is delivered into the hands of the heathens,
viz. the Romans, who alone could put him to death. See [Mar
2:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#015); [Mar
14:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#041). I think also it has this
meaning in [Luk 6:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#032); [Luk
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#001), [Luk
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#002), [Luk
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007), [Luk
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#010); [Luk
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#007); [Joh
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#031). I think no other sense can be
justly assigned to it in [Gal 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015) :
We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles. We Jews, who
have had the benefit of a Divine revelation, know that a man is not
justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Christ, ([Gal
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016)), which other nations, who were
heathens, not having a Divine revelation, could not know. It is, I
think, likely that the grand subject of the self-righteous Pharisee's
complaint was her being a heathen. As those who were touched by such
contracted a legal defilement, he could not believe that Christ was a
conscientious observer of the law, seeing he permitted her to touch him,
knowing who she was; or, if he did not know that she was a heathen, it
was a proof that he was no prophet, [Luk
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#039), and consequently had not the
discernment of spirits which prophets were supposed to possess. As the
Jews had a law which forbade all iniquity, and they who embraced it
being according to its requisitions and their profession saints; and as
the Gentiles had no law to restrain evil, nor made any profession of
holiness, the term ἁμαρτωλοι, or sinners, was first with peculiar
propriety applied to them, and afterwards to all others, who, though
they professed to be under the law, yet lived as Gentiles without the
law. Many suppose this person to be the same as Mary Magdalene, but of
this there is no solid proof.

Brought an alabaster box - See on [Mar
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003) (note).

[Luke 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 7:38</span></span>

Stood at his feet behind him - In taking their meals, the eastern people
reclined on one side; the loins and knees being bent to make the more
room, the feet of each person were turned outwards behind him. This is
the meaning of standing Behind at his Feet.

Began to wash his feet with tears - Ηρξατο βρεχειν - τοις δακρυσι, She
began to water his feet - to let a shower of tears fall on them. As the
Jews wore nothing like our shoes, (theirs being a mere sole, bound about
the foot and ancle with thongs), their feet being so much exposed had
frequent need of washing, and this they ordinarily did before taking
their meals.

Kissed his feet - With affectionate tenderness, κατεφιλει, or kissed
them again and again. See on [Mat
26:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#048) (note).

The kiss was used in ancient times as the emblem of love, religious
reverence, subjection, and supplication. It has the meaning of
supplication, in the way of adoration, accompanied with subjection, in
[Kg1 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018), Whose mouths have not
kissed Baal; and in [Job 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#027), My
mouth hath not kissed my hand; I have paid no sort of adoration to false
gods; and in [Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012), Kiss the Son
lest he be angry, - close in with him, embrace affectionately, the
offers of mercy made unto you through Christ Jesus, lest he (the Lord)
be angry with you, and ye perish: which commandment this woman seems to
have obeyed, both in the literal and spiritual sense. Kissing the feet
was practised also among the heathens, to express subjection of spirit,
and earnest supplication. See a long example in Raphelius, produced from
Polybius, concerning the Carthaginian ambassadors when supplicating the
Romans for peace. With an humble and abject mind, πεσοντες επι την γην,
they fell down on the earth, τους ποδας καταφιλοιεν τῳ συνεδριῳ, and
kissed the feet of the council. See also several examples in Kypke.
Kissing the feet is a farther proof that this person had been educated a
heathen. This was no part of a Jew's practice.

[Luke 7:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 7:41</span></span>

A certain creditor, etc. - It is plain that in this parable our Lord
means, by the creditor, God, and, by the two debtors, Simon and the
woman who was present. Simon, who had the light of the law, and who, in
consequence of his profession as a Pharisee, was obliged to abstain from
outward iniquity, might be considered as the debtor who owed only fifty
pence, or denarii. The woman, whom I have supposed to be a heathen, not
having these advantages, having no rule to regulate her actions, and no
curb on her evil propensities, may be considered as the debtor who owed
five hundred pence, or denarii. And when both were compared, Simon's
debt to God might be considered, in reference to hers, as fifty to five
hundred. However, we find, notwithstanding this great disparity, both
were insolvent. Simon, the religious Pharisee, could no more pay his
fifty to God than this poor heathen her five hundred; and, if both be
not freely forgiven by the Divine mercy, both must finally perish.
Having Nothing to Pay, he kindly Forgave them both. Some think that this
very Simon was no inconsiderable debtor to our Lord, as having been
mercifully cleansed from a leprosy; for he is supposed to be the same as
Simon the leper. See the note on [Mat
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#006).

[Luke 7:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 7:42</span></span>

Which of them will love him most? - Which is under the greater
obligation and should love him most?

[Luke 7:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 7:43</span></span>

He to whom he forgave most - By this acknowledgment he was, unknowingly
to himself, prepared to receive our Lord's reproof.

[Luke 7:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 7:44</span></span>

Thou gavest me no water - In this respect Simon was sadly deficient in
civil respect, whether this proceeded from forgetfulness or contempt.
The custom of giving water to wash the guest's feet was very ancient.
See instances in [Gen 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#004); [Gen
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#032); [Jdg
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#021); [Sa1
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#041). In Hindoostan it is the custom,
that when a superior enters the house of an inferior, the latter washes
his feet, and gives him water to rinse his mouth before he eats. See
Ayeen Akbery, vol. iii. p. 226.

[Luke 7:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 7:45</span></span>

Since the time I came in - Rather, Since the time She came in, αφ' ἡς
εισηλθεν, not εισηλθον, I came in, for it is clear from [Luk
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037) that the woman came in after
Christ, having heard that he was sitting at meat in the Pharisee's
house. The reading which I have adopted is supported by several MSS. and
Versions.

[Luke 7:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">luk 7:46</span></span>

My head with oil thou didst not anoint - Anointing the head with oil was
as common among the Jews as washing the face with water is among us. See
[Rut 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#003); [Sa2
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#020); [Sa2
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#002); [Kg2
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#002); and [Psa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005), where the author alludes to the
Jewish manner of receiving and entertaining a guest. Thou preparest a
table for me; anointest my head with oil; givest me an overflowing cup.
See [Mat 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017).

[Luke 7:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 7:47</span></span>

For she loved much - Or, Therefore she loved much. It appears to have
been a consciousness of God's forgiving love that brought her at this
time to the Pharisee's house. In the common translation her forgiveness
is represented to be the consequence of her loving much, which is
causing the tree to produce the root, and not the root the tree. I have
considered ὁτι here as having the sense of διοτι, therefore; because, to
make this sentence suit with the foregoing parable, [Luk
7:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#042), [Luk
7:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#043), and with what immediately
follows here, but he to whom little is forgiven loveth little, we must
suppose her love was the effect of her being pardoned, not the cause of
it. Ὁτι seems to have the sense of therefore in [Mat
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013); [Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044); [Co1
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#017); and in the Septuagint, in
Deuteronomy 33:52; Isaiah 49:19; Hosea 9:15; and [Ecc
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#006). Both these particles are often
interchanged in the New Testament.

Loved much - loveth little - That is, A man's love to God will be in
proportion to the obligations he feels himself under to the bounty of
his Maker.

[Luke 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">luk 7:48</span></span>

Thy sins are forgiven - He gave her the fullest assurance of what he had
said before to Simon, ([Luk 7:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047)), Thy
sins are forgiven. While the Pharisee murmured, the poor penitent
rejoiced.

[Luke 7:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">luk 7:50</span></span>

Thy faith hath saved thee - Thy faith hath been the instrument of
receiving the salvation which is promised to those who repent. Go in
peace. Though peace of conscience be the inseparable consequence of the
pardon of sin, yet here it seems to be used as a valediction or
farewell: as if he had said, May goodness and mercy continue to follow
thee! In this sense it is certainly used [Jdg
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#006); [Sa1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#017); [Sa1
20:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#042); [Sa1
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#007); [Sa2
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#009); [Jam
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#016).

The affecting account of raising the widow's son to life, [Luk
7:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#011), is capable of farther
improvement. The following may be considered to be sober, pious uses of
this transaction.

In this resurrection of the widow's son, four things are highly worthy
of notice: - 1. The meeting. 2. What Christ did to raise the dead man.
3. What the man did when raised to life: and 4. The effect produced on
the minds of the people.

I. The Meeting

1\. It was uncommon: it was a meeting of life and death, of consolation
and distress. On the one part Jesus, accompanied by his disciples, and
an innumerable crowd of people, advance towards the gate of the city of
Nain: on the other part, a funeral solemnity proceeds out of the gate, -
a person of distinction, as we may imagine from the number of the people
who accompanied the corpse, is carried out to be buried. Wherever Jesus
goes, he meets death or misery; and wherever he comes, he dispenses life
and salvation.

2\. It was instructive. A young man was carried to the grave - an only
son - cut off in the flower of his age from the pleasures, honors,
profits, and expectations of life; a multitude of relatives, friends,
and neighbors, in tears, affliction, and distress, accompanied the
corpse. Behold the present life in its true point of light! How
deceitful is the world! To hide its vanity and wretchedness, funeral
pomp takes the place of the decorations of life and health; and pride,
which carries the person through life, cleaves to the putrid carcass in
the ridiculous adornments of palls, scarfs, cloaks, and feathers! Sin
has a complete triumph, when pride is one of the principal bearers to
the tomb. And shall not the living lay these things to heart? Remember,
ye that are young, the young die oftener than the old; and it is because
so many of the former die, that there are so few of the latter to die.

3\. It was an affecting meeting. The mother of this young man followed
the corpse of her son; her distress was extreme. She had already lost
her husband, and in losing her only son she loses all that could be
reckoned dear to her in the world. She lost her support, her glory, and
the name of her family from among the tribes of her people. Jesus sees
her in this state of affliction, and was moved with compassion towards
her. This God of goodness cannot see the wretched without commiserating
their state, and providing for their salvation.

4\. It was a happy meeting. Jesus approaches this distressed widow, and
says, Weep not. But who, with propriety, can give such advice in a case
like this? Only that God who can dry up the fountain of grief, and
remove the cause of distress. Weep for thy sin, weep for thy relatives,
weep after Christ, and God will infallibly comfort thee.

II\. What Christ Did to Raise this Dead Man

1\. He came up, [Luk 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#014). When the
blessed God is about to save a soul from spiritual death, he comes up to
the heart by the light of his Spirit, by the preaching of his word, and
by a thousand other methods, which all prove that his name is mercy, and
his nature love.

2\. He touched the bier. God often stretches out his hand against the
matter or occasion of sin, renders that public that was before hidden,
lays afflictions upon the body; by some evil disease effaces that
beauty, or impairs that strength, which were the occasions of sin;
disconcerts the schemes and blasts the property of the worldly man.
These were carrying him down to the chambers of death, and the merciful
God is thus delivering him out of the hands of his murderers.

3\. He commanded - Young man! I say unto thee, Arise. Sinners! You have
been dead in trespasses and sins too long: now hear the voice of the Son
of God. Young people! to you in particular is this commandment
addressed. Delay not a moment: it will be more easy for you to return to
God now than at any future time. And perhaps the present call may never
be repeated. The sooner you hear the voice of God, the sooner you shall
be happy.

III . What the Man Did when Raised to Life

1\. He sat up, [Luk 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#015). When the
quickening voice of God reaches the heart of a sinner, his first
business is to lift up his head to contemplate the awful state in which
he is found, and the horrible pit over which he hangs, and look about
for a deliverer from the hell that is moved from beneath to meet him at
his coming.

2\. He began to speak. Prayer to God, for the salvation he needs, is
indispensably requisite to every awakened sinner. Let him speak in
prayer and praise; prayer for present salvation, and praise, because he
is still out of hell. Let him also declare the power and goodness of God
which have thus rescued him from the bitter pains of an eternal death.

3\. He walked. He (Christ) presented him to his mother. Those who were
carrying the corpse having heard the voice of the young man, immediately
laid down the bier, and the young man stepping directly on the ground,
Jesus took him by the hand and conducted him to his mother. What a
change from the deepest affliction to the highest ecstacy of joy must
have now taken place in this widow's heart! Happy moment! - when the
quickening power of Christ restores a prodigal son to a disconsolate
parent, and a member to Christ's mystical body, the Church militant!

IV\. The Effect Produced on the Minds of the People

1\. Fear seized them, [Luk 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#016). A
religious reverence penetrated their hearts, while witnessing the
effects of the sovereign power of Christ. Thus should we contemplate the
wonders of God's grace in the conviction and conversion of sinners.

2\. They glorified God. They plainly saw that he had now visited his
people: the miracle proclaimed his presence, and that a great prophet
was risen among them, and they expect to be speedily instructed in all
righteousness. The conversion of a sinner to God should be matter of
public joy to all that fear his name; and should be considered as a full
proof that the God of our fathers is still among their children. See
[Luk 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#016).

3\. They published abroad the account. The work of the grace of God
should be made known to all: the Gospel should be preached in every
place; and the miracle-working power of Christ every where recommended
to notice. If those who are raised from the death of sin were more
zealous in discoursing of, walking in, and recommending the Gospel of
the grace of God, the kingdom of Christ would soon have a more extensive
spread; and the souls thus employed would be incessantly watered from on
high.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 8](luk008)

</div>
