<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk003)  [Next](luk005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 4:0</span></span>

Christ's temptation, [Luk 4:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001).
Teaches in the synagogues of Galilee, [Luk
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#014), [Luk
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#015). He preaches in a synagogue at
Nazareth, [Luk 4:16-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016). They attempt
to kill him, [Luk 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#029), [Luk
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#030). He preaches in Capernaum, [Luk
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#031), [Luk
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#032), and casts out a demon, [Luk
4:33-37](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#033). Heals Peter's mother-in-law,
and various others, [Luk 4:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#038). He
goes to the desert, and preaches afterwards in the synagogues of
Galilee, [Luk 4:42-44](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#042).

[Luke 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 4:1</span></span>

Was led by the Spirit - Or, And was carried about, ηγετο. Matthew says,
ανηχθη, he was brought up. Mark says, the Spirit driveth him εκβαλλει -
putteth him forth. But each of the evangelists attributes this to the
Holy Ghost, not to Satan. It may be useful to remark here, that, during
the forty days and forty nights in which he is said to have been tempted
by the devil, he is carried about, continually sustained and supported,
by the Holy Ghost. Let those who are tempted by Satan look for, and, in
virtue of the power and intercession of Christ, claim, the same support;
and it matters little how many days they may be assaulted by the devil,
while they are carried about by the Spirit of God.

[Luke 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 4:7</span></span>

If thou - wilt worship me - This temptation is the last in order, as
related by Matthew; and it is not reasonable to suppose that any other
succeeded to it. Luke has here told the particulars, but not in the
order in which they took place. See every circumstance of this
temptation considered and explained in the notes on [Mat
4:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001) (note).

[Luke 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 4:14</span></span>

Returned in the power of the Spirit - Εν τῃ δυναμει του πνευματος, In
the mighty power of the Spirit. Having now conquered the grand
adversary, he comes in the miracle-working energy of the Spirit to show
forth his power, godhead, and love to the people, that they might
believe and be saved. He who, through the grace of God, resists and
overcomes temptation, is always bettered by it. This is one of the
wonders of God's grace, that those very things which are designed for
our utter ruin he makes the instruments of our greatest good. Thus Satan
is ever duped by his own proceedings, and caught in his own craft.

[Luke 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 4:15</span></span>

And he taught in their synagogues - We do not find that even the
persecuting Jews ever hindered Christ or his disciples from preaching in
their synagogues. Is it the same in every place where even the Christian
religion is established by law? Would Jesus, or his apostles, or their
most Scriptural representatives, be permitted to preach in one out of a
thousand churches, in certain countries, unless they were strictly
conformed to their external ecclesiastical customs? Nor even then,
unless their doctrine were according to the taste of the managers and of
the times.

Glorified of all - All felt the power of his preaching, and acknowledged
the divinity of his mission. The scandal of the cross had not yet taken
place.

[Luke 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 4:16</span></span>

To Nazareth, where he had been brought up - It is likely that our Lord
lived principally in this city till the 30th year of his age; but, after
he entered on his public ministry, his usual place of residence was at
the house of Peter, in Capernaum.

As his custom was - Our Lord regularly attended the public worship of
God in the synagogues; for there the Scriptures were read: other parts
of the worship were very corrupt; but it was the best at that time to be
found in the land. To worship God publicly is the duty of every man, and
no man can be guiltless who neglects it. If a person cannot get such
public worship as he likes, let him frequent such as he can get. Better
to attend the most indifferent than to stay at home, especially on the
Lord's day. The place and the time are set apart for the worship of the
true God: if others do not conduct themselves well in it, that is not
your fault, and need not be any hinderance to you. You come to worship
God - do not forget your errand - and God will supply the lack in the
service by the teachings of his Spirit. Hear the saying of old Mr.
Herbert: - "The worst speak something good: should all want sense, God
takes the text, and preacheth p-a-t-i-e-n-c-e." A man may always profit
where the word of God is read.

Stood up for to read - The Jews, in general, sat while they taught or
commented on the Sacred Writings, or the traditions of the elders; but
when they read either the law or the prophets they invariably stood up:
it was not lawful for them even to lean against any thing while employed
in reading.

[Luke 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 4:17</span></span>

And when he had opened the book - Αναπτυξας, When he had unrolled it.
The Sacred Writings used to this day, in all the Jewish synagogues, are
written on skins of basil, parchment, or vellum, sewed end to end, and
rolled on two rollers, beginning at each end; so that, in reading from
right to left, they roll off with the left, while they roll on with the
right. Probably the place in the Prophet Isaiah, here referred to, was
the lesson for that day; and Jesus unrolled the manuscript till he came
to the place: then, after having read, he rolled it up again, and
returned it to the officer, [Luk 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#020),
the ruler of the synagogue, or his servant, whose business it was to
take care of it. The place that he opened was probably the section for
the day. See the table at the end of Deuteronomy, and the note at the
end of that table.

[Luke 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 4:18</span></span>

The Spirit of the Lord - This is found in [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001); but our Lord immediately adds to
it [Isa 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007). The proclaiming of
liberty to the captives, and the acceptable year (or year of acceptance)
of the Lord, is a manifest allusion to the proclaiming of the year of
jubilee by sound of trumpet: see [Lev
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008) (note), etc., and the notes
there. This was a year of general release of debts and obligations; of
bond-men and women; of lands and possessions, which had been sold from
the families and tribes to which they belonged. Our Savior, by applying
this text to himself, a text so manifestly relating to the institution
above mentioned, plainly declares the typical design of that
institution. - Lowth.

He hath anointed me - I have been designed and set apart for this very
purpose; my sole business among men is to proclaim glad tidings to the
poor, etc. All the functions of this new prophet are exercised on the
hearts of men; and the grace by which he works in the heart is a grace
of healing, deliverance, and illumination; which, by an admirable
virtue, causes them to pass from sickness to health, from slavery to
liberty, from darkness to light, and from the lowest degrees of misery
to supreme eternal happiness. See Quesnel. To those who feel their
spiritual poverty, whose hearts are broken through a sense of their
sins, who see themselves tied and bound with the chains of many evil
habits, who sit in the darkness of guilt and misery, without a friendly
hand to lead them in the way in which they should go - to these, the
Gospel of the grace of Christ is a pleasing sound, because a present and
full salvation is proclaimed by it; and the present is shown to be the
acceptable year of the Lord; the year, the time, in which he saves to
the uttermost all who come unto him in the name of his Son Jesus.
Reader! what dost thou feel? Sin-wretchedness-misery of every
description? Then come to Jesus - He will save Thee - he came into the
world for this very purpose. Cast thy soul upon him, and thou shalt not
perish, but have everlasting life.

[Luke 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 4:20</span></span>

Were fastened on him - Were attentively fixed on him. The proper import
of ατενιζοντες αυτῳ.

[Luke 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 4:22</span></span>

At the gracious words - To the words of grace, επι τοις λογοις της
χαριτος, or the doctrines of grace, which he then preached. It is very
strange that none of the evangelists give us any account of this sermon!
There was certainly more of it than is related in [Luk
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#021). To-day is this scripture
fulfilled in your ears; which seems to have been no more than the first
sentence he spoke on the occasion. Had it been necessary for our
salvation, it would have been recorded. It was a demonstration to those
Jews, that Jesus, who preached to them, was the person of whom the
prophet there spoke: it was not designed for general edification. Let us
make a good use of what we have got, and we shalt not regret that this
sermon is lost. The ear is never satisfied with hearing: we wish for
another and another revelation, while sadly unacquainted with the nature
and design of that which God's mercy has already given us.

[Luke 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 4:23</span></span>

Physician, heal thyself - That is, heal the broken-hearted in thy own
country, as the latter clause of the verse explains it; but they were
far from being in a proper spirit to receive the salvation which he was
ready to communicate; and therefore they were not healed.

[Luke 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 4:24</span></span>

No prophet is accepted - See on [Mat
13:55-57](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055) (note).

[Luke 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 4:25</span></span>

In the days of Elias - See this history, [Kg1
17:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001), compared with 1 Kings 18:1-45.
This was evidently a miraculous interference, as no rain fell for three
years and six months, even in the rainy seasons. There were two of these
in Judea, called the first and the latter rains; the first fell in
October, the latter in April: the first prepared the ground for the
seed, the latter ripened the harvest. As both these rains were withheld,
consequently there was a great famine throughout all the land.

[Luke 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 4:26</span></span>

Unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta - The sentence is
elliptical, and means this: To none of them was Elias sent; he was not
sent except to Sarepta; for the widow at Sarepta was a Sidonian, not a
widow of Israel. Pearce. - Sarepta was a pagan city in the country of
Sidon, in the vicinity of Galilee.

[Luke 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 4:27</span></span>

None of them was cleansed - This verse is to be understood as the 26th;
for Naaman, being a Syrian, was no leper in Israel. The meaning of these
verses is, God dispenses his benefits when, where, and to whom he
pleases. No person can complain of his conduct in these respects,
because no person deserves any good from his hand. God never punishes
any but those who deserve it; but he blesses incessantly those who
deserve it not. The reason is evident: justice depends on certain rules;
but beneficence is free. Beneficence can bless both the good and the
evil; justice can punish the latter only. Those who do not make this
distinction must have a very confused notion of the conduct of Divine
Providence among men.

[Luke 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 4:28</span></span>

Were filled with wrath - They seem to have drawn the following
conclusion from what our Lord spoke: "The Gentiles are more precious in
the sight of God than the Jews; and to them his miracles of mercy and
kindness shall be principally confined." This was pretty near the truth,
as the event proved. Those who profit not by the light of God, while it
is among them, shall have their candle extinguished. The kingdom of God
was taken from the Jews, and given to the Gentiles; not because the
Gentiles were better than they were, but because,

1st. The Jews had forfeited their privileges; and

2dly. Because Christ saw that the Gentiles would bring forth the fruits
of the kingdom.

[Luke 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 4:29</span></span>

The brow of the hill - Mr. Maundrel tells us that this is still called
"the Mountain of the Precipitation, and is half a league southward of
Nazareth. In going to it, you cross first over the vale in which
Nazareth stands; and then going down two or three furlongs, in a narrow
cleft between the rocks, you there clamber up a short but difficult way
on the right hand; at the top of which you find a great stone standing
on the brink of a precipice, which is said to be the very place where
our Lord was destined to be thrown down by his enraged neighbors."
Maundrel's Journey, p. 116. Edit. 5th. 1732.

[Luke 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 4:30</span></span>

Passing through the midst of them - Either he shut their eyes so that
they could not see him; or he so overawed them by his power as to leave
them no strength to perform their murderous purpose. The man Christ
Jesus was immortal till his time came; and all his messengers are
immortal till their work is done. The following relation of a fact
presents a scene something similar to what I suppose passed on this
occasion: A missionary, who had been sent to a strange land to proclaim
the Gospel of the kingdom of God, and who had passed through many
hardships, and was often in danger of losing his life, through the
persecutions excited against him, came to a place where he had often
before, at no small risk, preached Christ crucified. About fifty people,
who had received good impressions from the word of God, assembled: he
began his discourse; and, after he had preached about thirty minutes, an
outrageous mob surrounded the house, armed with different instruments of
death, and breathing the most sanguinary purposes. Some that were within
shut the door; and the missionary and his flock betook themselves to
prayer. The mob assailed the house, and began to hurl stones against the
walls, windows, and roof; and in a short time almost every tile was
destroyed, and the roof nearly uncovered, and before they quitted the
premises scarcely left one square inch of glass in the five windows by
which the house was enlightened. While this was going forward, a person
came with a pistol to the window opposite to the place where the
preacher stood, (who was then exhorting his flock to be steady, to
resign themselves to God, and trust in him), presented it at him, and
snapped it; but it only flashed in the pan! As the house was a wooden
building, they began with crows and spades to undermine it, and take
away its principal supports. The preacher then addressed his little
flock to this effect: "These outrageous people seek not you, but me; if
I continue in the house, they will soon pull it down, and we shall be
all buried in its ruins; I will therefore, in the name of God, go out to
them, and you will be safe." He then went towards the door; the poor
people got round him, and entreated him not to venture out, as he might
expect to be instantly massacred; he went calmly forward, opened the
door, at which a whole volley of stones and dirt was that instant
discharged; but he received no damage. The people were in crowds in all
the space before the door, and filled the road for a considerable way,
so that there was no room to pass or repass. As soon as the preacher
made his appearance, the savages became instantly as silent and as still
as night: he walked forward; and they divided to the right and to the
left, leaving a passage of about four feet wide for himself and a young
man who followed him, to walk in. He passed on through the whole crowd,
not a soul of whom either lifted a hand, or spoke one word, till he and
his companion had gained the uttermost skirts of the mob! The narrator,
who was present on the occasion, goes on to say: "This was one of the
most affecting spectacles I ever witnessed; an infuriated mob, without
any visible cause, (for the preacher spoke not one word), became in a
moment as calm as lambs! They seemed struck with amazement bordering on
stupefaction; they stared and stood speechless; and, after they had
fallen back to right and left to leave him a free passage, they were as
motionless as statues! They assembled with the full purpose to destroy
the man who came to show them the way of salvation; but he, passing
through the midst of them, went his way. Was not the God of missionaries
in this work? The next Lord's day, the missionary went to the same
place, and again proclaimed the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of
the world!"

[Luke 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 4:31</span></span>

Came down to Capernaum - Which it is likely he made his ordinary place
of residence from this time. See on [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013) (note).

[Luke 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 4:32</span></span>

His word was with power - Εν εξουσιᾳ, With authority. He assumed the
tone and manner of a new Lawgiver; and uttered all his doctrines, not in
the way of exhortation or advice, but in the form of precepts and
commands, the unction of the Holy Spirit accompanying all he said. See
on [Mar 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#022) (note).

[Luke 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 4:33</span></span>

A spirit of an unclean devil - As demon was used both in a good and bad
sense before and after the time of the evangelists the word unclean may
have been added here by St. Luke, merely to express the quality of this
spirit. But it is worthy of remark, that the inspired writers never use
the word δαιμων, demon, in a good sense. See the whole of this case
explained, [Mar 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#023) (note), etc.

[Luke 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 4:35</span></span>

And hurt him not - Though he convulsed him, [Mar
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#026), and threw him down in the midst
of them, probably with the design to take away his life, yet our Lord
permitted it not; and this appears to be the meaning of the place. The
spirit was not permitted essentially to injure him at that time.

[Luke 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 4:37</span></span>

The fame - Ηχος, the sound. This is a very elegant metaphor. The people
are represented as struck with astonishment, and the sound goes out
through all the coasts; in allusion to the propagation of sound, by a
smart stroke upon any substance, by which the air is suddenly agitated,
and conveys the report made by the stroke to distant places. So this
miracle was told to others by those who saw it, and they to others
still, till it was heard through all the coasts of Galilee, [Mar
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#028).

[Luke 4:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 4:38</span></span>

Simon's wife's mother - See on [Mat
8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#014) (note). As soon as Peter began
to follow Christ, his family began to benefit by it. It is always
profitable to contract an acquaintance with good men. One person full of
faith and prayer may be the means of drawing down innumerable blessings
on his family and acquaintance. Every person who knows the virtue and
authority of Christ should earnestly seek his grace in behalf of all the
spiritually diseased in his household; nor can he seek the aid of Christ
in vain.

[Luke 4:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 4:40</span></span>

When the sun was setting - And consequently the Sabbath ended, for
before this it would have been unlawful to have brought their sick to be
healed.

[Luke 4:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 4:42</span></span>

And the people sought him - Rather, Sought him earnestly. Instead of
εζητουν, sought, I read, επεζητουν, earnestly sought. This reading is
supported by ABCDFLMS - V, and more than seventy others. Wetstein and
Griesbach have both received it into the text. The people had tasted the
good word of God, and now they cleave to Christ with their whole heart.
Hearing the words of Christ, and feeling the influence of his Spirit
upon the soul, will attract and influence the heart; and indeed nothing
else can do it.

And stayed him - Strove to detain him; κατειχον αυτον they caught hold
of him. Thus showing their great earnestness to be farther instructed.

[Luke 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 4:43</span></span>

I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities - To proclaim the
kingdom of God was the Messiah's great work; healing the diseases of the
people was only an emblematical and secondary work, a work that was to
be the proof of his goodness, and the demonstration of his authority to
preach the Gospel, and open the kingdom of heaven to all believers.

Some have found both a difficulty and a mystery in the shutting up of
heaven in the time of the Prophet Elijah. It was, no doubt, emblematical
of the hardened and impenitent state of the Israelites, and of the
judgments of God in withholding those Divine influences which they had
so often abused. As to the difficulty of the six months, which both our
Lord here, and St. James, [Jam 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017),
mention, and which are not mentioned in the book of Kings whence the
account is taken, it may be easily understood thus. The rains, we have
already seen, fell in Judea twice in the year, about April, and about
October. At this latter period, when the rain was expected, the prophet
prayed that it might not rain; the rain therefore of Marchesvan, or
October, etc., was then restrained: this restraint continued for three
full years; but six months had elapsed from Nisan, April, etc., when
they had their last rain, add these six months to the three full years
that the rain was restrained at the prayer of Elijah, and then we have
the period of three years and six months, according to our Lord and
Saint James. By this the justice of God was shown: but behold his mercy
in that rain of grace which fell so abundantly by the preaching of
Christ during the three years and six months of his public ministry!
Thus the difficulty is solved, and the mystery explained. Reader, the
most awful famine is a famine of the word of God: thou art not yet tried
in this way: behold the goodness and severity of God! While thou hast
the light, walk as a child of the light; and let it not be thy curse and
condemnation, that while others, by reading and hearing the word of God,
are plenteously watered, thy fleece alone should be found dry. How
unutterable must the wo of those be, who live and die infidels under the
preaching of the Gospel of Christ!

Let him that readeth, understand.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 5](luk005)

</div>
