<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Malachi Index](mal)  
  [Previous](zac014)  [Next](mal002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

[Malachi](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mal 1:0</span></span>

This chapter begins with showing the great and free favor which God had
manifested to the Israelites, above what he had done to the Edomites,
who are threatened with farther marks of the Divine displeasure;
alluding, perhaps, to the calamities which they suffered from Judas
Maccabeus and John Hyrcanus, (see 1 Maccabees 5:65, and Joseph Antiq.
13:9), [Mal 1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001). God then reproaches
his people, and especially their priests, for their ungrateful returns
to his distinguished goodness, [Mal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006). They are particularly charged
with sacrificing the refuse of beasts, [Mal
1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007), for which God threatens to
reject them, [Mal 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010), and choose
other nations who will show more reverence to his name and worship, [Mal
1:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011).

[Malachi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mal 1:1</span></span>

The burden of the word of the Lord to Israel by Malachi - This prophet
is undoubtedly the last of the Jewish prophets. He lived after Zechariah
and Haggai; for we find that the temple, which was begun in their time,
was standing complete in his. See [Mal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#010). Some have thought that he was
contemporary with Nehemiah; indeed, several have supposed that Malachi,
is no other than Ezra under the feigned name of angel of the Lord, or my
angel. John the Baptist was the link that connected Malachi with Christ.
According to Abp. Usher he flourished b.c. 416, but the authorized
version, which we have followed in the margin, states this event to have
happened nineteen years later. Both the Hebrew language and poetry had
declined in his days.

Israel - Here means the Jewish people in general.

[Malachi 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mal 1:2</span></span>

Was not Esau Jacob's brother? - Have I not shown a greater partiality to
the Israelites than I have to the Edomites?

I loved Jacob - My love to Jacob has been proved by giving him greater
privileges and a better inheritance than what I have given to Esau.

[Malachi 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mal 1:3</span></span>

And I hated Esau - I have shown him less love; [Gen
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#030), [Gen
29:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#031). I comparatively hated him by
giving him an inferior lot. And now, I have not only laid waste the
dwelling-place of the Edomites, by the incursions of their enemies; but
([Mal 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004)) they shall remain the
perpetual monuments of my vengeance. On the subject of loving Jacob and
hating Esau, see the notes on Genesis 27 (note), and [Rom
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#013) (note). Let it be remembered,

1\. That there is not a word spoken here concerning the eternal state of
either Jacob or Esau.

2\. That what is spoken concerns merely their earthly possessions. And,

3\. That it does not concern the two brothers at all, but the posterity
of each.

[Malachi 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mal 1:4</span></span>

They shall build, but I will throw down - We have already seen enough of
the wickedness of the Edomites to justify the utmost severity of Divine
justice against them. The pulling down predicted here was by Judas
Maccabeus; see 1 Maccabees 5:65; and by John Hyrcanus; see Joseph
Antiq., lib. 13 c. 9. s. 1.

They shall call them, The border of wickedness - A wicked land. Among
this people scarcely any trace of good could ever be noted.

[Malachi 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mal 1:5</span></span>

Your eyes - Ye Israelites shall see, in your succeeding generations,
that: -

The Lord will be magnified - By his kindness in Israel, and his
judgments beyond.

[Malachi 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mal 1:6</span></span>

A son honoreth his father - I am your Father - where, then, is my honor?
Where your filial obedience?

If I be a master, where is my fear? - The respect due to me.

[Malachi 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mal 1:7</span></span>

Ye offer polluted bread - The priests, probably to ingratiate themselves
with the people, took the refuse beasts, etc., and offered them to God;
and thus the sacrificial ordinances were rendered contemptible.

[Malachi 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mal 1:8</span></span>

Offer it now unto thy governor - פחת pechath, a word signifying a
lieutenant, or viceroy, among the Chaldeans, Syrians, and Persians; for
neither at this time, nor ever after, was there a king in Israel.

[Malachi 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mal 1:9</span></span>

Beseech God - There were evident marks of God's displeasure in the land,
and it was occasioned by these pollutions through the priests. And now
he exhorts them to pray to God that they may be pardoned: for, if this
practice be persisted in, God will not accept any offering made by them.

[Malachi 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mal 1:10</span></span>

Who is - among you - From this we learn that there was not one sincere
or honest priest among them. They were selfish and worldly; and so
basely so, that not one of them would even kindle a fire on the hearth
of the altar unless he were paid for it.

[Malachi 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mal 1:11</span></span>

From the rising of the sun - The total abolition of the Mosaic
sacrifices, and the establishment of a spiritual worship over the whole
earth, is here foretold. The incense of praise, and the pure offering of
the Lamb without spot, and through him a holy, loving heart, shall be
presented everywhere among the Gentiles; and the Jews and their mock
offerings shall be rejected.

[Malachi 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mal 1:12</span></span>

Ye have profaned it - Ye have desecrated God's worship; is it any wonder
that God should cast you off, and follow you with his judgments?

[Malachi 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mal 1:13</span></span>

Ye have snuffed at it - A metaphor taken from cattle which do not like
their fodder. They blow strongly through their nose upon it; and after
this neither they nor any other cattle will eat it.

Ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick - There had
never been such abominations in the Divine worship before. What was of
no worth in itself, and what could not be used by its owner, was brought
to God's altar, and offered for sacrifice! Was not the punishment of
these wretches less than their crimes?

[Malachi 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mal 1:14</span></span>

Cursed be the deceiver - Those who act thus, as they cannot elude God's
notice, so neither shall they escape his curse.

And voweth, and sacrificeth - a corrupt thing - The history of Ananias
and Sapphira, [Act 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001), etc., is a
complete comment on this. It was high time to break up this corrupt
service; and after this time God does not appear to have paid any regard
to it, for he sent them no other prophet.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 2](mal002)

</div>
