<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Malachi Index](mal)  
  [Previous](mal001)  [Next](mal003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001)

[Malachi](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mal 2:0</span></span>

The priests reproved for their unfaithfulness in their office, for which
they are threatened to be deprived of their share of the sacrifice, (the
shoulder), and rewarded only with ignominy and ordure, [Mal
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001). The degeneracy of the order is
then complained of, and they are again threatened, [Mal
2:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#004). The rest of the chapter
reproves the people for marrying strange and idolatrous women; and
multiplying divorces, with all their consequent distress, in order to
make way for such illicit alliances, [Mal
2:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010). See [Neh
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#030); [Neh
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#013), etc.

[Malachi 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mal 2:2</span></span>

If ye will not hear - What I have spoken, lay it to heart, and let it
sink down into your souls.

Give glory unto my name - That honor that is due to me as a Father, and
that fear that belongs to me as a Master, [Mal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006).

I will even send a curse upon you - I will dispense no more good.

I will curse your blessings - Even that which ye have already shall not
profit you. When temporal blessings are not the means of leading us to
God and heaven, they will infallibly lead us to hell. In speaking of the
abuse of temporal blessings, one of our old poets, in his homely phrase,
expresses himself thus: -

Thus God's best gifts, usurped by wicked ones,

To poison turn by their con-ta-gi-ons.

Yea, I have cursed them already - This may refer, generally, to
unfruitful seasons; or, particularly, to a dearth that appears to have
happened about this time. See [Hag
1:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006).

[Malachi 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mal 2:3</span></span>

Behold, I will corrupt your seed - So as to render it unfruitful.
Newcome translates, - "I will take away from you the shoulder." This was
the part that belonged to the priest, [Lev
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#032); [Deu
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#003).

Spread dung upon your faces - Instead of receiving a sacrifice at your
hands, I will throw your offerings back into your faces. Here God shows
his contempt for them and their offerings.

[Malachi 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mal 2:4</span></span>

This commandment - That in the first verse; to drive such priests from
his presence and his service.

That my covenant might be with Levi - I gave the priesthood and the
service of my altar to that tribe.

[Malachi 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mal 2:5</span></span>

My covenant was with him of life and peace - These are the two grand
blessings given to men by the New Covenant, which was shadowed by the
Old. To man, excluded from the favor of God, and sentenced to death
because of sin, God gave ברית berith, a covenant sacrifice, and this
secured life - exemption from the death deserved by transgressors;
communication of that inward spiritual life given by Christ, and issuing
in that eternal life promised to all his faithful disciples. And, as it
secured life, so it gave peace, prosperity, and happiness; peace between
God and man, between man and man, and between man and his own
conscience.

[Malachi 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mal 2:6</span></span>

The law of truth was in his mouth - See the qualifications of Levi:

1\. "He feared me;" he was my sincere worshipper.

2\. "He was afraid;" he acted as in the presence of a just and holy God,
and acted conscientiously in all that he did.

3\. "My law of truth was ever in his mouth;" by this he directed his own
conduct and that of others.

4\. "No iniquity;" nothing contrary to justice and equity ever proceeded
"from his lips."

5\. "He walked with me in peace;" he lived in such a way as to keep up
union with me.

6\. "He did turn many away from iniquity;" by his upright
administration, faithful exhortations, and pious walk, he became the
instrument of converting many sinners.

This character suits every genuine minister of God. And as the priest's
lips should preserve knowledge, so the people should seek "the law at
his mouth;" for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts, [Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007).

[Malachi 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mal 2:8</span></span>

But ye are departed out of the way - Ye are become impure yourselves,
and ye have led others into iniquity.

[Malachi 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mal 2:9</span></span>

Therefore have I also made you contemptible - The people despised you
because they saw that you acted contrary to your functions. This has
happened repeatedly since, to several classes of priests. Not
maintaining, by purity of life and soundness of doctrine, the dignity of
the ministerial function, they became contemptible before the people;
their meager preaching was disregarded, and their persons at last cast
out as a general loathing to the universe! See what happened to the
truly abominable priesthood of France and Rome 1796-8. They were the
sole cause of that infidelity that brought about the revolution. They
are now partially restored; and are endeavouring to supply by grimace,
paltry superstition, and jesuitical cunning, what they want in purity of
morals, soundness of doctrine, and unction from God. They must mend, or
look for another revolution. Mankind will no longer put up with the
chaff of puerile and fanatical ceremonies in place of the wheat of God's
word and worship.

[Malachi 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mal 2:10</span></span>

Have we not all one Father? - From this to [Mal
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#016) the prophet censures the
marriages of Israelites with strange women, which the law had forbidden,
[Deu 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#003). And also divorces, which
seem to have been multiplied for the purpose of contracting these
prohibited marriages. - Newcome.

Why do we deal treacherously - Gain the affections of the daughter of a
brother Jew, and then profane the covenant of marriage, held sacred
among our fathers, by putting away this same wife and daughter! How
wicked, cruel, and inhuman!

[Malachi 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mal 2:11</span></span>

Daughter of a strange god - Of a man who worships an idol.

[Malachi 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mal 2:12</span></span>

The master and the scholar - He who teachers such doctrine, and he who
follows this teaching, the Lord will cut off both the one and the other.

[Malachi 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mal 2:13</span></span>

Covering the altar of the Lord with tears - Of the poor women who, being
divorced by cruel husbands, come to the priests, and make an appeal to
God at the altar; and ye do not speak against this glaring injustice.

[Malachi 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mal 2:14</span></span>

Ye say, Wherefore? - Is the Lord angry with us? Because ye have been
witness of the contract made between the parties; and when the lawless
husband divorced his wife, the wife of his youth, his companion, and the
unite of his covenant, ye did not execute on him the discipline of the
law. They kept their wives till they had passed their youth, and then
put them away, that they might get young ones in their place.

[Malachi 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mal 2:15</span></span>

And did not he make one? - One of each kind, Adam and Eve. Yet had he
the residue of the Spirit, he could have made millions of pairs, and
inspired them all with living souls. Then wherefore one? He made one
pair from whom all the rest might proceed, that he might have a holy
offspring; that children being a marked property of one man and one
woman, proper care might be taken that they should be brought up in the
discipline of the Lord. Perhaps the holy or godly seed, זרע אלהים zera
Elohim, a seed of God, may refer to the Messiah. God would have the
whole human race to spring from one pair, that Christ, springing from
the same family, might in his sufferings taste death for every man;
because he had that nature that was common to the whole human race. Had
there been several heads of families in the beginning, Jesus must have
been incarnated from each of those heads, else his death could have
availed for those only who belonged to the family of which he was
incarnated.

Take heed to your spirit - Scrutinize the motives which induce you to
put away your wives.

[Malachi 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mal 2:16</span></span>

For the Lord - hateth putting away - He abominates all such divorces,
and him that makes them.

Covereth violence with his garment - And he also notes those who frame
idle excuses to cover the violence they have done to the wives of their
youth, by putting them away, and taking others in their place, whom they
now happen to like better, when their own wives have been worn down in
domestic services.

[Malachi 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mal 2:17</span></span>

Ye have wearied the Lord - He has borne with you so long, and has been
provoked so often, that he will bear it no longer. It is not fit that he
should.

Every one that doeth evil - Ye say that it is right in the sight of the
Lord to put away a wife, because she has no longer found favor in the
sight of her husband. And because it has not been signally punished
hitherto, ye blaspheme and cry out, "Where is the God of judgment?" Were
he such as he is represented, would he not speak out? All these things
show that this people were horribly corrupt. The priests were bad; the
prophets were bad; the Levites were bad; and no wonder that the people
were irreligious, profane, profligate, and cruel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 3](mal003)

</div>
