<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat026)  [Next](mat028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 27:0</span></span>

In the morning, Christ is bound and delivered to Pontius Pilate, [Mat
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001), [Mat
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#002). Judas, seeing his Master
condemned, repents, acknowledges his transgression to the chief priests,
attests Christ's innocence, throws down the money, and goes and hangs
himself, [Mat 27:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#003). They buy the
potter's field with the money, [Mat
27:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#006). Christ, questioned by Pilate,
refuses to answer, [Mat 27:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#011).
Pilate, while inquiring of the Jews whether they would have Jesus or
Barabbas released, receives a message from his wife to have nothing to
do in this wicked business, [Mat
27:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#015). The multitude, influenced by
the chief priests and elders, desire Barabbas to be released, and Jesus
to be crucified, [Mat 27:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#020). Pilate
attests his innocence, and the people make themselves and their
posterity responsible for his blood, [Mat
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024), [Mat
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025). Barabbas is released, and
Christ is scourged, [Mat 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#026). The
soldiers strip him, clothe him with a scarlet robe, crown him with
thorns, mock, and variously insult him, [Mat
27:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#027). Simon compelled to bear his
cross, [Mat 27:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#032). They bring him to
Golgotha, give him vinegar mingled with gall to drink, crucify him, and
cast lots for his raiment, [Mat
27:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#033). His accusation, [Mat
27:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#037). Two thieves are crucified with
him, [Mat 27:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#038). He is mocked and
insulted while hanging on the cross, [Mat
27:39-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039). The awful darkness, [Mat
27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045). Jesus calls upon God, is
offered vinegar to drink, expires, [Mat
27:46-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046). Prodigies that accompanied
and followed his death, [Mat 27:51-53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051).
He is acknowledged by the centurion, [Mat
27:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054). Several women behold the
crucifixion, [Mat 27:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#055), [Mat
27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056). Joseph of Arimathea begs the
body of Pilate, and deposites it in his own new tomb, [Mat
27:57-60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057). The women watch the
sepulchre, [Mat 27:61](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#061). The Jews
consult with Pilate how they may prevent the resurrection of Christ,
[Mat 27:62-64](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#062). He grants them a guard
for the sepulchre, and they seal the stone that stopped the mouth of the
tomb where he was laid, [Mat 27:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#065),
[Mat 27:66](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#066).

[Matthew 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 27:1</span></span>

When the morning was come - As soon as it was light - took counsel
against Jesus. They had begun this counsel the preceding evening, see
[Mat 26:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#059). But as it was contrary to
all forms of law to proceed against a person's life by night, they seem
to have separated for a few hours, and then, at the break of day, came
together again, pretending to conduct the business according to the
forms of law.

To put him to death - They had already determined his death, and
pronounced the sentence of death on him; [Mat
26:66](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#066). And now they assemble under the
pretense of reconsidering the evidence, and deliberating on it, to give
the greater appearance of justice to their conduct. They wished to make
it appear that "they had taken ample time to consider of it, and, from
the fullest conviction, by the most satisfactory and conclusive
evidence, they had now delivered him into the hands of the Romans, to
meet that death to which they had adjudged him."

[Matthew 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 27:2</span></span>

They - delivered him to Pontius Pilate - The Sanhedrin had the power of
life and death in their own hands in every thing that concerned
religion; but as they had not evidence to put Christ to death because of
false doctrine, they wished to give countenance to their conduct by
bringing in the civil power, and therefore they delivered him up to
Pilate as one who aspired to regal dignities, and whom he must put to
death, if he professed to be Caesar's friend. Pontius Pilate governed
Judea ten years under the Emperor Tiberius; but, having exercised great
cruelties against the Samaritans, they complained of him to the emperor,
in consequence of which he was deposed, and sent in exile to Vienna, in
Dauphiny, where he killed himself two years after.

[Matthew 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 27:3</span></span>

Judas - when he saw that he was condemned, repented - There is much of
the wisdom and goodness of God to be seen in this part of Judas's
conduct. Had our Lord been condemned to death on the evidence of one of
his own disciples, it would have furnished infidels with a strong
argument against Christ and the Christian religion. "One of his own
disciples, knowing the whole imposture, declared it to the Jewish
rulers, in consequence of which he was put to death as an impostor and
deceiver." But the traitor, being stung with remorse, came and
acknowledged his crime, and solemnly declared the innocence of his
Master, threw back the money which they gave him to induce him to do
this villainous act; and, to establish the evidence which he now gave
against them and himself, in behalf of the innocence of Christ, hanged
himself, or died through excessive grief and contrition. Thus the
character of Christ was rescued from all reproach; infidelity deprived
of the power to cry "imposture!" and the Jewish rulers overwhelmed with
eternal infamy. If it should ever be said, "One who knew him best
delivered him up as an impostor," - to this it may be immediately
answered, "The same person, struck with remorse, came and declared his
own guilt, and Christ's innocence; accused and convicted the Jewish
rulers, in the open council, of having hired him to do this iniquitous
action, threw them back the bribe they had given him, and then hanged
himself through distress and despair, concluding his iniquity in this
business was too great to be forgiven." Let him who chooses, after this
plenary evidence to the innocence of Christ, continue the objection, and
cry out imposture! take heed that he go not and do Likewise. Caiaphas,
Pilate, and Judas have done so already, and I have known several, who
have called Christ an impostor, who have cut their own throats, shot,
drowned, or hanged themselves. God is a jealous God, and highly resents
every thing that is done and said against that eternal truth that came
to man through Jesus Christ, by the Holy Spirit. Indeed, there is one
class of Deists, viz. those who are vicious in their lives, and virulent
in their opposition to Christianity, who generally bring themselves to
an untimely end.

[Matthew 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 27:4</span></span>

Innocent blood - Αιμα αθωον, a Hebraism, for an innocent man. But
instead of αθωον, innocent, two ancient MSS., Syriac, Vulgate, Sahidic,
Armenian, and all the Itala; Origen, Cyprian, Lucifer, Ambrose, Leo,
read δικαιον, righteous, or just.

What is that to us? - What is it? - A great deal. You should immediately
go and reverse the sentence you have pronounced, and liberate the
innocent person. But this would have been justice, and that would have
been a stranger at their tribunal.

[Matthew 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 27:5</span></span>

In the temple - Ναος signifies, properly, the temple itself, into which
none but the priests were permitted to enter; therefore εν τῳ ναῳ must
signify, near the temple, by the temple door, where the boxes stood to
receive the free-will offerings of the people, for the support and
repairs of the sacred edifice. See this amply proved by Kypke.

Hanged himself - Or was strangled - απηγξατο. Some eminent critics
believe that he was only suffocated by excessive grief, and thus they
think the account here given will agree with that in [Act
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#018). Mr. Wakefield supports this
meaning of the word with great learning and ingenuity. I have my doubts
- the old method of reconciling the two accounts appears to me quite
plausible - he went and strangled himself, and the rope breaking, he
fell down, and by the violence of the fall his body was bursted, and his
bowels gushed out. I have thought proper, on a matter of such
difficulty, to use the word strangled, as possessing a middle meaning
between choking or suffocation by excessive grief, and hanging, as an
act of suicide. See the note on [Mat
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#004). Dr. Lightfoot is of opinion that
the devil caught him up into the air, strangled him, and threw him down
on the ground with violence, so that his body was burst, and his guts
shed out! This was an ancient tradition.

[Matthew 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 27:6</span></span>

The treasury - Κορβαναν - the place whither the people brought their
free-will offerings for the service of the temple, so called from the
Hebrew קרבן korban, An Offering, from קרב karab, he drew nigh, because
the person who brought the gift came nigh to that place where God
manifested his glory between the cherubim, over the mercy-seat in the
most holy place. It is from this idea that the phrase to draw nigh to
God is taken, which is so frequently used in the sacred writings.

Because it is the price of blood - "What hypocrites, as one justly
exclaims, to adjudge an innocent man to death, and break the eternal
laws of justice and mercy without scruple, and to be, at the same time,
so very nice in their attention to a ceremonial direction of the law of
Moses! Thus it is that the devil often deludes many, even among the
priests, by a false and superstitious tenderness or conscience in things
indifferent, while calumny, envy, oppression of the innocent, and a
conformity to the world, give them no manner of trouble or disturbance."
See Quesnel.

[Matthew 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 27:7</span></span>

To bury strangers in - Τοις ξενοις, the strangers, probably meaning, as
some learned men conjecture, the Jewish strangers who might have come to
Jerusalem, either to worship, or on some other business, and died there
during their stay. See here, the very money for which the blessed Jesus
was sold becomes subservient to the purpose of mercy and kindness! The
bodies of strangers have a place of rest in the field purchased by the
price at which his life was valued, and the souls of strangers and
foreigners have a place of rest and refuge in his blood which was shed
as a ransom price for the salvation of the whole world.

[Matthew 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 27:8</span></span>

The field of blood - In vain do the wicked attempt to conceal
themselves; God makes them instrumental in discovering their own
wickedness. Judas, by returning the money, and the priests, by laying it
out, raise to themselves an eternal monument - the one of his treachery,
the others of their perfidiousness, and both of the innocence of Jesus
Christ. As, long as the Jewish polity continued, it might be said, "This
is the field that was bought from the potter with the money which Judas
got from the high priests for betraying his Master; which he, in deep
compunction of spirit, brought back to them, and they bought this ground
for a burial-place for strangers: for as it was the price of the blood
of an innocent man, they did not think proper to let it rest in the
treasury of the temple where the traitor had thrown it, who afterwards,
in despair, went and hanged himself." What a standing proof must this
have been of the innocence of Christ, and of their perfidy!

[Matthew 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 27:9</span></span>

Jeremy the prophet - The words quoted here are not found in the Prophet
Jeremiah, but in [Zac 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#013). But St.
Jerome says that a Hebrew of the sect of the Nazarenes showed him this
prophecy in a Hebrew apocryphal copy of Jeremiah; but probably they were
inserted there only to countenance the quotation here.

One of Colbert's, a MS. of the eleventh century, has Ζαχαριου,
Zechariah; so has the later Syriac in the margin, and a copy of the
Arabic quoted by Bengel. In a very elegant and correct MS. of the
Vulgate, in my possession, written in the fourteenth century, Zachariam
is in the margin, and Jeremiam in the text, but the former is written by
a later hand. Jeremiah is wanting in two MSS., the Syriac, later Persic,
two of the Itala, and in some other Latin copies. It is very likely that
the original reading was δια τοι προφητου, and the name of no prophet
mentioned. This is the more likely, as Matthew often omits the name of
the prophet in his quotations. See [Mat
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#022); [Mat
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#005), [Mat
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#015); [Mat
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#035); [Mat
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#004). Bengel approves of the omission.

It was an ancient custom among the Jews, says Dr. Lightfoot, to divide
the Old Testament into three parts: the first beginning with the law was
called The Law; the second beginning with the Psalms was called The
Psalms; the third beginning with the prophet in question was called
Jeremiah: thus, then, the writings of Zechariah and the other prophets
being included in that division that began with Jeremiah, all quotations
from it would go under the name of this prophet. If this be admitted, it
solves the difficulty at once. Dr. Lightfoot quotes Baba Bathra, and
Rabbi David Kimchi's preface to the prophet Jeremiah, as his
authorities; and insists that the word Jeremiah is perfectly correct as
standing at the head of that division from which the evangelist quoted,
and which gave its denomination to all the rest. But Jeremiah is the
reading in several MSS. of the Coptic. It is in one of the Coptic
Dictionaries in the British Museum, and in a Coptic MS. of Jeremiah, in
the library of St. Germain. So I am informed by the Rev. Henry Tattam,
Rector of St Cuthbert's, Bedford.

[Matthew 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 27:11</span></span>

Before the governor - My old MS. English Bible translates ηγημων Meyr
cheef justyse, Presedent.

Art thou the King of the Jews? - The Jews had undoubtedly delivered him
to Pilate as one who was rising up against the imperial authority, and
assuming the regal office. See on [Mat
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#002) (note).

[Matthew 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 27:12</span></span>

He answered nothing - An answer to such accusations was not necessary:
they sufficiently confuted themselves.

[Matthew 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 27:14</span></span>

Marveled greatly - Silence under calumny manifests the utmost
magnanimity. The chief priests did not admire this because it confounded
them; but Pilate, who had no interest to serve by it, was deeply
affected. This very silence was predicted. [Isa
53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007).

[Matthew 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 27:15</span></span>

The governor was wont to release - Whence this custom originated among
the Jews is not known, - probably it was introduced by the Romans
themselves, or by Pilate, merely to oblige the Jews, by showing them
this public token of respect; but if it originated with him, he must
have had the authority of Augustus; for the Roman laws never gave such
discretionary power to any governor.

[Matthew 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 27:16</span></span>

A notable prisoner - Barabbas - This person had, a short time before,
raised an insurrection in Jerusalem, in which it appears, from [Mar
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#007), some lives were lost. In some
MSS., and in the Armenian and Syriac Hieros., this man has the surname
of Jesus. Professor Birch has discovered this reading in a Vatican MS.,
written in 949, and numbered 354, in which is a marginal note which has
been attributed to Anastasius, bishop of Antioch, and to Chrysostom,
which asserts that in the most ancient MSS. the passage was as follows:
- Τινα θελετε απο των δυω απολυσω υμιν, ΙΝ τον βαραββαν, η ΙΝ τον
λεγομενον ΧΝ: Which of the two do ye wish me to release unto you, Jesus
Barabbas, or Jesus who is called Christ? As Jesus, or Joshua, was a very
common name among the Jews, and as the name of the father was often
joined to that of the son, as Simon Barjonah, Simon, son of Jonah; so it
is probable it was the case here, Jesus Barabba, Jesus, son of Abba, or
Abbiah. If this name were originally written as above, which I am
inclined to believe, the general omission of Jesus in the MSS. may be
accounted for from the over zealous scrupulosity of Christian copyists,
who were unwilling that a murderer should, in the same verse, be honored
with the name of the Redeemer of the world. See Birch in New Test.

[Matthew 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 27:18</span></span>

For envy - Δια φθονον, through malice. Then it was his business, as an
upright judge, to have dispersed this mob, and immediately released
Jesus.

Seeing malice is capable of putting even Christ himself to death, how
careful should we be not to let the least spark of it harbor in our
breast. Let it be remembered that malice as often originates from envy
as it does from anger.

[Matthew 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 27:19</span></span>

I have suffered many things - in a dream - There is no doubt that God
had appeared unto this woman, testifying the innocence of Christ, and
showing the evils which should pursue Pilate if this innocent blood
should be shed by his authority. See [Mat
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#002).

[Matthew 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 27:20</span></span>

Ask Barabbas - Who had raised an insurrection and committed murder - and
to destroy Jesus, whose voice was never heard in their streets, and who
had, during the space of three years and a half, gone about unweariedly,
from village to village, instructing the ignorant, healing the diseased,
and raising the dead.

[Matthew 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 27:21</span></span>

They said, Barabbas - What a fickle crowd! A little before they all
hailed him as the Son of David, and acknowledged him as a gift from God;
now they prefer a murderer to him! But this it appears they did at the
instigation of the chief priests. We see here how dangerous wicked
priests are in the Church of Christ; when pastors are corrupt, they are
capable of inducing their flock to prefer Barabbas to Jesus, the world
to God, and the pleasures of sense to the salvation of their souls. The
invidious epithet which a certain statesman gave to the people at large
was, in its utmost latitude, applicable to these Jews, - they were a
Swinish Multitude.

[Matthew 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 27:22</span></span>

What shall I do then with Jesus? - Showing, hereby, that it was his wish
to release him.

[Matthew 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 27:23</span></span>

What evil hath he done? - Pilate plainly saw that there was nothing laid
to his charge for which, consistently with the Roman laws, he could
condemn him.

But they cried out the more - What strange fury and injustice! They
could not answer Pilate's question, What evil hath he done? He had done
none, and they knew he had done none; but they are determined on his
death.

[Matthew 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 27:24</span></span>

Pilate - took water, and washed his hands - Thus signifying his
innocence. It was a custom among the Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins, to
wash the hands in token of innocence, and to show that they were pure
from any imputed guilt. In case of an undiscovered murder, the elders of
that city which was nearest to the place where the dead body was found,
were required by the law, [Deu
21:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001), to wash their hands over the
victim which was offered to expiate the crime, and thus make public
protestation of their own innocence. David says, I will wash my hands in
innocence, so shall I compass thine altar, [Psa
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006). As Pilate knew Christ was
innocent, he should have prevented his death: he had the armed force at
his command, and should have dispersed this infamous mob. Had he been
charged with countenancing a seditious person, he could have easily
cleared himself, had the matter been brought before the emperor. He,
therefore, was inexcusable.

[Matthew 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 27:25</span></span>

His blood be on us and on our children - If this man be innocent, and we
put him to death as a guilty person, may the punishment due to such a
crime be visited upon us, and upon our children after us! What a
dreadful imprecation! and how literally fulfilled! The notes on chap.
24, will show how they fell victims to their own imprecation, being
visited with a series of calamities unexampled in the history of the
world. They were visited with the same kind of punishment; for the
Romans crucified them in such numbers when Jerusalem was taken, that
there was found a deficiency of crosses for the condemned, and of places
for the crosses. Their children or descendants have had the same curse
entailed upon them, and continue to this day a proof of the innocence of
Christ, the truth of his religion, and of the justice of God.

[Matthew 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 27:26</span></span>

Scourged Jesus - This is allowed to have been a very severe punishment
of itself among the Romans, the flesh being generally cut by the whips
used for this purpose: so the poet: -

\- Horribili Sectere flagello.

"To be cut by the horrible whip."

Hor. Sat. I. 3. 119.

And sometimes it seems, they were whipped to death.

See the same poet, Sat. I. 2. 41.

\- Ille Flagellis Ad Mortem caesus

See also Horat. Epod. od. iv. v. 11.

It has been thought that Pilate might have spared this additional
cruelty of whipping; but it appears that it was a common custom to
scourge those criminals which were to be crucified, (see Josephus De
Bello, lib. ii. c. 25), and lenity in Christ's case is not to be
allowed; he must take all the misery in full tale.

Delivered him to be crucified - Tacitus, the Roman historian, mentions
the death of Christ in very remarkable terms: -

Nero - quaesitissimis poenis is affecit, quos - vulgus Christianos
appellabat. Auctor nominis ejus Christus, qui Tiberio imperitante, per
Procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat. -

"Nero put those who commonly went by the name of Christians to the most
exquisite tortures. The author of this name was Christ, who was
capitally punished in the reign of Tiberius, by Pontius Pilate the
Procurator."

[Matthew 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 27:27</span></span>

The common hall - Or, praetorium. Called so from the praetor, a
principal magistrate among the Romans, whose business it was to
administer justice in the absence of the consul. This place night be
termed in English the court house, or common hall.

[Matthew 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 27:28</span></span>

Stripped him - Took off his mantle, or upper garment.

A scarlet robe - Or, according to Mark and John, a purple robe, such as
emperors and kings wore.

[Matthew 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 27:29</span></span>

A crown of thorns - Στεφανον εξ ακανθων. It does not appear that this
crown was intended to be an instrument of punishment or torture to his
head, but rather to render him ridiculous; for which cause also they put
a reed in his hand, by way of scepter, and bowed their knees, pretending
to do him homage. The crown was not probably of thorns, in our sense of
the word: there are eminently learned men who think that the crown was
formed of the herb acanthus; and Bishop Pearce and Michaelis are of this
opinion. Mark, [Mar 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#017), and John,
[Joh 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#005), term it, Ϛεφανον ακανθινον,
which may very well be translated an acanthine crown or wreath, formed
out of the branches of the herb acanthus, or bear's foot. This, however,
is a prickly plant, though nothing like thorns, in the common meaning of
that word. Many Christians have gone astray in magnifying the sufferings
of Christ from this circumstance; and painters, the worst of all
commentators, frequently represent Christ with a crown of long thorns,
which one standing by is striking into his head with a stick. These
representations engender ideas both false and absurd.

There is a passage produced from Philo by Dr. Lardner, which casts much
light on these indignities offered to our blessed Lord.

"Caligula, the successor of Tiberius, gave Agrippa the tetrarchy of his
uncle Philip, with the right of wearing a diadem or crown. When he came
to Alexandria, on his way to his tetrarchate, the inhabitants of that
place, filled with envy at the thoughts of a Jew having the title of
king, showed their indignation in the following way. They brought one
Carabus (a sort of an idiot) into the theater; and, having placed him on
a lofty seat, that he might be seen by all, they put a diadem upon his
head, made of the herb byblos, (the ancient papyrus, or paper flag); his
body they covered with a mat or carpet, instead of a royal cloak. One
seeing a piece of reed, παπυρου (the stem, probably, of the aforesaid
herb) lying on the ground, picked it up, and put it in his hand in place
of a scepter. Having thus given him a mock royal dress, several young
fellows, with poles on their shoulders, came and stood on each side of
him as his guards. Then there came people, some to pay their homage to
him, some to ask justice, and some to consult him on affairs of state
and the crowd that stood round about made a confused noise, crying,
Mario, that being, as they say, the Syriac word for Lord; thereby
showing that they intended to ridicule Agrippa, who was a Syrian." See
Philo, Flace. p. 970, and Dr. Lardner, Works, vol. i. p. 159.

There is the most remarkable coincidence between this account and that
given by the evangelists; and the conjecture concerning the acanthus
will probably find no inconsiderable support from the byblos and papyrus
of Philo. This plant, Pliny says, grows to ten cubits long in the stem
and the flowers were used ad deos coronandos, for Crowning The Gods. See
Hist. Nat. lib. xiii. c. 11.

The reflections of pious Quesnel on these insults offered to our blessed
Lord merit serious attention. "Let the crown of thorns make those
Christians blush who throw away so much time, pains, and money, in
beautifying and adorning a sinful head. Let the world do what it will to
render the royalty and mysteries of Christ contemptible, it is my glory
to serve a King thus debased; my salvation, to adore that which the
world despises; and my redemption, to go unto God through the merits of
him who was crowned with thorns."

[Matthew 27:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 27:30</span></span>

And they spit upon him - "Let us pay our adoration," says the same pious
writer, "and humble ourselves in silence at the sight of a spectacle
which faith alone renders credible, and which our senses would hardly
endure. Jesus Christ, in this condition, preaches to the kings of the
earth this truth - that their scepters are but reeds, with which
themselves shall be smitten, bruised, and crushed at his tribunal, if
they do not use them here to the advancement of his kingdom."

[Matthew 27:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 27:32</span></span>

A man of Cyrene - him they compelled to bear his cross - In John, [Joh
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#016), [Joh
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017), we are told Christ himself bore
the cross, and this, it is likely, he did for a part of the way; but,
being exhausted with the scourging and other cruel usage which he had
received, he was found incapable of bearing it alone; therefore they
obliged Simon, not, I think, to bear it entirely, but to assist Christ,
by bearing a part of it. It was a constant practice among the Romans, to
oblige criminal to bear their cross to the place of execution: insomuch
that Plutarch makes use of it as an illustration of the misery of vice.
"Every kind of wickedness produces its own particular torment, just as
every malefactor, when he is brought forth to execution, carries his own
cross." See Lardner's Credib. vol. i. p. 160.

[Matthew 27:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 27:33</span></span>

A place called Golgotha - From the Hebrew גלגתה or גלגלת, golgoleth, a
skull, probably so called from the many skulls of these who had suffered
crucifixion and other capital punishments scattered up and down in the
place. It is the same as Calvary, Calvaria, i.e. calvi capitis area, the
place of bare skulls. Some think the place was thus called, because it
was in the form of a human skull. It is likely that it was the place of
public execution, similar to the Gemoniae Scalae at Rome.

[Matthew 27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 27:34</span></span>

They gave him vinegar - mingled with gall - Perhaps χολη, commonly
translated gall, signifies no more than bitters of any kind. It was a
common custom to administer a stupefying potion compounded of sour wine,
which is the same as vinegar, from the French vinaigre, frankincense,
and myrrh, to condemned persons, to help to alleviate their sufferings,
or so disturb their intellect that they might not be sensible of them.
The rabbins say that they put a grain of frankincense into a cup of
strong wine; and they ground this on [Pro
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006) : Give strong drink unto him that
is ready to perish, i.e. who is condemned to death. Some person, out of
kindness, appears to have administered this to our blessed Lord; but he,
as in all other cases, determining to endure the fullness of pain,
refused to take what was thus offered to him, choosing to tread the
winepress alone. Instead of οξος, vinegar, several excellent MSS. and
versions have οινον, wine; but as sour wine is said to have been a
general drink of the common people and Roman soldiers, it being the same
as vinegar, it is of little consequence which reading is here adopted.
This custom of giving stupefying potions to condemned malefactors is
alluded to in [Pro 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006) : Give strong
drink, שקר shekar, inebriating drink, to him who is ready to Perish, and
wine to him who is Bitter of soul - because he is just going to suffer
the punishment of death. And thus the rabbins, as we have seen above,
understand it. See Lightfoot and Schoettgen.

Michaelis offers an ingenious exposition of this place: "Immediately
after Christ was fastened to the cross, they gave him, according to [Mat
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034), vinegar mingled with gall; but,
according to Mark, they offered him wine mingled with myrrh. That St.
Mark's account is the right one is probable from this circumstance, that
Christ refused to drink what was offered him, as appears from both
evangelists. Wine mixed with myrrh was given to malefactors at the place
of execution, to intoxicate them, and make them less sensible to pain.
Christ, therefore, with great propriety, refused the aid of such
remedies. But if vinegar was offered him, which was taken merely to
assuage thirst, there could be no reason for his rejecting it. Besides,
he tasted it before he rejected it; and therefore he must have found it
different from that which, if offered to him, he was ready to receive.
To solve this difficulty, we must suppose that the words used in the
Hebrew Gospel of St. Matthew were such as agreed with the account given
by St. Mark, and at the same time were capable of the construction which
was put on them by St. Matthew's Greek translator. Suppose St. Matthew
wrote חליא במרירא (chaleea bemireera) which signifies, sweet wine with
bitters, or sweet wine and myrrh, as we find it in Mark; and Matthew's
translator overlooked the yod י in חליא (chaleea) he took it for חלא
(chala) which signifies vinegar; and bitter, he translated by χολη, as
it is often used in the Septuagint. Nay, St. Matthew may have written
חלא, and have still meant to express sweet wine; if so, the difference
only consisted in the points; for the same word which, when pronounced
chale, signifies sweet, denotes vinegar, as soon as it is pronounced
chala."

With this conjecture Dr. Marsh (Michaelis's translator) is not
satisfied; and therefore finds a Chaldee word for οινος wine, which may
easily be mistaken for one that denotes οξος vinegar; and likewise a
Chaldee word, which signifies σμυρνα, (myrrh), which may be easily
mistaken for one that denotes χολη, (gall). "Now," says he, "חמר
(chamar) or חמרא (chamera) really denotes οινος (wine), and חמץ
(chamets) or חמצא (charnetsa) really denotes οξος (vinegar). Again, מורא
(mura) really signifies σμυρνα (myrrh), and מררא (murera) really
signifies χολη (gall). If, then, we suppose that the original Chaldee
text was חמרא הליט במורא (chamera heleet bemura) wine mingled with
myrrh, which is not at all improbable, as it is the reading of the
Syriac version, at [Mar 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#023), it
might easily have been mistaken for חמצא הליט במררא (chametsa haleet
bemurera) vinegar mingled with gall." This is a more ingenious
conjecture than that of Michaelis. See Marsh's notes to Michaelis, vol.
iii., part 2d. p. 127-28. But as that kind of sour wine, which was used
by the Roman soldiers and common people, appears to have been termed
οινος, and vin aigre is sour wine, it is not difficult to reconcile the
two accounts, in what is most material to the facts here recorded.

[Matthew 27:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 27:35</span></span>

And they crucified him - Crucifixion properly means the act of nailing
or tying to a cross. The cross was made of two beams, either crossing at
the top at right angles, like a T, or in the middle of their length,
like an X. There was, besides, a piece on the center of the transverse
beam, to which the accusation or statement of the crime of the culprit
was attached, and a piece of wood which projected from the middle, on
which the person sat, as on a sort of saddle; and by which the whole
body was supported. Tertullian mentions this particularly: Nobis, says
he, tota crux imputatur, cum antenna scilicet sua, et cum illo Sedills
excessu. Advers. Nationes, lib. ii. Justin Martyr, in his dialogue with
Trypho the Jew, gives precisely the same description of the cross; and
it is worthy of observation that both he and Tertullian flourished
before the punishment of the cross had been abolished. The cross on
which our Lord suffered was of the former kind; being thus represented
in all old monuments, coins, and crosses. St. Jerome compares it to a
bird flying, a man swimming, or praying with his arms extended. The
punishment of the cross was inflicted among the ancient Hindoos from
time immemorial for various species of theft; see Halhead's Code of
Gentoo Laws, p. 248, and was common among the Syrians, Egyptians,
Persians, Africans, Greeks, and Romans: it is also still in use among
the Chinese, who do not nail, but tie the criminal to it. It was
probably the Romans who introduced it among the Jews. Before they became
subject to the Romans, they used hanging or gibbeting, but not the
cross. This punishment was the most dreadful of all others, both for the
shame and pain of it: and so scandalous, that it was inflicted as the
last mark of detestation upon the vilest of people. It was the
punishment of robbers and murderers, provided they were slaves; but if
they were free, it was thought too infamous a punishment for such, let
their crimes be what they might.

The body of the criminal was fastened to the upright beam, by nailing or
tying the feet to it, and on the transverse piece by nailing, and
sometimes tying the hands to it. As the hands and feet are the grand
instruments of motion, they are provided with a greater quantity of
nerves; and the nerves in those places, especially the hands, are
peculiarly sensible. Now, as the nerves are the instruments of all
sensation or feeling, wounds in the parts where they abound must be
peculiarly painful; especially when inflicted with such rude instruments
as large nails, forced through the places by the violence of a hammer;
thus tearing asunder the nervous fibrillae, delicate tendons, and small
bones of those parts. This punishment will appear dreadful enough, when
it is considered that the person was permitted to hang (the whole weight
of his body being borne up by his nailed hands and the projecting piece
which passed between the thighs) till he perished through agony and lack
of food. Some, we are informed, have lived three whole days in this
state. It is true that, in some cases, there was a kind of mercy shown
to the sufferer, which will appear sufficiently horrid, when it is known
that it consisted in breaking the bones of their legs and thighs to
pieces with a large hammer, in order to put them the sooner out of pain!
Such a coup de grace as this could only spring from those tender mercies
of the wicked which God represents as cruelty itself. Some were
permitted to hang on the cross till eaten up by birds of prey, which
often began to tear them before life was extinct. Horace alludes to this
punishment, and from what he says, it seems to have been inflicted on
slaves, etc., not on trifling occasions, but for the most horrible
crimes.

Si quis eum servum, patinam qui tollere jussus

Semesos pisces tepidumque ligurrierit jus,

In Cruce suffigat.

Hor. Satyr. l. i. s. 3. v. 80

If a poor slave who takes away your plate,

Lick the warm sauce, or half cold fragments eat,

Yet should you crucify the wretch!

Francis

Non hominem occidi: non pasces in Cruce corvos.

"I have not committed murder:

Then thou shalt not be nailed to the cross, to feed the ravens."

Hor. Epist. l. i. s. 16. v. 48.

The anguish occasioned by crucifixion was so intense, that crucio, (a
cruce), among the Romans, was the common word by which they expressed
suffering and torment in general.

And parted his garments, casting lots - These were the Roman soldiers,
who had crucified him: and it appears from this circumstance, that in
those ancient times the spoils of the criminal were claimed by the
executioners, as they are to the present day. It appears that they
divided a part, and cast lots for the rest: viz. for his seamless coat,
[Joh 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023), [Joh
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024).

That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, They
parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots -
The whole of this quotation should be omitted, as making no part
originally of the genuine text of this evangelist. It is omitted by
almost every MS. of worth and importance, by almost all the versions,
and the most reputable of the primitive fathers, who have written or
commented on the place. The words are plainly an interpolation, borrowed
from [Joh 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024), in which place they
will be properly noticed.

[Matthew 27:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 27:36</span></span>

They watched him - To prevent his disciples or relatives from taking
away the body or affording any relief to the sufferer.

[Matthew 27:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 27:37</span></span>

His accusation - It was a common custom to affix a label to the cross,
giving a statement of the crime for which the person suffered. This is
still the case in China, when a person is crucified. Sometimes a person
was employed to carry this before the criminal, while going to the place
of punishment.

It is with much propriety that Matthew calls this αιτια, accusation; for
it was false that ever Christ pretended to be King Of The Jews, in the
sense the inscription held forth: he was accused of this, but there was
no proof of the accusation; however it was affixed to the cross. From
[Joh 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#021), we find that the Jews
wished this to be a little altered: Write, said they, that He said, l am
king of the Jews; thus endeavoring, by the addition of a vile lie, to
countenance their own conduct in putting him to death. But this Pilate
refused to do. Both Luke, [Luk 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#038),
and John, [Joh 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#020), say that this
accusation was written in Greek, Latin, and Hebrew. In those three
languages, we may conceive the label to stand thus, according to the
account given by St. John; the Hebrew being the mixed dialect then
spoken.

In Hebrew - ΕβραΐϚι:

ישוע נצריא מלכא דיהודיא

In Greek - ΕλληνιϚι:

ΙΗΣΟΥΣ Ο ΝΑΖΩΡΑΙΟΣ Ο ΒΑΣΙΛΕΥΕ ΤΩΝ ΙΟΥΔΑΙΩΝ

In Latin - ΡωμαΐϚι:

IESUS NAZARENUS REX IUDAEORUM

It is only necessary to observe, that all the letters, both of the Greek
and Roman alphabets, were those now called square or uncial, similar to
these above.

[Matthew 27:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 27:38</span></span>

Two thieves - ΛῃϚαι, robbers, or cutthroats: men who had committed
robbery and murder; for it does not appear that persons were crucified
for robbery only. Thus was our Lord numbered (his name enrolled, placed
as it were in the death warrant) with transgressors, according to the
prophetic declaration, [Isa 53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012); and
the Jews placed him between these two, perhaps to intimate that he was
the worst felon of the three.

[Matthew 27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 27:39</span></span>

Wagging their heads - In token of contempt.

[Matthew 27:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 27:40</span></span>

Thou that destroyest - Who didst pretend that thou couldst have
destroyed the temple, and built it up again in three days. This
malicious torturing of our Lord's words has been noticed before. Cruelty
is obliged to take refuge in lies, in order to vindicate its infamous
proceedings.

If thou be the Son of God - Or rather, Υἱος του Θεου A son of God, i.e.
a peculiar favorite of the Most-High; not Ὁ Υἱος του Θεου, The Son of
God. "It is not to be conceived," says a learned man, "that every
passenger who was going to the city had a competent knowledge of
Christ's supernatural conception by the Holy Spirit, or an adequate
comprehension of his character as the Messiah, and (κατ' εξοχην) The Son
Of God. There is not a single passage where Jesus is designed to be
pointed out as the Messiah, The Son Of God, where the article is
omitted: nor, on the other hand, is this designation ever specified
without the article, thus, 'Ὁ Υἱος του Θεου. See [Mat
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016); [Mat
26:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#063); [Mat
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)."

[Matthew 27:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 27:41</span></span>

Chief priests - scribes and elders - To these, several ancient MSS. and
versions add, και Φαρισαιων, and Pharisees. But though the authority for
this reading is respectable, yet it does not appear that the Pharisees
joined in with the others in the condemnation of our Lord. Probably his
discourses and parables, related in some of the preceding chapters,
which were spoken directly to them, had so far convinced them that they
would at least have no hand in putting him to death. All the infamy of
this seems to fall upon the Priests, scribes, and elders.

[Matthew 27:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 27:42</span></span>

He saved others; himself he cannot save - Or, Cannot he save himself?
Several MSS. read this with the mark of interrogation as above; and this
makes the sarcasm still more keen.

A high priest who designs to destroy the temple of God: a Savior who
saves not himself; and the Son of God crucified: these are the
contradictions which give offense to Jews and libertines. But a high
priest who dispels the types and shadows, only that he may disclose the
substance of religion, and become the minister of a heavenly sanctuary;
a Savior who dies only to be the victim of salvation; and the Son of God
who confines his power within the bounds of the cross to establish the
righteousness of faith: this is what a Christian adores; this is the
foundation of his hope, and the fountain of his present comfort and
final blessedness. See Quesnel.

We will believe him - Instead of αυτῳ, him, many excellent MSS. have επ'
αυτῳ, In him: this is a reading which Griesbach and other eminent
critics have adopted.

[Matthew 27:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 27:43</span></span>

If he will have him - Or, if he delight in him - ει θελει αυτον. The
verbs θελω and εθελω, are used by the Septuagint in more than forty
places for the Hebrew חפץ chaphets, which signifies, earnestly to
desire, or delight in. Now as this is a quotation from [Psa
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008), He trusted in the Lord, that he
would deliver him; let him deliver him, (כי חפץ בו ki chaphets bo), for
he Hath Delighted In Him: - ὁτι θελει αυτον, Sept. This will
sufficiently vindicate the above translation; as the evangelist quotes
the words from that version, with the simple change of ει, if, for ὁτι,
because.

[Matthew 27:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 27:44</span></span>

The thieves also - cast the same in his teeth - That is, one of the
robbers; for one, we find, was a penitent, [Luk
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#039), [Luk
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#040). See this form of expression
accounted for, on [Mat 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#008) (note).

[Matthew 27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 27:45</span></span>

There was darkness over all the land - I am of opinion that πασαν την
γην does not mean all the world, but only the land of Judea. So the word
is used [Mat 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030); [Luk
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025), and in other places. Several
eminent critics are of this opinion: Beza defends this meaning of the
word, and translates the Greek, super universam Regionem over the whole
Country. Besides, it is evident that the evangelists speak of things
that happened in Judea, the place of their residence. It is plain enough
there was a darkness in Jerusalem, and over all Judea; and probably over
all the people among whom Christ had for more than three years preached
the everlasting Gospel; and that this darkness was supernatural is
evident from this, that it happened during the passover, which was
celebrated only at the full moon, a time in which it was impossible for
the sun to be eclipsed. But many suppose the darkness was over the whole
world, and think there is sufficient evidence of this in ancient
authors. Phlegon and Thallus, who flourished in the beginning of the
second century, are supposed to speak of this. The former says: "In the
fourth year of the 202nd Olympiad, there was an extraordinary eclipse of
the sun: at the sixth hour, the day was turned into dark night, so that
the stars in heaven were seen; and there was an earthquake in Bithynia,
which overthrew many houses in the city of Nice." This is the substance
of what Phlegon is reputed to have said on this subject: - but

1\. All the authors who quote him differ, and often very materially, in
what they say was found in him.

2\. Phlegon says nothing of Judea: what he says is, that in such an
Olympiad, (some say the 102nd, others the 202nd), there was an eclipse
in Bithynia, and an earthquake at Nice.

3\. Phlegon does not say that the earthquake happened at the time of the
eclipse.

4\. Phlegon does not intimate that this darkness was extraordinary, or
that the eclipse happened at the full of the moon, or that it lasted
three hours. These circumstances could not have been omitted by him, if
he had known them.

5\. Phlegon speaks merely of an ordinary, though perhaps total, eclipse
of the sun, and cannot mean the darkness mentioned by the evangelists.

6\. Phlegon speaks of an eclipse that happened in some year of the
102nd, or 202nd Olympiad; and therefore little stress can be laid on
what he says as applying to this event.

The quotation from Thallus, made by Africanus, found in the Chronicle of
Syncellus, of the eighth century, is allowed by eminent critics to be of
little importance. This speaks "of a darkness over all the world, and an
earthquake which threw down many houses in Judea and in other parts of
the earth." It may be necessary to observe, that Thallus is quoted by
several of the ancient ecclesiastical writers for other matters, but
never for this; and that the time in which he lived is so very
uncertain, that Dr. Lardner supposes there is room to think he lived
rather before than after Christ.

Dionysius the Areopagite is supposed to have mentioned this event in the
most decided manner: for being at Heliopolis in Egypt, with his friend
Apollophanes, when our Savior suffered, they there saw a wonderful
eclipse of the sun, whereupon Dionysius said to his friend, "Either God
himself suffers, or sympathizes with the sufferer." It is enough to say
of this man, that all the writings attributed to him are known to be
spurious, and are proved to be forgeries of the fifth or sixth century.
Whoever desires to see more on this subject, may consult Dr. Lardner,
(vol. vii. p. 371, ed. 1788), a man whose name should never be mentioned
but with respect, notwithstanding the peculiarities of his religious
creed; who has done more in the service of Divine revelation than most
divines in Christendom; and who has raised a monument to the perpetuity
of the Christian religion, which all the infidels in creation shall
never be able to pull down or deface.

This miraculous darkness should have caused the enemies of Christ to
understand that he was the light of the world, and that because they did
not walk in it it was now taken away from them.

[Matthew 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 27:46</span></span>

My God! My God! why hast thou forsaken me! - These words are quoted by
our Lord from [Psa 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001); they are of
very great importance, and should be carefully considered.

Some suppose "that the divinity had now departed from Christ, and that
his human nature was left unsupported to bear the punishment due to men
for their sins." But this is by no means to be admitted, as it would
deprive his sacrifice of its infinite merit, and consequently leave the
sin of the world without an atonement. Take deity away from any
redeeming act of Christ, and redemption is ruined. Others imagine that
our Lord spoke these words to the Jews only, to prove to them that he
was the Messiah. "The Jews," say they, "believed this psalm to speak of
the Messiah: they quoted the eighth verse of it against Christ - He
trusted in God that he would deliver him; let him deliver him, seeing he
delighted in him. (See [Mat 27:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043)). To
which our Lord immediately answers, My God! my God! etc , thus showing
that he was the person of whom the psalmist prophesied." I have doubts
concerning the propriety of this interpretation.

It has been asked, What language is it that our Lord spoke? Eli, Eli,
lama sabachthani. Some say it is Hebrew - others Syriac. I say, as the
evangelists quote it, it is neither. St. Matthew comes nearest the
Hebrew, אלי אלי למה עזבתני Eli, Eli, lamah azabthani, in the words, Ηλι,
Ηλι, λαμα σαβαχθανι, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani.

And St. Mark comes nearest the Syriac, [Mar
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#034), Alohi, Alohi, l'mono
shebachtheni, in the words Ελωΐ, Ελωΐ, λαμμα σαβαχθανι, Eloi, Eloi,
lamma sabachthani. It is worthy of note, that a Hebrew MS. of the
twelfth century, instead of עזבתני azabthani, forsaken me, reads שכחתני
shechachthani, Forgotten me. This word makes a very good sense, and
comes nearer to the sabachthani of the evangelists. It may be observed
also, that the words, Why hast thou Forgotten me? are often used by
David and others, in times of oppression and distress. See [Psa
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#009).

Some have taken occasion from these words to depreciate the character of
our blessed Lord. "They are unworthy," say they, "of a man who suffers,
conscious of his innocence, and argue imbecility, impatience, and
despair." This is by no means fairly deducible from the passage.
However, some think that the words, as they stand in the Hebrew and
Syriac, are capable of a translation which destroys all objections, and
obviates every difficulty. The particle למה lamah, may be translated, to
what - to whom - to what kind or sort - to what purpose or profit: [Gen
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#032); [Gen
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#029); [Gen
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#015); [Job
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#029); [Jer
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020); [Jer
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#018); [Amo
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018); and the verb עזב azab signifies
to leave - to deposit - to commit to the care of. See [Gen
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#006); [Job
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#011); [Psa
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#014), and [Jer
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#011). The words, taken in this way,
might be thus translated: My God! my God! to what sort of persons hast
thou left me? The words thus understood are rather to be referred to the
wicked Jews than to our Lord, and are an exclamation indicative of the
obstinate wickedness of his crucifiers, who steeled their hearts against
every operation of the Spirit and power of God. See Ling. Brit. Reform.
by B. Martin, p. 36.

Through the whole of the Sacred Writings, God is represented as doing
those things which, in the course of his providence, he only permits to
be done; therefore, the words, to whom hast thou left or given me up,
are only a form of expression for, "How astonishing is the wickedness of
those persons into whose hands I am fallen!" If this interpretation be
admitted, it will free this celebrated passage from much embarrassment,
and make it speak a sense consistent with itself, and with the dignity
of the Son of God.

The words of St. Mark, [Mar 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#034),
agree pretty nearly with this translation of the Hebrew: Εις τι με
εγκατιλεπες; To what \[sort of persons, understood\] hast thou left me?
A literal translation of the passage in the Syriac Testament gives a
similar sense: Ad quid dereliquisti me? "To what hast thou abandoned
me?" And an ancient copy of the old Itala version, a Latin translation
before the time of St. Jerome, renders the words thus: Quare me in
opprobrium dedisti? "Why hast thou abandoned me to reproach?"

It may he objected, that this can never agree with the ἱνατι, why, of
Matthew. To this it is answered, that ἱνατι must have here the same
meaning as εις τι - as the translation of למה lama; and that, if the
meaning be at all different, we must follow that evangelist who
expresses most literally the meaning of the original: and let it be
observed, that the Septuagint often translate למה by ἱνατι instead of
εις τι, which evidently proves that it often had the same meaning. Of
this criticism I say, Valet quod valet, Let it pass for no more than it
is worth: the subject is difficult. But whatever may be thought of the
above mode of interpretation, one thing is certain, viz. That the words
could not be used by our Lord in the sense in which they are generally
understood. This is sufficiently evident; for he well knew why he was
come unto that hour; nor could he be forsaken of God, in whom dwelt all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily. The Deity, however, might restrain
so much of its consolatory support as to leave the human nature fully
sensible of all its sufferings, so that the consolations might not take
off any part of the keen edge of his passion; and this was necessary to
make his sufferings meritorious. And it is probable that this is all
that is intended by our Lord's quotation from the twenty-second Psalm.
Taken in this view, the words convey an unexceptionable sense, even in
the common translation.

[Matthew 27:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mat 27:47</span></span>

This man calleth for Elias - Probably these were Hellenistic Jews, who
did not fully understand the meaning of our Lord's words. Elijah was
daily expected to appear as the forerunner of the Messiah, whose
arrival, under the character of a mighty prince, was generally supposed
to be at hand throughout the east. See [Mal
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005); [Mat
2:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#002); [Mat
17:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#010).

[Matthew 27:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 27:48</span></span>

Took a sponge - This being the most convenient way to reach a liquid to
his mouth; tied it on a reed, that they might be able to reach his lips
with it. This reed, as we learn from St. John, was a stalk of hyssop,
which, in that country, must have grown to a considerable magnitude.
This appears also to have been done in mercy, to alleviate his
sufferings. See [Mat 27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034).

[Matthew 27:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">mat 27:49</span></span>

After this verse, BCL and five others add, Another, taking a spear,
pierced his side, and there came out blood and water. Several of the
fathers add the same words here: they appear, however, to be an
interpolation from [Joh 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034).

[Matthew 27:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">mat 27:50</span></span>

Yielded up the ghost - Αφηκε το πνευμα, He dismissed the spirit. He
himself willingly gave up that life which it was impossible for man to
take away. It is not said that he hung on the cross till he died through
pain and agony; nor is it said that his bones were broken, the sooner to
put him out of pain, and to hasten his death; but that himself dismissed
the soul, that he might thus become, not a forced sacrifice, but a
free-will offering for sin.

Now, as our English word ghost, from the Anglo-Saxon gast, an inmate,
inhabitant, guest, (a casual visitant), also a spirit, is now restricted
among us to the latter meaning, always signifying the immortal spirit or
soul of man, the guest of the body and as giving up the spirit, ghost,
or soul, is an act not proper to man, though commending it to God, in
our last moments, is both an act of faith and piety; and as giving up
the ghost, i.e. dismissing his spirit from his body, is attributed to
Jesus Christ, to whom alone it is proper; I therefore object against its
use in every other case.

Every man, since the fall, has not only been liable to death, but has
deserved it; as all have forfeited their lives because of sin. Jesus
Christ, as born immaculate, and having never sinned, had not forfeited
his life, and therefore may be considered as naturally and properly
immortal. No man, says he, taketh it, my life, from me, but I lay it
down of myself: I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it
again; therefore doth the Father love me, because I lay down my life
that I might take it again, [Joh
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017), [Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018). Hence we rightly translate [Mat
27:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050), αφηκε το πνευμα, he gave up the
ghost; i.e. he dismissed his spirit, that he might die for the sin of
the world. The Evangelist St. John ([Joh
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030)) makes use of an expression to
the same import, which we translate in the same way: παρεδωκε το πνευμα,
he delivered up his spirit. We translate [Mar
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#037), and [Luk
23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046), he gave up the ghost, but not
correctly, because the word in both these places is very different -
εξεπνευσε, he breathed his last, or expired; though in the latter place,
[Luk 23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046), there is an equivalent
expression - O Father, into thy hands, παρατιθεμαι το πνευμα μου, I
commit my spirit; i.e. I place my soul in thy hand: proving that the act
was his own; that no man could take his life away from him; that he did
not die by the perfidy of his disciple, or the malice of the Jews, but
by his own free act. Thus He Laid Down his life for the sheep. Of
Ananias and Sapphira, [Act 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#005),[Act
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#010), and of Herod, [Act
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#023), our translation says, they gave
up the ghost; but the word in both places is εξεψυξε, which simply means
to breathe out, to expire, or die: but in no case, either by the
Septuagint in the Old, or any of the sacred writers in the New
Testament, is αφηκε το πνευμα, or παρεδωκε το πνευμα, he dismissed his
spirit, or delivered up his spirit, spoken of any person but Christ.
Abraham, Isaac, Ishmael, Jacob, etc., breathed their last; Ananias,
Sapphira, and Herod, expired; but none, Jesus Christ excepted, gave up
the ghost, dismissed, or delivered up his own spirit, and was,
consequently, free among the dead. Of the patriarchs, etc., the
Septuagint use the word εκλειπων, failing; or κατεπαυσεν, he ceased, or
rested.

[Matthew 27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">mat 27:51</span></span>

The veil of the temple was rent - That is, the veil which separated the
holy place, where the priests ministered, from the holy of holies, into
which the high priest only entered, and that once a year, to make a
general expiation for the sins of the people. This rending of the veil
was emblematical, and pointed out that the separation between Jews and
Gentiles was now abolished, and that the privilege of the high priest
was now communicated to all mankind: All might henceforth have access to
the throne of grace, through the one great atonement and mediator, the
Lord Jesus. See this beautifully illustrated in [Heb
10:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019).

[Matthew 27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">mat 27:52</span></span>

And the graves were opened - By the earthquake; and many bodies of
saints which slept, i.e. were dead, sleep being a common expression for
death in the Scriptures.

[Matthew 27:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">mat 27:53</span></span>

And came out of the graves after his resurrection - Not Before, as some
have thought, for Christ was himself the First Fruits of them who slept,
[Co1 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020). The graves were opened at
his death, by the earthquake, and the bodies came out at his
resurrection.

And appeared unto many - Thus establishing the truth of our Lord's
resurrection in particular, and of the resurrection of the body in
general, by many witnesses. Quesnel's reflections on these passages may
be very useful.

"1. The veil being rent shows that his death is to put an end to the
figurative worship, and to establish the true religion.

2\. The earthquake, that this dispensation of the Gospel is to make
known through the earth the judgments of God against sin and sinners.

3\. The rocks being rent declare that the sacrifice of Christ is to make
way for the grace of repentance.

4\. The graves being opened, that it is to destroy the death of sin, and
confer the life grace on sinners.

5\. The rising of the bodies of the saints shows that this death of
Christ is to merit, and his Gospel publish, the eternal happiness of
body and soul for all that believe in his name."

It is difficult to account for the transaction mentioned [Mat
27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052), [Mat
27:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#053). Some have thought that these
two verses have been introduced into the text of Matthew from the gospel
of the Nazarenes; others think that the simple meaning is this: - by the
earthquake several bodies that had been buried were thrown up and
exposed to view, and continued above ground till after Christ's
resurrection, and were seen by many persons in the city. Why the graves
should be opened on Friday, and the bodies not be raised to life till
the following Sunday, is difficult to be conceived. The place is
extremely obscure.

[Matthew 27:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">mat 27:54</span></span>

The centurion - The Roman officer who superintended the execution,
called centurio, from centum, a hundred, because he had the command of
one hundred men.

Truly this was the Son of God - An innocent, holy, and Divine person;
and God thus shows his disapprobation of this bloody tragedy. It is not
likely that this centurion had any knowledge of the expectation of the
Jews relative to the Messiah, and did not use the words in this sense. A
son of God, as the Romans used the term, would signify no more than a
very eminent or Divine person; a hero.

[Matthew 27:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">mat 27:55</span></span>

Many women - To their everlasting honor, these women evidenced more
courage, and affectionate attachment to their Lord and Master, than the
disciples did, who had promised to die with him rather than forsake him.

Beholding afar off - At a distance - απο μακροθεν. Though this
expression may be understood to refer, rather to the distance from which
they came, (viz. from Galilee), than the distance they stood from the
cross; yet, as all malefactors were crucified naked, perhaps this may
account for the distance at which these modest women stood.

[Matthew 27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">mat 27:56</span></span>

Mary Magdalene - She probably had her name from Magdala, a village or
district in Lower Galilee. See [Mat
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#039). Some think she was called
Magdalene from מגדלא magdala, which signifies a plaiter of hair. See
Lightfoot.

Mary the mother of James - She was mother of him called James the
lesser, or junior, who was son of Alpheus or Cleopas - see [Mat
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#003); [Mar
15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040); [Joh
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025); and she was sister to the holy
virgin. Thus it appears that there were four remarkable Marys mentioned
in the Gospels.

1\. Mary the Virgin, wife of Joseph.

2\. Mary Salome, her sister, wife of Cleopas, [Joh
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025).

3\. Mary Magdalene, or Mary of Magdala; and,

4\. Mary, the sister of Martha and Lazarus, [Joh
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001).

Though Baronius asserts, and Lightfoot is of the same opinion, that Mary
Magdalene, and Mary, the sister of Martha and Lazarus, was one and the
same person. It is difficult to ascertain and distinguish these women
where their names occur in the Gospels, so many being called by the name
of Mary.

Joses - Several MSS. and versions read Joseph.

[Matthew 27:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">mat 27:57</span></span>

When the even - This must have been about three o'clock, or a little
after; for our Lord having expired about three o'clock, [Mat
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046), and the Jewish passover
beginning about four, it was necessary that Joseph, who would not fail
to eat the passover at the usual time, should have obtained and buried
the body of Christ some time before four o'clock. But such was the
general consternation, occasioned by the prodigies that took place on
this most awful occasion, that we may safely conjecture that nothing was
done in order, and perhaps the passover itself was not eaten at the
usual hour, if at all, that day. See at the end of the preceding
chapter.

A rich man - He was a counsellor of the great Sanhedrin, [Luk
23:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050); and, from the accounts given of
him by the evangelists we learn that he was a man of the greatest
respectability. He now acted a more honorable part than all the
disciples of our Lord. He was of Arimathea, or Rama, in the tribe of
Benjamin, [Mat 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#018), but lived
ordinarily in Jerusalem, as being a member of the great council.

[Matthew 27:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">mat 27:58</span></span>

Begged the body - That he might bury it honorably otherwise, by the
Jewish customs, he would have either been burned, or buried in the
common place appointed for executed criminals.

[Matthew 27:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">mat 27:59</span></span>

Wrapped it in a clean linen cloth - The Jews, as well as the Egyptians,
added spices to keep the body from putrefaction, and the linen was
wrapped about every part to keep the aromatics in contact with the
flesh. From [Joh 19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039), [Joh
19:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#040), we learn that a mixture of
myrrh and aloes of one hundred pounds' weight had been applied to the
body of Jesus when he was buried. And that a second embalmment was
intended, we learn from [Luk 23:56](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#056);
[Luk 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001), as the hurry to get the
body interred before the Sabbath did not permit them to complete, the
embalming in the first instance. See an account of the mode of embalming
among the Egyptians, in the note on [Gen
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#002), [Gen
50:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#026) (note).

[Matthew 27:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">mat 27:60</span></span>

Laid it in his own new tomb - To all human appearance the body of Christ
must have had the same burial-place with those of the two robbers, as he
was numbered with the transgressors, and suffered with them; for then he
was a sacrifice, bearing the sin of the world in his own body on the
tree; but now the sacrifice is offered, the atonement made and accepted,
he is no longer to be enrolled with the transgressors, and, according to
a prophecy delivered nearly seven hundred years before that time, he is
to have the burying-place of a rich man. See [Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009), [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010). Had our Lord been buried in the
common burial-ground of the malefactors, his resurrection could not have
been so distinctly remarked, as the chief priests would never have
thought of sealing the stone there, or setting a watch; but now that the
body is got into the hands of a friend, they judge it necessary to make
use of these precautions, in order, as they said, to prevent imposture;
and from this very circumstance the resurrection of Christ had its
fullest evidence, and was put beyond the power of successful
contradiction. What a number of objections would not human prudence have
made to Joseph's conduct, had he consulted it on this occasion! It would
have represented to him that, "this was to expose himself, to bring
himself into trouble, to render himself suspected, to put himself out of
all capacity of doing good, to ruin himself irrecoverably; and now it
could do no good to his teacher - he is now dead, and needs no longer
any office of kindness from men." There is, sometimes in our whole life,
but one opportunity in which God designs signally to employ us; and,
through our general backwardness to every good work, we are for
reserving ourselves to other opportunities, in which God neither
requires nor will accept our services.

Rolled a great stone to the door - Some are of opinion that this tomb
was cut down into the rock, perpendicularly from the surface; and that
the great stone spoken of here covered over the entrance to it. The
stone, no doubt, was intended to secure the place as much as possible.

[Matthew 27:61](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">mat 27:61</span></span>

Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary - The mother of James and Joses, [Mat
27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056). The mother of our Lord had
probably, by this time, been taken home to the house of John. See [Joh
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026), [Joh
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#027).

Sitting over against the sepulchre - These holy women, filled with that
love to their Lord which death cannot destroy, cleaved to him in life,
and in death were not divided. They came to the grave to see the end,
and overwhelmed with sorrow and anguish, sat down to mourn.

[Matthew 27:62](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">mat 27:62</span></span>

The next day - This was the seventh, or Saturday, and might be what we
should term the evening of the sixth, or Friday, because the Jews always
ended their day when the sun set, and then began the next.

That followed the day of the preparation - That is, of the Sabbath. The
victuals, etc., which were to be used on the Sabbath by the Jews, were
always prepared the preceding evening before the sun set. It is of this
preparation that the evangelist speaks here; and it is the same which is
mentioned by Mark, [Mar 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042); by
Luke, [Luk 23:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#054); and by John, [Joh
19:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031). But there was another
preparation which happened in the same day: viz. The preparation of the
passover; this began about twelve o'clock, and continued till four, the
time in which they ate the paschal lamb. See [Joh
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014).

[Matthew 27:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">mat 27:63</span></span>

Sir, we remember, etc. - While these wicked men are fulfilling their own
vicious counsels, they are subserving the great cause of Christianity.
Every thing depended on the resurrection of Christ; if it did not appear
that he rose from the dead, then the whole system was false, and no
atonement was made. It was necessary therefore that the chief priests,
etc., should make use of every precaution to prevent an imposture, that
the resurrection of Christ might have the fullest evidence to support
it. See on [Mat 27:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#060) (note).

The word Κυριε is here very properly translated sir, which, in many
other places, is as improperly translated Lord. When a Roman is the
speaker, or the person addressed, Κυριε should always be translated sir;
when strangers address our Lord, the word is a title of civil respect,
and should, in general, be translated in the same way.

After three days I will rise again - This they probably took from his
saying, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will build it up. If
so, they destroyed, by their own words, the false accusation they
brought against him to put him to death; then they perverted the
meaning, now they declare it. Thus the wise are taken in their own
craftiness. Neither the devil nor his servants ever speak truth, but
when they expect to accomplish some bad purpose by it.

[Matthew 27:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">mat 27:64</span></span>

Lest his disciples come by night - Νυκτος, by night, is wanting in ten
of the uncial MSS., and in several others, and in most of the versions.
Erasmus, Aldus, Bengel, and Boghard, with Griesbach, leave it out of the
text.

[Matthew 27:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">mat 27:65</span></span>

Ye have a watch - The Jews had a corps of Roman troops, consisting of
several companies, as a guard for the temple, [Act
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001). These companies mounted guard by
turns, see [Luk 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#004). Some of these
companies, which were not then on duty, Pilate gave them leave to employ
to watch the tomb.

[Matthew 27:66](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">mat 27:66</span></span>

Made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch - Or
rather, made the tomb secure by the guard, and by sealing the stone. I
follow Kypke, in construing μετα της κουστωδιας, with ησφαλισαντο. The
guard was to take care that the disciples should not steal him away; and
the seal, which was probably the seal of the governor, was to prevent
the guards from being corrupted so as to permit the theft. So every
thing was done which human policy and prudence could, to prevent a
resurrection, which these very precautions had the most direct tendency
to authenticate and establish. How wonderful are the wisdom and goodness
of God! - and how true is it, that there is neither might nor counsel
against him!

1\. The death of Christ was ordered, so as to be witnessed by thousands;
and if his resurrection take place, it must be demonstrated; and it
cannot take place without being incontestable, such are the precautions
used here to prevent all imposture.

2\. The more the circumstances of the death of Christ are examined, the
more astonishing the whole will appear. The death is uncommon - the
person uncommon - and the object uncommon; and the whole is grand,
majestic, and awful. Nature itself is thrown into unusual action, and by
means and causes wholly supernatural. In every part, the finger of God
most evidently appears.

3\. How glorious does Christ appear in his death! Were it not for his
thirst, his exclamation on the cross, and the piercing of his side, we
should have found it difficult to believe that such a person could ever
have entered the empire of death; but the divinity and the manhood
equally appear, and thus the certainty of the atonement is indubitably
established.

4\. But who can reflect on the state of the poor disciples, during the
whole of the time in which our blessed Lord lay under the empire of
death, without sharing their sorrows! When he expired on the cross their
expectation was cut off; and when his body was laid in the grave their
hopes were buried; and nothing but the resurrection of Christ from the
dead could have given a resurrection to their hopes. It is true they had
heard him say that he would rise again the third day; but in this it is
evident their faith was very imperfect; and the uncertainty, perplexity,
anxiety, and distress which they in consequence must have suffered, can
neither be described nor imagined. Though we know the glorious result,
yet who can help sympathizing with the pious father, the virgin mother,
and the disconsolate disciples!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 28](mat028)

</div>
