<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat019)  [Next](mat021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 20:0</span></span>

The similitude of the householder hiring laborers into his vineyard, to
show that the Gentiles should be preferred to the Jews, according to
what was hinted at the close of the last chapter, vv. 1-16. On the way
going up to Jerusalem he predicts his sufferings and death, [Mat
20:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017). The mother of Zebedee's
children requests dignities for her sons, [Mat
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020), [Mat
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#021). Christ, by his answer, shows
that sufferings, not worldly honors, are to be the lot of his most
faithful followers, and that seats in glory can be given only to those
who are prepared for them, [Mat 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022),
[Mat 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023). From this our Lord takes
occasion to teach the necessity of humility, and to show that those who
wished to be chief must be servants of all, [Mat
20:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#024). On his coming to Jericho, he
restores sight to two blind men, who, being restored, follow him, [Mat
20:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029).

[Matthew 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 20:1</span></span>

For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man - a householder - The very
commencement of this chapter shows it to be connected with the
preceding. The manner of God's proceeding under the Gospel dispensation
resembles a householder, who went out at day break, αμα πρωι, together
with the morning; as the light began to go out of its chambers in the
east, so he went out of his bed-room to employ laborers, that they might
cultivate his vineyard. This was what was called, among the Jews and
Romans, the first hour; answering to six o'clock in the morning.

To hire laborers - Some workmen, των εργατων - for he had not got all
that was necessary, because we find him going out at other hours to hire
more.

[Matthew 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 20:2</span></span>

A penny - A Roman coin, as noted before, [Mat
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#028), worth about seven-pence
halfpenny or seven-pence three farthings of our money, and equal to the
Greek drachma. This appears to have been the ordinary price of a day's
labor at that time. See Tobit 5:14. In 1351 the price of labor was
regulated in this country by parliament; and it is remarkable that
"corn-weeders and hay-makers, without meat, drink, or other courtesy
demanded," were to have one penny per day! In 1314 the pay of a chaplain
to the Scotch bishops, who were then prisoners in England, was three
halfpence per day. See Fleetwood's Chronicon Precios, p. 123, 129. This
was miserable wages, though things at that time were so cheap that
twenty-four eggs were sold for a penny, p. 72; a pair of shoes for
four-pence, p. 71; a fat goose for two-pence halfpenny, p. 72; a hen for
a penny, p. 72; eight bushels of wheat for two shillings, and a fat ox
for six shillings and eight-pence! Ibid. In 1336, wheat per quarter,
2s.; a fat sheep 6d.; fat goose, 2d. and a pig, 1d., p. 75.

[Matthew 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 20:3</span></span>

The third hour - Nine o'clock in the morning.

Market-place - Where laborers usually stood till they were hired. I have
often seen laborers standing in the market places of large towns in
these countries, waiting to be employed.

[Matthew 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 20:5</span></span>

The sixth hour - Twelve o'clock. Ninth hour - three o'clock in the
afternoon.

[Matthew 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 20:6</span></span>

Eleventh - Five o'clock in the evening, when there was only one hour
before the end of the Jewish day, which, in matters of labor, closed at
six.

[Matthew 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 20:7</span></span>

No man hath hired us - This was the reason why they were all the day
idle.

And whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive - Ye may expect payment
in proportion to your labor, and the time ye spend in it; but this
clause is wanting in some of the best MSS., versions, and fathers.

[Matthew 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 20:8</span></span>

When the even was come - Six o'clock, the time they ceased from labor,
and the workmen came to receive their wages.

Steward - Επιτρωπος. A manager of the household concerns under the
master. The rabbinical writers use the very same word, in Hebrew
letters, for the same office, אפיטרופוס epitropos. See Kypke.

[Matthew 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 20:11</span></span>

They murmured - The Jews made the preaching of the Gospel to the
Gentiles, a pretense why they should reject that Gospel; as they fondly
imagined they were, and should be, the sole objects of the Divine
approbation. How they murmured because the Gentiles were made partakers
of the kingdom of God; see [Act 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001),
etc., and [Act 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001), etc. There are
many similitudes of this kind among the Jews, where the principal part
even of the phraseology of our Lord's parable may be found. Several of
them may be seen in Schoettgen. Our Lord, however, as in all other
cases, has greatly improved the language, scope, design, and point of
the similitude. He was, in all cases, an eminent master of the
sentences.

[Matthew 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 20:13</span></span>

Friend, I do thee no wrong - The salvation of the Gentiles can in itself
become no impediment to the Jews; there is the same Jesus both for the
Jew and for the Greek. Eternal life is offered to both through the blood
of the cross; and there is room enough in heaven for all.

[Matthew 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 20:15</span></span>

Is it not lawful for me - As eternal life is the free gift of God, he
has a right to give it in whatever proportions, at whatever times, and
on whatever conditions he pleases.

Is thine eye evil - An evil eye among the Jews meant a malicious,
covetous, or envious person.

Most commentators have different methods of interpreting this parable.
Something was undoubtedly designed by its principal parts, besides the
scope and design mentioned at the conclusion of the last chapter. The
following, which is taken principally from the very pious Quesnel, may
render it as useful to the reader as any thing else that has been
written on it.

The Church is a vineyard, because it is a place of labor, where no man
should be idle. Each of us is engaged to labor in this vineyard - to
work out our salvation through him who worketh in us to will and to
perform. Life is but a day, whereof childhood, or the first use of
reason, is the day-break or first hour, [Mat
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001), in which we receive the first
Call.

The promise of the kingdom of glory is given to all those who are
workers together with him, [Mat 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#002).

The second call is in the time of youth, which is most commonly idle, or
only employed in dissipation and worldly cares, [Mat
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#003).

The third call is at the age of manhood.

The fourth, in the decline of life, [Mat
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#005).

The fifth, when sickness and the infirmities of life press upon us. How
many are there in the world who are just ready to leave it, before they
properly consider for what end they were brought into it! Still idle,
still unemployed in the things which concern their souls; though eternal
life is offered to them, and hell moving from beneath to meet them! [Mat
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#006).

Others consider the morning the first dawn of the Gospel; and the first
call to be the preaching of John Baptist.

The second call, the public preaching of our Lord; and that of the
apostles when they got an especial commission to the Jews, [Mat
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005), [Mat
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006), together with that of the
seventy disciples mentioned [Luk 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001).

The third call, which was at mid-day, represents the preaching of the
fullness of the Gospel after the ascension of Christ, which was the
meridian of evangelic glory and excellence.

The fourth call represents the mission of the apostles to the various
synagogues of the Jews, in every part of the world where they were
scattered; the history of which is particularly given in the Acts of the
Apostles.

The fifth call, or eleventh hour, represents the general call of the
Gentiles into the Church of Christ, when the unbelieving Jews were
finally rejected.

What makes this interpretation the more likely is, that the persons who
are addressed at [Mat 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#007), say, No
man hath hired us, i.e. We never heard the voice of a prophet announcing
the true God, nor of an apostle preaching the Lord Jesus, until now. The
Jews could not use this as an argument for their carelessness about
their eternal interests.

[Matthew 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 20:16</span></span>

So the last shall be first, and the first last - The Gentiles, who have
been long without the true God, shall now enjoy all the privileges of
the new covenant; and the Jews, who have enjoyed these from the
beginning, shall now be dispossessed of them; for, because they here
rejected the Lord, he also hath rejected them.

Many are called, etc. - This clause is wanting in BL, one other, and in
the Coptic and Sahidic versions. Bishop Pearce thinks it is an
interpolation from [Mat 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#014). The
simple meaning seems to be: As those who did not come at the invitation
of the householder to work in the vineyard did not receive the denarius,
or wages, so those who do not obey the call of the Gospel, and believe
in Christ Jesus, shall not inherit eternal life.

This place seems to refer to the ancient Roman custom of recruiting
their armies. Among this celebrated people, no one was forced to serve
his country in a military capacity; and it was the highest honor to be
deemed worthy of thus serving it. The youth were instructed, almost from
their cradle, in military exercises. The Campus Martius was the grand
field in which they were disciplined: there, they accustomed themselves
to leaping, running, wrestling, bearing burdens, fencing, throwing the
javelin, etc., and when, through these violent exercises, they were all
besmeared with dust and sweat, in order to refresh themselves, they swam
twice or thrice across the Tyber! Rome might at any time have recruited
her armies by volunteers from such a mass of well-educated, hardy
soldiers; but she thought proper, to use the words of the Abbe Mably,
that the honor of being chosen to serve in the wars should be the reward
of the accomplishments shown by the citizens in the Campus Martius, that
the soldier should have a reputation to save; and that the regard paid
him, in choosing him to serve, should be the pledge of his fidelity and
zeal to discharge his duty. The age of serving in the army was from
seventeen to forty-five, and the manner in which they were chosen was
the following: -

After the creation of consuls, they every year named twenty-four
military tribunes, part of whom must have served five years at least,
and the rest eleven. When they had divided among them the command of the
four legions to be formed, the consuls summoned to the capitol, or
Campus Martius, all the citizens who, by their age, were obliged to bear
arms. They drew up by tribes, and lots were drawn to determine in what
order every tribe should present its soldiers. That which was the first
in order chose the four citizens who were judged the most proper to
serve in the war; and the six tribunes who commanded the first legion
chose one of these four, whom they liked best. The tribunes of the
second and third likewise made their choice one after another; and he
that remained entered into the fourth legion. A new tribe presented
other four soldiers, and the second legion chose first. The third and
fourth legions had the same advantage in their turns. In this manner,
each tribe successively chose four soldiers, till the legions were
complete. They next proceeded to the creation of subaltern officers,
whom the tribunes chose from among the soldiers of the greatest
reputation. When the legions were thus completed, the citizens who had
been called, but not chosen, returned to their respective employments,
and served their country in other capacities. None can suppose that
these were deemed useless, or that, because not now chosen to serve
their country in the field, they were proscribed from the rights and
privileges of citizens, much less destroyed, because others were found
better qualified to serve their country at the post of honor and danger.
Thus many are called by the preaching of the Gospel, but few are found
who use their advantages in such a way as to become extensively useful
in the Church - and many in the Church militant behave so ill as never
to be admitted into the Church triumphant. But what a mercy that those
who appear now to be rejected may be called in another muster, enrolled,
serve in the field, or work in the vineyard? How many millions does the
long-suffering of God lead to repentance!

[Matthew 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 20:17</span></span>

And Jesus going up - From Jericho to Jerusalem, See [Mat
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#015).

[Matthew 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 20:18</span></span>

The Son of man shall be betrayed - Or, will be delivered up. This is the
third time that our Lord informed his disciples of his approaching
sufferings and death. This was a subject of the utmost importance, and
it was necessary they should be well prepared for such an awful event.

[Matthew 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 20:19</span></span>

Deliver him to the Gentiles to mock - This was done by Herod and his
Roman soldiers. See [Luk 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#011).

To scourge, and to crucify - This was done by Pilate, the Roman
governor. The punishment of the cross was Roman not Jewish; but the
chief priests condemned him to it, and the Romans executed the sentence.
How little did they know that they were, by this process, jointly
offering up that sacrifice which was to make an atonement for the
Gentiles and for the Jews; an atonement for the sin of the whole world?
How often may it be literally said, The wrath of man shall praise thee!

[Matthew 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 20:20</span></span>

The mother of Zebedee's children - This was Salome.

[Matthew 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 20:21</span></span>

Grant that these my two sons - James and John. See [Mar
15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040). In the preceding chapter, [Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028), our Lord had promised his
disciples, that they should sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve
tribes. Salome, probably hearing of this, and understanding it
literally, came to request the chief dignities in this new government
for her sons; and it appears it was at their instigation that she made
this request, for Mark, [Mar 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#035),
informs us that these brethren themselves made the request, i.e. they
made it through the medium of their mother.

One on thy right hand, and the other on (Thy) left - I have added the
pronoun in the latter clause on the authority of almost every MS. and
version of repute.

That the sons of Zebedee wished for ecclesiastical, rather than secular
honors, may be thought probable, from the allusion that is made here to
the supreme dignities in the great Sanhedrin. The prince of the
Sanhedrin (Ha-Nasi) sat in the midst of two rows of senators or elders;
on his right hand sat the person termed AB (the father of the
Sanhedrin); and on his left hand the Chacham, or sage. These persons
transacted all business in the absence of the president. The authority
of this council was at some periods very great, and extended to a
multitude of matters both ecclesiastical and civil. These appear to have
been the honors which James and John sought. They seem to have strangely
forgot the lesson they had learned from the transfiguration.

[Matthew 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 20:22</span></span>

Ye know not what ye ask - How strange is the infatuation, in some
parents, which leads them to desire worldly or ecclesiastical honors for
their children! He must be much in love with the cross who wishes to
have his child a minister of the Gospel; for, if he be such as God
approves of in the work, his life will be a life of toil and suffering;
he will be obliged to sip, at least, if not to drink largely, of the cup
of Christ. We know not what we ask, when, in getting our children into
the Church, we take upon ourselves to answer for their Call to the
sacred office, and for the salvation of the souls that are put under
their care. Blind parents! rather let your children beg their bread than
thrust them into an office to which God has not called them; and in
which they will not only ruin their souls, but be the means of damnation
to hundreds; for if God has not sent them, they shall not profit the
people at all.

And to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized, etc. - This
clause in this, and the next verse, is wanting in BDL, two others, (7
more in [Mat 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)), Coptic, Sahidic,
Ethiopic, Mr. Wheelock's Persic, Vulgate, Saxon, and all the Itala,
except two. Grotius, Mill, and Bengel, think it should be omitted, and
Griesbach has left it out of the text in both his editions. It is
omitted also by Origen, Epiphanius, Hilary, Jerome, Ambrose, and
Juvencus. According to the rules laid down by critics to appreciate a
false or true reading, this clause cannot be considered as forming a
part of the sacred text. It may be asked, Does not drink of my cup,
convey the same idea? Does the clause add any thing to the perspicuity
of the passage? And, though found in many good MSS., is not the balance
of evidence in point of antiquity against it? Baptism among the Jews, as
it was performed in the coldest weather, and the persons were kept under
water for some time, was used not only to express death, but the most
cruel kind of death. See Lightfoot. As to the term cup, it was a common
figure, by which they expressed calamities, judgments, desolation, etc.

They say unto him, We are able - Strange blindness! You can? No: one
drop of this cup would sink you into utter ruin, unless upheld by the
power of God. However, the man whom God has appointed to the work he
will preserve in it.

[Matthew 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 20:23</span></span>

Is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for wham it is
prepared of my Father - The common translation, in which the words, it
shall be given to them; are interpolated by our translators, utterly
changes and destroys the meaning of the passage. It represents Christ
(in opposition to the whole Scriptures) as having nothing to do in the
dispensing of rewards and punishments; whereas, our Lord only intimates
that, however partial he may be to these two brethren, yet seats in
glory can only be given to those who are fitted for them. No favor can
prevail here; the elevated seat is for him who is filled with the
fullness of God. The true construction of the words is this: - ουκ εϚιν
εμον δουναι, αλλ' ὁις ητοιμυϚαι ὑπο του πατρος μου, To sit on my right
hand and on my left, is not mine to give, except to them for whom it is
prepared of my Father. According to the prediction of Christ, these
brethren did partake of his afflictions: James was martyred by Herod,
[Act 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002); and John was banished to
Patmos, for the testimony of Christ, [Rev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009).

[Matthew 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 20:24</span></span>

When the ten heard it, they were moved - The ambition which leads to
spiritual lordship is one great cause of murmurings and animosities in
religious societies, and has proved the ruin of the most flourishing
Churches in the universe.

[Matthew 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 20:25</span></span>

Exercise dominion - and - exercise authority upon them - They tyrannized
and exercised arbitrary power over the people. This was certainly true
of the governments in our Lord's time, both in the east and in the west.
I have endeavored to express, as nearly as possible, the meaning of the
two Greek verbs, κατακυριευουσιν, and κατεξουσιαζουσιν; and those who
understand the genius of the language will perceive that I have not
exhausted their sense, however some may think that no emphasis was
intended, and that these compound verbs are used for the simple
κυριευειν, and εξουσιαζειν. See Wakefield and Rosenmuller.

The government of the Church of Christ is widely different from secular
governments. It is founded in humility and brotherly love: it is derived
from Christ, the great Head of the Church, and is ever conducted by his
maxims and spirit. When political matters are brought into the Church of
Christ, both are ruined. The Church has more than once ruined the State;
the State has often corrupted the Church: it is certainly for the
interests of both to be kept separate. This has already been abundantly
exemplified in both cases, and will continue so to be, over the whole
world, wherever the Church and State are united in secular matters.

[Matthew 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 20:26</span></span>

It shall not be so among you - Every kind of lordship and spiritual
domination over the Church of Christ, like that exercised by the Church
of Rome, is destructive and anti-christian.

Your minister - Or, deacon, διακονος. I know no other word which could
at once convey the meaning of the original, and make a proper
distinction between it and δουλος, or servant, in [Mat
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027). The office of a deacon, in the
primitive Church, was to serve in the agapae, or love feasts, to
distribute the bread and wine to the communicants; to proclaim different
parts and times of worship in the churches; and to take care of the
widows, orphans, prisoners, and sick, who were provided for out of the
revenues of the Church. Thus we find it was the very lowest
ecclesiastical office. Deacons were first appointed by the apostles,
[Act 6:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001); they had the care of the
poor, and preached occasionally.

[Matthew 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 20:27</span></span>

Your servant - Δουλος the lowest secular office, as deacon was the
lowest ecclesiastical office: δουλος is often put for slave.

From these directions of our Lord, we may easily discern what sort of a
spirit his ministers should be of.

1\. A minister of Christ is not to consider himself a lord over Christ's
flock.

2\. He is not to conduct the concerns of the Church with an imperious
spirit.

3\. He is to reform the weak, after Christ's example, more by loving
instruction than by reproof or censure.

4\. He should consider that true apostolic greatness consists in serving
the followers of Christ with all the powers and talents he possesses.

5\. That he should be ready, if required, to give up his life unto
death, to promote the salvation of men.

[Matthew 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 20:28</span></span>

A ransom for many - Λυτρον αντι πολλων, or a ransom instead of many, -
one ransom, or atonement, instead of the many prescribed in the Jewish
law. Mr. Wakefield contends for the above translation, and with
considerable show of reason and probability.

The word λυτρον is used by the Septuagint for the Hebrew פדיו, pidion,
the ransom paid for a man's life: see [Exo
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#030); [Num
3:49-51](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#049); and λυτρα is used [Num
35:31](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#031), where a satisfaction (Hebrew
כפר copher, an atonement) for the life of a murderer is refused. The
original word is used by Lucian in exactly the same sense, who
represents Ganymede promising to sacrifice a ram to Jupiter, λυτρον υπερ
εμου, as a ransom for himself, provided he would dismiss him.

The whole Gentile world, as well as the Jews, believed in vicarious
sacrifices. Virgil, Aen. v. 85, has nearly the same words as those in
the text. "Unum Pro Multis dabitur Caput," - One man must be given for
many. Jesus Christ laid down his life as a ransom for the lives and
souls of the children of men. In the Codex Bezae, and in most of the
Itala, the Saxon, and one of the Syriac, Hilary, Leo Magnus, and
Juvencus, the following remarkable addition is found; "But seek ye to
increase from a little, and to be lessened from that which is great.
Moreover, when ye enter into a house, and are invited to sup, do not
recline in the most eminent places, lest a more honorable than thou come
after, and he who invited thee to supper come up to thee and say, Get
down yet lower; and thou be put to confusion. But if thou sit down in
the lowest place, and one inferior to thee come after, he who invited
thee to supper will say unto thee, Go and sit higher: now this will be
advantageous to thee." This is the largest addition found in any of the
MSS., and contains not less than sixty words In the original, and
eighty-three in the Anglo-Saxon. It may be necessary to remark, that Mr.
Marshall, in his edition of the Gothic and Saxon Gospels, does not
insert these words in the text, but gives them, p. 496 of his
observations. This addition is at least as ancient as the fourth
century, for it is quoted by Hilary, who did not die till about a.d.
367.

[Matthew 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 20:30</span></span>

Two blind men - [Mar 10:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#046), and [Luk
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#035), mention only one blind man,
Bartimeus. Probably he was mentioned by the other evangelists, as being
a person well known before and after his cure. Blindness of heart is a
disorder of which, men seldom complain, or from which they desire to be
delivered; and it is one property of this blindness, to keep the person
from perceiving it, and to persuade him that his sight is good.

Sitting by the way side - In the likeliest place to receive alms,
because of the multitudes going and coming between Jerusalem and
Jericho.

Cried out - In the midst of judgments God remembers mercy. Though God
had deprived them, for wise reasons, of their eyes, he left them the use
of their speech. It is never so ill with us, but it might be much worse:
let us, therefore, be submissive and thankful.

Have mercy on us - Hearing that Jesus passed by, and not knowing whether
they should ever again have so good an opportunity of addressing him,
they are determined to call, and call earnestly. They ask for mercy,
conscious that they deserve nothing, and they ask with faith - Son of
David, acknowledging him as the promised Messiah.

[Matthew 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 20:31</span></span>

The multitude rebuked them - Whenever a soul begins to cry after Jesus
for light and salvation, the world and the devil join together to drown
its cries, or force it to be silent. But let all such remember, Jesus is
now passing by; that their souls must perish everlastingly, if not saved
by him, and they may never have so good an opportunity again. While
there is a broken and a contrite heart, let it sigh its complaints to
God, till he hear and answer.

They cried the more - When the world and the devil begin to rebuke, in
this case, it is a proof that the salvation of God is nigh; therefore,
let such cry out a great deal the more.

[Matthew 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 20:32</span></span>

Jesus stood - "The cry of a believing penitent," says one, "is
sufficient to stop the most merciful Jesus, were he going to make a new
heaven and a new earth; for what is all the irrational part of God's
creation in worth, when compared with the value of one immortal soul!"
See on [Mar 10:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#050) (note).

What will ye that I shall do - Christ is at all times infinitely willing
to save sinners: when the desire of the heart is turned towards him,
there can be little delay in the salvation. What is thy wish? If it be a
good one, God will surely fulfill it.

[Matthew 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 20:33</span></span>

That our eyes may be opened - He who feels his own sore, and the plague
of his heart, has no great need of a prompter in prayer. A hungry man
can easily ask bread; he has no need to go to a book to get expressions
to state his wants in; his hunger tells him he wants food, and he tells
this to the person from whom he expects relief. Helps to devotion, in
all ordinary cases, may be of great use; in extraordinary cases they can
be of little importance; the afflicted heart alone can tell its own
sorrows, with appropriate pleadings.

[Matthew 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 20:34</span></span>

So Jesus had compassion on them - Σπλαγχνιαθεις, He was moved with
tender pity. The tender pity of Christ met the earnest cry of the blind
men, and their immediate cure was the result.

They followed him - As a proof of the miracle that was wrought, and of
the gratitude which they felt to their benefactor. For other particulars
of this miraculous cure, see the notes on [Mar
10:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#046), etc.

Reader, whosoever thou art, act in behalf of thy soul as these blind men
did in behalf of their sight, and thy salvation is sure. Apply to the
Son of David; lose not a moment; he is passing by, and thou art passing
into eternity, and probably wilt never have a more favorable opportunity
than the present. The Lord increase thy earnestness and faith!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 21](mat021)

</div>
