<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat017)  [Next](mat019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 18:0</span></span>

The disciples inquiring who should be greatest in Christ's kingdom, [Mat
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001). He takes occasion to recommend
humility, simplicity, and disinterestedness, [Mat
18:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#002). Warns them against offenses,
[Mat 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007). Recommends mortification
and self-denial. [Mat 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#008), [Mat
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#009). Charges them to avoid giving
offense. [Mat 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010), [Mat
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011). Parable of him who had lost one
sheep out of his flock consisting of one hundred, [Mat
18:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012). How to deal with an
offending brother, [Mat 18:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015). A
gracious promise to social prayer, [Mat
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#019), [Mat
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020). How often an offending brother
who expresses sorrow, and promises amendment, is to be forgiven, [Mat
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#021), [Mat
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022). The parable of the king, who
calls his servants to account, and finds one who owed him ten thousand
talents, who, being unable to pay, and imploring mercy, is forgiven,
[Mat 18:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023). Of the same person, who
treated his fellow-servant unmercifully, who owed him but a small sum,
[Mat 18:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#028). Of the punishment
inflicted on this unmerciful servant, [Mat
18:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#031).

[Matthew 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 18:1</span></span>

At the same time - Or hour; but ωρα is frequently used to signify some
particular time: however, instead of ωρα, three MSS., all the Itala but
four, and Origen, read ημερα, day. Origen says both readings were extant
in MSS. in his time.

Who is the greatest - Could these disciples have viewed the kingdom of
Christ in any other light than that of a temporal one? Hence they wished
to know whom he would make his prime minister - whom his general - whom
his chief chancellor - whom supreme judge, etc., etc. Is it he who first
became thy disciple, or he who is thy nearest relative, or he who has
most frequently entertained thee, or he who is the oldest, merely as to
years? Could this inquiry have proceeded from any but the nine disciples
who had not witnessed our Lord's transfiguration? Peter, James, and
John, were surely more spiritual in their views! And yet how soon did
even these forget that his kingdom was not of this world! See [Mar
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#035), etc.; [Joh
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#010), etc. The disciples having
lately seen the keys delivered to Peter, and found that he, with James
and John, had been privileged with being present at the transfiguration,
it is no wonder if a measure of jealousy and suspicion began to work in
their minds. From this inquiry we may also learn, that the disciples had
no notion of Peter's supremacy; nor did they understand, as the Roman
Catholics will have it, that Christ had constituted him their head,
either by the conversation mentioned [Mat
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018), [Mat
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019), or by the act mentioned in the
conclusion of the preceding chapter. Had they thought that any such
superiority had been designed, their present question must have been
extremely impertinent. Let this be observed.

[Matthew 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 18:2</span></span>

A little child - But this child could walk, for he called him to him.
Nicephorus says, this was Ignatius, who was afterwards bishop of
Antioch, and suffered martyrdom under, and by command of, the Roman
Emperor Trojan, in the 107th year of our Lord. But this good father is
not much to be depended on, being both weak and credulous.

[Matthew 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 18:3</span></span>

Except ye be converted - Unless ye be saved from those prejudices which
are at present so baneful to your nation, (seeking a temporal and not a
spiritual kingdom), unless ye be clothed with the spirit of humility, ye
cannot enter into the spirit, design, and privileges of my spiritual and
eternal kingdom. The name of this kingdom should put you in mind of its
nature. -

1\. The King is heavenly;

2\. His Subjects are heavenly-minded;

3\. Their Country is heavenly, for they are strangers and pilgrims upon
earth;

4\. The Government of this kingdom is wholly spiritual and divine.

See on [Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002) (note).

And become as little children - i.e. Be as truly without worldly
ambition, and the lust of power, as little children are, who act among
themselves as if all were equal. The following saying from the Boostan
of the poet Saady is very appropriate. "The hearts of infants being free
from avarice, what care they for a handful of silver more than for a
handful of dust?"

[Matthew 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 18:4</span></span>

Whosoever therefore shall humble himself - So great is the disparity
between the kingdom of Christ and the kingdoms of this world, that there
is no way of rising to honors in the former, but by humility of mind,
and continual self-abasement.

The same is greatest - Thus our Lord shows them that they were all
equal, and that there could be no superiority among them, but what must
come from the deepest humility; he intimates also, that wherever this
principle should be found, it would save its possessor from seeking
worldly honors or earthly profits, and from seeking to be a ruler over
his brethren, or a lord in God's heritage.

[Matthew 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 18:5</span></span>

One such little child - As our Lord in the preceding verses considers a
little child an emblem of a genuine disciple, so by the term in this
verse he means a disciple only. "Whosoever will receive, i.e. show unto
such a child-like, unambitious disciple of mine, any act of kindness for
my sake, I will consider it as done to myself."

[Matthew 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 18:6</span></span>

But whoso shall offend one of these little ones - But, on the contrary,
whosoever shall cause one of the least of those who believe in me to be
stumbled - to go into the spirit of the world, or give way to sin - such
a one shall meet with the most exemplary punishment.

Let those who act the part of the devil, in tempting others to sin, hear
this declaration of our Lord, and tremble.

A millstone - Μυλος ονικος, an ass's millstone, because in ancient
times, before the invention of wind and water mills, the stones were
turned sometimes by slaves, but commonly by asses or mules. The most
ancient kind of mills among the inhabitants of the northern nations, was
the quern, or hand-mill. In some places in Ireland, Scotland, and the
Zetland Isles, these still exist.

Drowned in the depth of the sea - It is supposed that in Syria, as well
as in Greece, this mode of punishing criminals was practised; especially
in cases of parricide; and when a person was devoted to destruction for
the public safety, as in cases of plague, famine, etc. That this was the
custom in Greece, we learn from the Scholiast on the Equites of
Aristophanes, Οταν γαρ κατεποντουν τινας, βαρος απο των τραχηλων
εκρεμων. When a person was drowned, they hung a weight, (υπερβολον
λιθον, Suidas), a vast stone about his neck. See the ancient Scholia
upon the Equites, lin. 1360, and Suidas, in υπερβολον λιθον. We find
also that it was a positive institute of the ancient Hindoo law. "If a
woman," says the precept, "causes any person to take poison, sets fire
to any person's house, or murders a man, then the magistrate, having
bound a stone to her neck, shall drown her." Halhead's Code of Gentoo
Laws, 4th. edition, page 306.

[Matthew 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 18:7</span></span>

Wo! - Or, alas! ουαι. It is the opinion of some eminent critics, that
this word is ever used by our Lord to express sympathy and concern.

Because of offenses - Scandals, stumbling-blocks, persecutions, etc.

For it must needs be that offenses come - Αναγκε γαρ εϚιν ελθειν τα
σκανδαλα, for the coming of offenses is unavoidable. Such is the
wickedness of men, such their obstinacy, that they will not come unto
Christ that they may have life, but desperately continue deceiving and
being deceived. In such a state of things, offenses, stumbling-blocks,
persecutions, etc., are unavoidable.

Wo to that man - He who gives the offense, and he who receives it, are
both exposed to ruin.

[Matthew 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 18:8</span></span>

If thy hand, etc. - See the notes on [Mat
5:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029) (note).

[Matthew 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 18:10</span></span>

One of these little ones - One of my simple, loving, humble disciples.

Their angels - always behold - Our Lord here not only alludes to, but,
in my opinion, establishes the notion received by almost all nations,
viz. That every person has a guardian angel; and that these have always
access to God, to receive orders relative to the management of their
charge. See [Psa 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008); [Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014).

Always behold the face - Hence, among the Jews, the angels were styled
מלכי פנים, malakey panim, angels of the face, and Michael is said to be
סר הפנים, sar ha-panim the prince of the face. This is an allusion to
the privilege granted by eastern monarchs to their chief favourites; a
privilege which others were never permitted to enjoy. The seven princes
of Media and Persia, who were the chief favourites and privy-counsellors
of Ahasuerus, are said to see the king's face. [Est
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#014); see also [Kg2
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#019), and [Jer
51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025). Our Lord's words give us to
understand that humble-hearted, child-like disciples, are objects of his
peculiar care, and constant attention. The clause, εν ουρανοις, in the
heavens, is wanting in several MSS., versions, and fathers.

[Matthew 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 18:11</span></span>

For the Son of man, etc. - This is added as a second reason, why no
injury should be done to his followers. "The Son of man has so loved
them as to come into the world to lay down his life for them."

That which was lost - Απολωλος. In [Rev
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011), Satan is called Απολλυων,
Apolluon, the destroyer, or him who lays waste. This name bears a near
relation to that state in which our Lord tells us he finds all mankind -
lost, desolated, ruined. So it appears that Satan and men have the
nearest affinity to each other - as the destroyer and the destroyed -
the desolator and the desolated - the loser and the lost. But the Son of
man came to save the lost. Glorious news! May every lost soul feel it!
This verse is omitted by five MSS., two versions, and three of the
fathers; but of its authenticity there can be no doubt, as it is found
in the parallel place, [Luk 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010), on
which verse there is not a single various reading found in any of the
MSS. that have ever been discovered, nor in any of the ancient versions.

[Matthew 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 18:12</span></span>

Doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains - So
our common translation reads the verse; others, Doth he not leave the
ninety and nine Upon The Mountains, and go, etc. This latter reading
appears to me to be the best; because, in [Luk
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004), it is said, he leaveth the
ninety and nine In The Desert. The allusion, therefore, is to a shepherd
feeding his sheep on the mountains, in the desert; not seeking the lost
one On the mountains.

Leaving the ninety and nine, and seeking the One strayed sheep: - This
was a very common form of speech among the Jews, and includes no
mystery, though there are some who imagine that our Lord refers to the
angels who kept not their first estate, and that they are in number, to
men, as Ninety are to One. But it is likely that our Lord in this place
only alludes to his constant solicitude to instruct, heal, and save
those simple people of the sea coasts, country villages, etc., who were
scattered abroad, as sheep without a shepherd, ([Mat
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036)), the scribes and Pharisees
paying no attention to their present or eternal well-being. This may be
also considered as a lesson of instruction and comfort to backsliders.
How hardly does Christ give them up!

[Matthew 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 18:13</span></span>

He rejoiceth more - It is justly observed by one, on this verse, that it
is natural for a person to express unusual joy at the fortunate
accomplishment of an unexpected event.

[Matthew 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 18:14</span></span>

It is not the will of your Father - If any soul be finally lost, it is
not because God's will or counsel was against its salvation, or that a
proper provision had not been made for it; but that, though light came
into the world, it preferred darkness to light, because of its
attachment to its evil deeds.

[Matthew 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 18:15</span></span>

If thy brother - Any who is a member of the same religious society, sin
against thee, 1. Go and reprove him alone, - it may be in person; if
that cannot be so well done, by thy messenger, or in writing, (which in
many cases is likely to be the most effectual). Observe, our Lord gives
no liberty to omit this, or to exchange it for either of the following
steps. If this do not succeed,

[Matthew 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 18:16</span></span>

2\. Take with thee one or two more - Men whom he esteems, who may then
confirm and enforce what thou sayest; and afterwards, if need require,
bear witness of what was spoken. If even this do not succeed, then, and
not before,

[Matthew 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 18:17</span></span>

3\. Tell it unto the Church - Lay the whole matter before the
congregation of Christian believers, in that place of which he is a
member, or before the minister and elders, as the representatives of the
Church or assembly. If all this avail not, then,

Let him be unto thee as a heathen man and a publican - To whom thou art,
as a Christian, to owe earnest and persevering good will, and acts of
kindness; but have no religious communion with him, till, if he have
been convicted, he acknowledge his fault. Whosoever follows this
threefold rule will seldom offend others, and never be offended himself.
- Rev. J. Wesley.

Reproving a brother who had sinned was a positive command under the law.
See [Lev 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#017). And the Jews have a
saying, that one of the causes of the ruin of their nation was, "No man
reproved another." On the word Church, see Clarke at [Mat
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028) (note).

[Matthew 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 18:18</span></span>

Whatsoever ye shall bind, etc. - Whatever determinations ye make, in
conformity to these directions for your conduct to an offending brother,
will be accounted just, and ratified by the Lord. See on [Mat
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019) (note); and, to what is there
said, the following observations may be profitably added.

Οσα εαν δησητε - και οσα εαν λυσητε. Binding and loosing, in this place,
and in [Mat 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019), is generally
restrained, by Christian interpreters, to matters of discipline and
authority. But it is as plain as the sun, by what occurs in numberless
places dispersed throughout the Mishna, and from thence commonly used by
the later rabbins when they treat of ritual subjects, that binding
signified, and was commonly understood by the Jews at that time to be, a
declaration that any thing was unlawful to be done; and loosing
signified, on the contrary, a declaration that any thing may be lawfully
done. Our Savior spoke to his disciples in a language which they
understood, so that they were not in the least at a loss to comprehend
his meaning; and its being obsolete to us is no manner of reason why we
should conclude that it was obscure to them. The words, bind and loose,
are used in both places in a declaratory sense, of things, not of
persons. It is ὁ and ὃσα, in the neuter gender, both in chap. 16, and
here in this: i.e. Whatsoever thing or things ye shall bind or loose.
Consequently, the same commission which was given at first to St. Peter
alone, ([Mat 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)), was afterwards
enlarged to all the apostles. St. Peter had made a confession that Jesus
was the Christ, the Son of God. His confession of the Divinity of our
Lord was the first that ever was made by man; to him, therefore, were
given the keys of the kingdom of heaven: i.e. God made choice of him
among all the apostles, that the Gentiles should first, by his mouth,
hear the word of the Gospel, and believe. He first opened the kingdom of
heaven to the Gentiles, when he preached to Cornelius. It was open to
the Jews all along before; but if we should suppose that it was not, yet
to them also did St. Peter open the kingdom of heaven, in his sermon at
the great pentecost. Thus, then, St. Peter exercised his two keys: that
for the Jews at the great pentecost; and that for the Gentiles, when he
admitted Cornelius into the Church. And this was the reward of his first
confession, in which he owned Jesus to be the promised Messiah. And what
St. Peter loosed, i.e. declared as necessary to be believed and
practised by the disciples here, was ratified above. And what he
declared unlawful to be believed and practised, (i.e. what he bound),
was actually forbidden by God himself.

I own myself obliged to Dr. Lightfoot for this interpretation of the
true notion of binding and loosing. It is a noble one, and perfectly
agrees with the ways of speaking then in use among the Jews. It is
observable that these phrases, of binding and loosing, occur no where in
the New Testament but in St. Matthew, who is supposed to have written
his Gospel first in Hebrew, from whence it was translated into Greek,
and then the force and use of the expression will better appear. Dr.
Wotton's Miscell. Discourses, vol. i. p. 309, etc., etc.

"The phrases to bind and to loose were Jewish, and most frequent in
their writers. It belonged only to the teachers among the Jews to bind
and to loose. When the Jews set any apart to be a preacher, they used
these words, 'Take thou liberty to teach what is Bound and what is
Loose.'" Strype's preface to the Posthumous Remains of Dr. Lightfoot, p.
38.

[Matthew 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 18:19</span></span>

Again I say unto you - The word αμην, verily, is added here, in
ninety-eight MSS., (many of which are of the greatest antiquity and
importance), seven editions, all the Arabic, the Slavonic, and several
of the Itala. The taking in or leaving out such a word may appear to
some a matter of indifference; but, as I am fully convinced Jesus Christ
never spoke a useless or a needless word, my maxim is, to omit not one
syllable that I am convinced (from such authority as the above) he has
ever used, and to take in nothing that he did not speak. It makes the
passage much more emphatic - Again, Verily I say unto you,

If two of you shall agree - ΣυμφωνηϚωσιν, symphonize, or harmonize. It
is a metaphor taken from a number of musical instruments set to the same
key, and playing the same tune: here, it means a perfect agreement of
the hearts, desires, wishes, and voices, of two or more persons praying
to God. It also intimates that as a number of musical instruments,
skilfully played, in a good concert, are pleasing to the ears of men, so
a number of persons united together in warm, earnest, cordial prayer, is
highly pleasing in the sight and ears of the Lord. Now this conjoint
prayer refers, in all probability, to the binding and loosing in the
preceding verse; and thus we see what power faithful prayer has with
God!

It shall be done for them - What an encouragement to pray! even to two,
if there be no more disposed to join in this heavenly work.

[Matthew 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 18:20</span></span>

For where two - are gathered together in thy name - There are many
sayings among the Jews almost exactly similar to this, such as, Wherever
even two persons are sitting in discourse concerning the law, the Divine
presence is among them. See much more in Schoettgen. And the following,
among the ancient Hindoos, is like unto it: "When Brahma, the Lord of
creation, had formed mankind, and at the same time appointed his
worship, he spoke and said, 'With this worship pray for increase, and
let it be that on which ye shall depend for the accomplishment of all
your wishes. With this remember God, that God may remember you. Remember
one another, and ye shall obtain supreme happiness. God, being
remembered in worship, will grant you the enjoyment of your wishes: he
who enjoyeth what hath been given unto him by God, and offereth not a
portion unto him, is even as a thief. Know that good works come from
Brahma, whose nature is incorruptible; wherefore, the omnipresent Brahma
is Present In The Worship." See the Bagvat Geeta, p. 45, 46.

In my name - Seems to refer particularly to a public profession of
Christ and his Gospel.

There am I in the midst - None but God could say these words, to say
them with truth, because God alone is every where present, and these
words refer to his omnipresence. Wherever - suppose millions of
assemblies were collected in the same moment, in different places of the
creation, (which is a very possible case), this promise states that
Jesus is in each of them. Can any, therefore, say these words, except
that God who fills both heaven and earth? But Jesus says these words:
ergo - Jesus is God. Let it be observed, that Jesus is not among them to
spy out their sins; or to mark down the imperfections of their worship;
but to enlighten, strengthen, comfort, and save them.

[Matthew 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 18:21</span></span>

Till seven times? - Though seven was a number of perfection among the
Hebrews, and often meant much more than the units in it imply, yet it is
evident that Peter uses it here in its plain literal sense, as our
Lord's words sufficiently testify. It was a maxim among the Jews never
to forgive more than thrice: Peter enlarges this charity more than one
half; and our Lord makes even his enlargement septuple, see [Mat
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022). Revenge is natural to man, i.e.
man is naturally a vindictive being, and, in consequence, nothing is
more difficult to him than forgiveness of injuries.

[Matthew 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 18:22</span></span>

Seventy times seven - There is something very remarkable in these words,
especially if collated with [Gen 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#024),
where the very same words are used - "If any man kill Lamech, he shall
be avenged seventy times seven." The just God punishes sin in an
exemplary manner. Sinful man, who is exposed to the stroke of Divine
justice, should be abundant in forgiveness, especially as the merciful
only shall find mercy. See the note on [Mat
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007), and on [Mat
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014), [Mat
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#015) (note). The sum seventy times
seven makes four hundred and ninety. Now an offense, properly such, is
that which is given wantonly, maliciously, and without Any Provocation.
It is my opinion, that, let a man search ever so accurately, he will not
find that he has received, during the whole course of his life, four
hundred and ninety such offenses. If the man who receives the offense
has given any cause for it, in that case, the half of the offense, at
least, towards his brother, ceases.

[Matthew 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 18:23</span></span>

Therefore is the kingdom - In respect to sin, cruelty, and oppression,
God will proceed in the kingdom of heaven (the dispensation of the
Gospel) as he did in former times; and every person shall give an
account of himself to God. Every sin is a debt contracted with the
justice of God; men are all God's own servants; and the day is at hand
in which their Master will settle accounts with them, inquire into their
work, and pay them their wages. Great Judge! what an awful time must
this be, when with multitudes nothing shall be found but sin and
insolvency!

By servant, in the text, we are to understand, a petty king, or
tributary prince; for no hired servant could possibly owe such a sum as
is here mentioned.

[Matthew 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 18:24</span></span>

Ten thousand talents - Μυριων ταλαντων, a myriad of talents, the highest
number known in Greek arithmetical notation. An immense sum, which, if
the silver talent be designed, amounts to 4,500,000 sterling; but if the
gold talent be meant which is by far the most likely, then the amount is
67,500,000 sterling, a sum equal to the annual revenue of the British
empire! See the note on [Exo 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#039).

[Matthew 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 18:25</span></span>

He had not to pay - That is not being able to pay. As there could not be
the smallest probability that a servant, wholly dependent on his master,
who was now absolutely insolvent, could ever pay a debt he had
contracted of more than 67 millions! - so is it impossible for a sinner,
infinitely indebted to Divine justice, ever to pay a mite out of the
talent.

Commanded him to be sold - his wife - children, etc. - Our Lord here
alludes to an ancient custom among the Hebrews, of selling a man and his
family to make payment of contracted debts. See [Exo
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#003); [Lev
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#030), [Lev
25:47](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#047); [Kg2
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#001). This custom passed from among the
Jews to the Greeks and Romans. I have already remarked (see [Gen
47:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#019)) that in the Burman empire the
sale of whole families, to discharge debts, is very common.

[Matthew 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 18:26</span></span>

Fell down and worshipped him - Προσεκυνει αυτω, crouched as a dog before
him, with the greatest deference, submission, and anxiety.

Have patience with me - Μακροθυμησον επ' εμοι, be long-minded towards me
- give me longer space.

The means which a sinner should use to be saved, are,

1\. Deep humiliation of heart - he fell down.

2\. Fervent prayer.

3\. Confidence in the mercy of God - have patience.

4\. A firm purpose to devote his soul and body to his Maker - I will pay
thee all.

A sinner may be said, according to the economy of grace, to pay all,
when he brings the sacrifice of the Lord Jesus to the throne of justice,
by faith; thus offering an equivalent for the pardon he seeks, and
paying all he owes to Divine justice, by presenting the blood of the
Lamb.

[Matthew 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 18:27</span></span>

Moved with compassion - Or with tender pity. This is the source of
salvation to a lost world, the tender pity, the eternal mercy of God.

[Matthew 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 18:28</span></span>

A hundred pence - Rather denarii. The denarius was a Roman coin, worth
about seven-pence halfpenny English. The original word should be
retained, as our word penny does not convey the seventh part of the
meaning. A hundred denarii would amount to about 3l. 2s. 6d. British,
or, if reckoned as some do, at seven-pence three farthings, the sum
would be 3l. 4s. 7d.

Took him by the throat - Κρατησας αυτον επνιγε. There is no word I am
acquainted with, which so fully expresses the meaning of the original,
επνιγε, as the Anglo-saxon term throttle: it signified (like the Greek)
to half choke a person, by seizing his throat.

[Matthew 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 18:29</span></span>

Fell down at his feet - This clause is wanting in several ancient MSS.,
versions, and fathers. Several printed editions also have omitted it;
Griesbach has left it out of the text.

Pay thee all - Παντα, all, is omitted by a multitude of MSS., versions,
and fathers.

[Matthew 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 18:30</span></span>

And he would not, etc. - To the unmerciful, God will show no mercy; this
is an eternal purpose of the Lord, which never can be changed. God
teaches us what to do to a fellow-sinner, by what He does to us. Our
fellow-servant's debt to us, and ours to God, are as one hundred denarii
to ten thousand talents! When we humble ourselves before him, God freely
forgives us all this mighty sum! And shall we exact from our brother
recompense for the most trifling faults? Reader, if thou art of this
unmerciful, unforgiving cast, read out the chapter.

"All the souls that are were forfeit once,

And he who might the 'vantage best have took,

Found out the remedy. How would you be,

If He, who is the top of judgment, should

But judge you as you are? O! think on that,

And mercy then will breathe within your lips

Like man new made

Though justice be thy plea, consider this,

That, in the course of justice, none of us

Should see salvation: we do pray for mercy;

And that same prayer doth teach us all to render

The deeds of Mercy. - "

[Matthew 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 18:31</span></span>

His fellow-servants saw what was done - An act of this kind is so
dishonorable to all the followers of Christ, and to the spirit of his
Gospel, that through the respect they owe to their Lord and Master, and
through the concern they feel for the prosperity of his cause, they are
obliged to plead against it at the throne of God.

[Matthew 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 18:32</span></span>

His lord, after that he had called him - Alas! how shall he appear!
Confounded. What shall he answer? He is speechless!

[Matthew 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 18:33</span></span>

Shouldest not thou also have had compassion - Ουκ εδει και σε, Did it
not become thee also? What a cutting reproach! It became Me to show
mercy, when thou didst earnestly entreat me, because I am Merciful, It
became thee also to have shown mercy, because thou wert so deep in debt
thyself, and hadst obtained mercy.

[Matthew 18:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 18:34</span></span>

Delivered him to the tormentors - Not only continued captivity is here
intended, but the tortures to be endured in it. If a person was
suspected of fraud, as there was reason for in such a case as that
mentioned here, he was put to very cruel tortures among the Asiatics, to
induce him to confess. In the punishments of China, a great variety of
these appear; and probably there is an allusion to such torments in this
place. Before, he and all that he had, were only to be sold. Now, as he
has increased his debt, so he has increased his punishment; he is
delivered to the tormentors, to the horrors of a guilty conscience, and
to a fearful looking for of fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries. But if this refers to the day of judgment, then the worm
that dieth not, and the fire that is not quenched, are the tormentors.

[Matthew 18:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 18:35</span></span>

So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you - The goodness and
indulgence of God towards us is the pattern we should follow in our
dealings with others. If we take man for our exemplar we shall err,
because our copy is a bad one; and our lives are not likely to be better
than the copy we imitate. Follow Christ; be merciful as your Father who
is in heaven is merciful. You cannot complain of the fairness of your
copy. Reader, hast thou a child, or servant who has offended thee, and
humbly asks forgiveness? Hast thou a debtor, or a tenant, who is
insolvent, and asks for a little longer time? And hast thou not forgiven
that child or servant? Hast thou not given time to that debtor or
tenant? How, then, canst thou ever expect to see the face of the just
and merciful God? Thy child is banished, or kept at a distance; thy
debtor is thrown into prison, or thy tenant sold up: yet the child
offered to fall at thy feet; and the debtor or tenant, utterly
insolvent, prayed for a little longer time, hoping God would enable him
to pay thee all; but to these things thy stony heart and seared
conscience paid no regard! O monster of ingratitude! Scandal to human
nature, and reproach to God! If thou canst, go hide thyself - even in
hell, from the face of the Lord!

Their trespasses - These words are properly left out by Greisbach, and
other eminent critics, because they are wanting in some of the very best
MSS. most of the versions, and in some of the chief of the fathers. The
words are evidently an interpolation; the construction of them is
utterly improper, and the concord false.

In our common method of dealing with insolvent debtors, we in some sort
imitate the Asiatic customs: we put them in prison, and all their
circumstances there are so many tormentors; the place, the air, the
company, the provision, the accommodation, all destructive to comfort,
to peace, to health, and to every thing that humanity can devise. If the
person be poor, or comparatively poor, is his imprisonment likely to
lead him to discharge his debt? His creditor may rest assured that he is
now farther from his object than ever: the man had no other way of
discharging the debt but by his labor; that is now impossible, through
his confinement, and the creditor is put to a certain expense towards
his maintenance. How foolish is this policy! And how much do such laws
stand in need of revision and amendment! Imprisonment for debt, in such
a case as that supposed above, can answer no other end than the
gratification of the malice, revenge, or inhumanity of the creditor.
Better sell all that he has, and, with his hands and feet untied, let
him begin the world afresh. Dr. Dodd very feelingly inquires here,
"Whether rigour in exacting temporal debts, in treating without mercy
such as are unable to satisfy them - whether this can be allowed to a
Christian, who is bound to imitate his God and Father? To a debtor, who
can expect forgiveness only on the condition of forgiving others? To a
servant, who should obey his Master? - and to a criminal, who is in
daily expectation of his Judge and final sentence?" Little did he think,
when he wrote this sentence, that himself should be a melancholy proof,
not only of human weakness, but of the relentless nature of those laws
by which property, or rather money, is guarded. The unfortunate Dr. Dodd
was hanged for forgery, in 1777, and the above note was written only
seven years before!

The unbridled and extravagant appetites of men sometimes require a
rigour even beyond the law to suppress them. While, then, we learn
lessons of humanity from what is before us, let us also learn lessons of
prudence, sobriety, and moderation. The parable of the two debtors is
blessedly calculated to give this information.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 19](mat019)

</div>
