<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic006)  [Next](nah000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 7:0</span></span>

The prophet begins this chapter with lamenting the decay of piety and
the growth of ungodliness, using a beautiful allegory to imply (as
explained in [Mic 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#002)) that the good
man is as seldom to be met with as the early fig of best quality in the
advanced season, or the cluster after the vintage, [Mic
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001), [Mic
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#002). He then reproves and threatens in
terms so expressive of great calamities as to be applied in the New
Testament to times of the hottest persecution, [Mic
7:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#003). See [Mat
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#035), [Mat
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#036). Notwithstanding which a Jew is
immediately introduced declaring, in the name of his captive people, the
strongest faith in the mercy of God the most submissive resignation to
his will, and the firmest hope in his favor in future times, when they
should triumph over their enemies, [Mic
7:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#007). The prophet upon this resumes
the discourse, and predicts their great prosperity and increase, [Mic
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#011), [Mic
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#012); although the whole land of
Israel must first be desolated on account of the great wickedness of its
inhabitants, [Mic 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#013). The prophet
intercedes in behalf of his people, [Mic
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014). After which God is introduced
promising, in very ample terms, their future restoration and prosperity,
[Mic 7:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#015). And then, to conclude, a
chorus of Jews is introduced, singing a beautiful hymn of thanksgiving,
suggested by the gracious promises which precede, [Mic
7:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018).

[Micah 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 7:1</span></span>

Wo is me! - This is a continuation of the preceding discourse. And here
the prophet points out the small number of the upright to be found in
the land. He himself seemed to be the only person who was on God's side;
and he considers himself as a solitary grape, which had escaped the
general gathering. The word קץ kayits, which is sometimes used for
summer, and summer fruits in general, is here translated late figs; and
may here, says Bishop Newcome, be opposed to the early ripe fig of
superior quality. See on [Hos 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010)
(note), and [Amo 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001) (note), [Amo
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#002) (note). He desired to see the
first-ripe fruit - distinguished and eminent piety; but he found nothing
but a very imperfect or spurious kind of godliness.

[Micah 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mic 7:2</span></span>

The good man is perished out of the earth - A similar sentiment may be
found, [Psa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001); [Isa
57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001). As the early fig of excellent
flavor cannot be found in the advanced season of summer, or a choice
cluster of grapes after vintage, so neither can the good and upright man
be discovered by searching in Israel. This comparison, says Bp. Newcome,
is beautifully implied.

They hunt every man his brother with a net - This appears to be an
allusion to the ancient mode of duel between the retiarius and secutor.
The former had a casting net, which he endeavoured to throw over the
head of his antagonist, that he might then despatch him with his short
sword. The other parried the cast; and when the retiarius missed, he was
obliged to run about the field to get time to set his net in right order
for another throw. While he ran, the other followed, that he might
despatch him before he should be able to recover the proper position of
his net; and hence the latter was called secutor, the pursuer, as the
other was called retiarius, or the net man. I have explained this before
on Job, and other places; but because it is rarely noticed by
commentators, I explain the allusion here once more. Abp. Newcome by not
attending to this, has translated איש את אחיהו יצודו חרם ish eth achihu
yatsudu cherem, "They hunt every man his brother for his destruction;"
though he put net in the margin.

[Micah 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mic 7:3</span></span>

That they may do evil with both hands - That is, earnestly, greedily, to
the uttermost of their power. The Vulgate translates: Malum manuum
suarum dicunt bonum; "The evil of their hands they call good."

The prince asketh - A bribe, to forward claims in his court.

The judge asketh for a reward - That he may decide the cause in favor of
him who gives most money, whether the cause be good or evil. This was
notoriously the case in our own country before the giving of Magna
Charta; and hence that provision, Nulli vendemus justitiam aut rectum:
"We will not sell justice to any man." And this was not the only country
in which justice and judgment were put to sale.

The great man, he uttereth his mischievous desire - Such consider
themselves above law, and they make no secret of their unjust
determinations. And so they wrap it up - they all conjoin in doing evil
in their several offices, and oppressing the poor; so our translators
have interpreted the original ויעבתוה vayeabtuha, which the versions
translate variously. Newcome has, "And they do abominably."

[Micah 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mic 7:4</span></span>

The best of them is as a brier - They are useless in themselves, and
cannot be touched without wounding him that comes in contact with them.
He alludes to the thick thorn hedges, still frequent in Palestine.

The day of thy watchmen - The day of vengeance, which the prophets have
foreseen and proclaimed, is at hand. Now shall be their perplexity; no
more wrapping up, all shall be unfolded. In that day every man will wish
that he were different from what he is found to be; but he shall be
judged for what he is, and for the deeds he has done.

[Micah 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mic 7:5</span></span>

Trust ye not in a friend - These times will be so evil, and the people
so wicked, that all bonds will be dissolved; and even the most intimate
will betray each other, when they can hope to serve themselves by it.

On this passage, in the year 1798, I find I have written as follows: -

"Trust ye not in a friend. - Several of those whom I have delighted to
call by that name have deceived me.

"Put ye not confidence in a guide. - Had I followed some of these I
should have gone to perdition.

"Keep the door of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom. - My wife
alone never deceived me."

It is now twenty-seven years since, and I find no cause to alter what I
then wrote.

[Micah 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 7:6</span></span>

For the son dishonoreth the father - See the use our Lord has made of
these words, where he quotes them, [Mat
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#021) (note), [Mat
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025) (note), [Mat
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#036) (note), and the notes there.

[Micah 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 7:7</span></span>

Therefore I will look unto the Lord - Because things are so, I will
trust in the Lord more firmly, wait for him more patiently, and more
confidently expect to be supported, defended, and saved.

[Micah 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 7:8</span></span>

Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy - The captive Israelites are
introduced as speaking here and in the preceding verse. The enemy are
the Assyrians and Chaldeans; the fall is their idolatry and consequent
captivity; the darkness, the calamities they suffered in that captivity;
their rise and light, their restoration and consequent blessedness.

To rejoice over the fall or miseries of any man, betrays a malignant
spirit. I have known several instances where people professing to hold a
very pure and Christian creed, having become unfaithful and fallen into
sin, their opponents, who held a very impure and unchristian creed, have
exulted with "Ha, ha! so would we have it!" and have shown their
malignity more fully, by giving all possible publicity and circulation
to such accounts. Perhaps in the sight of God this was worse than the
poor wretch's fall, in which they exulted as having taken place in one
who held a creed different from their own. But these arose again from
their fall, while those jesters at holiness continued in the gall of
bitterness and bonds of inward corruption.

[Micah 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 7:9</span></span>

I will bear the indignation of the Lord - The words of the penitent
captives, acknowledging their sins and praying for mercy.

Until he plead my cause - And wo to the slanderers, when God undertakes
to plead for the fallen who have returned to him with deep compunction
of heart, seeking redemption in the blood of the cross.

[Micah 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mic 7:10</span></span>

Then she that is mine enemy - This may refer particularly to the city of
Babylon.

Shall she be trodden down - Literally fulfilled in the package of that
city by the Persians, and its consequent total ruin. It became as mire;
its walls, formed of brick kneaded with straw and baked in the sun,
becoming exposed to the wet, dissolved, so that a vestige of the city
remains not, except a few bricks digged from under the rubbish, several
pieces of which now lie before me, and show the perishing materials of
which the head of this proud empire was composed.

[Micah 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mic 7:11</span></span>

In the day that thy walls are to be built - This refers to Jerusalem;
the decree, to the purpose of God to deliver the people into captivity.
"This shall be far removed." God having purposed their return, I cannot
think, with some commentators, that this verse contains threatenings
against Jerusalem, and not promises. See [Hag
1:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001) (note), where the subject is
similar; and the restoration of Jerusalem is certainly what the prophet
describes.

[Micah 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mic 7:12</span></span>

In that day also he shall come - Bp. Newcome translates: -

"And in that day they shall come unto thee

From Assyria and the fenced cities;

And from Egypt even unto the river."

Calmet translates: -

"They shall come to thee from Assyria even unto Egypt;

And from Egypt even to the river; (Euphrates);

And from one sea to another, and from one mountain to another."

This, says he, gives an easy sense; whereas we cannot tell where to find
those fortified cities spoken of by other translators. The Israelites
were to return from their captivity, and re-occupy their ancient country
from Assyria to Egypt; that is, from the river Euphrates to the river
Nile; and from the Mediterranean Sea to the Ocean, and from Mount
Libanus to the mountains of Arabia Petraea, or Mount Seir. See [Amo
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#012). This prediction was literally
fulfilled under the Asmoneans. The Jewish nation was greatly extended
and very powerful under Herod, at the time that our Lord was born. See
Calmet.

[Micah 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mic 7:13</span></span>

Notwithstanding the land shall be desolate - This should be translated
in the preter tense, "Though the land Had been desolate;" that is, the
land of Israel had been desolate during the captivity, which captivity
was the "fruit of the evil doings of them that had dwelt therein."

[Micah 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mic 7:14</span></span>

Feed thy people with thy rod - בשבטך beshibtecha, "with thy crook." The
shepherd's crook is most certainly designed, as the word flock
immediately following shows. No rod of correction or affliction is here
intended; nor does the word mean such.

Solitarily - They have been long without a shepherd or spiritual
governor.

In the midst of Carmel - Very fruitful in vines.

Bashan and Gilead - Proverbially fruitful in pasturages.

[Micah 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mic 7:15</span></span>

According to the days - This is the answer to the prophet's prayer; and
God says he will protect, save, defend, and work miracles for them in
their restoration, such as he wrought for their fathers in their return
from Egypt to the promised land.

[Micah 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mic 7:16</span></span>

The nations shall see and be confounded - Whether the words in these
verses ([Mic 7:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#015)) be applied to
the return from the Babylonish captivity, or to the prosperity of the
Jews under the Maccabees, they may be understood as ultimately
applicable to the final restoration of this people, and their lasting
prosperity under the Gospel.

[Micah 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mic 7:18</span></span>

Who is a God like unto thee, etc - Here is a challenge to all idol
worshippers, and to all those who take false views of the true God, to
show his like. See his characters; they are immediately subjoined.

1\. He pardoneth iniquity. This is the prerogative of God alone; of that
Being who alone has power to save or to destroy.

2\. He passeth by transgression. He can heal backsliding, and restore
them that are fallen.

3\. He retaineth not his anger forever. Though, justly displeased
because of sin, he pours out his judgments upon the wicked; yet when
they return to him, he shows "that he retaineth not his anger forever,"
but is indescribably ready to save them.

4\. He delighteth in mercy. Judgment is his strange work: he is ever
more ready to save than to destroy. Nothing can please him better than
having the opportunity, from the return and repentance of the sinner, to
show him that mercy without which he must perish everlastingly.

5\. Because he is such a God -

1\. "He will turn again." His face has been long turned from us, because
of our sins.

2\. "He will have compassion upon us" pity our state, and feel for our
sorrows.

3\. "He will subdue our iniquities." Though they have been mighty, he
will bring them down, and bruise them under our feet.

4\. "He will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea." Will fully
pardon them, and never more remember them against us. Instead of חטאתם
chattotham, Their sins, five MSS. of Kennicott's and De Rossi's, with
the Septuagint, Syriac, Vulgate, and Arabic read חטאתינו chattotheynu,
Our sins. He will plunge them into eternal oblivion, never more to come
into sight or remembrance; like a stone dropped into the "depths of the
sea."

[Micah 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mic 7:20</span></span>

Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob - The promises which he has made to
Jacob and his posterity. Not one of them can ever fall to the ground.
"And the mercy to Abraham, which thou hast sworn;" viz., that "in his
Seed all the families of the earth should be blessed;" that the Messiah
should come from Abraham, through his son Isaac, by Jacob and David; be
a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel. And
this promise, and this oath, God has most signally fulfilled by the
incarnation of Christ, who was sent to bless us by turning away every
one of us from his iniquities; and for this purpose he was delivered for
our offenses, and rose again for our justification; and repentance and
remission of sins are preached in his name to all nations. The
proclamation was first made at Jerusalem; and that the prophet refers to
this, is evident from the use made of these words by Zacharias, the
father of John the Baptist, when, under the full afflatus of the Spirit
of God, he quoted this prophecy of Micah, as fulfilled in the
incarnation of Christ, [Luk 1:72](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#072), [Luk
1:73](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#073). The Chaldee paraphrases this
last verse with spirit and propriety: "Thou wilt give the truth to Jacob
his son, as thou hast promised by oath to him in Beth-el. And the mercy
to Abraham and to his seed after him, as thou didst swear to him amidst
the divisions. Thou wilt be mindful of us on account of the binding of
Isaac, who was bound upon the altar before thee.

And thou wilt do us that good, which, from the most ancient days, thou
hast promised to our fathers by an oath." Between the divisions, refers
to the covenant made between God and Abraham, [Gen
15:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#009), [Gen
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#017), [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018). Well might the prophet exult in
his challenge to earth and hell. Who Is a God Like unto Thee! Hell is
speechless, earth is dumb. Infidels dare not open their mouths!!!
Hallelujah! מי אל כמוך mi El camocha! Jesus is the mighty God and
Savior, pardoning iniquity, transgression, and sin, and saving to the
uttermost all that come unto God through him. Blessed be God! Reader,
lay this to heart.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Introduction](nah000)

</div>
