<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](jon004)  [Next](mic001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to the Book of the Prophet Micah

Micah, the Morasthite, or of Moresa, a village near the city
Eleutheropolis, in the southern part of Judah, is the sixth in order of
the twelve minor prophets. He prophesied under Jotham, Ahaz, and
Hezekiah, kings of Judah, for about fifty years. Some have confounded
him with Micaiah, son of Imlah, who lived in the kingdom of the ten
tribes, under the reign of Ahab.

The spurious Dorotheus says that Micah was buried in the burying-place
of the Anakim, whose habitation had been at Hebron, and round about it.
This prophet appeared almost at the same time with Isaiah, and has even
borrowed some expressions from him. Compare [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002) with [Mic
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001), and [Isa
41:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#015) with [Mic
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#013).

The prophecy of Micah contains but seven chapters. He foretells the
calamities of Samaria, which was taken by Shalmaneser, and reduced to a
heap of stones. Afterwards he prophesies against Judah, and declares the
troubles that Sennacherib should bring upon it under the reign of
Hezekiah. Then he declaims against the iniquities of Samaria. He
foretells the captivity of the ten tribes, and their return into their
own country. The third chapter contains a pathetic invective against the
princes of the house of Jacob, and the judges of the house of Israel;
which seems leveled against the chief of the kingdom of Judah, the
judges, the magistrates, the priests, the false prophets, etc. He
upbraids them with their avarice, their injustice, and falsehood; and
tells them they will be the occasion that Jerusalem shall be reduced to
a heap of rubbish, and the mountain of the temple shall be as a forest.
We are informed, [Jer 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#018), [Jer
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#019), that this prophecy was
pronounced in the reign of Hezekiah; and that it saved Jeremiah from
death.

After these terrible denunciations, Micah speaks of the reign of the
Messiah, and of the establishment of the Christian Church. And as the
peaceable times which succeeded the return from the Babylonish
captivity, and which were a figure of the reign of the Messiah, were
disturbed by a tempest of a short continuance, Micah foretold it in such
a manner as agrees very well with what Ezekiel says of the war of Gog
against the Jews. Micah speaks in particular of the birth of the
Messiah; that he was to be born at Bethlehem; and that his dominion was
to extend to the utmost parts of the earth. He says that God should
raise seven shepherds, who should reign by the sword over Assyria, and
in the land of Nimrod; which Calmet explains of Darius, son of
Hystaspes; and of the seven confederates that killed the magian, and who
possessed the empire of the Persians, after the extinction of the family
of Cyrus. The fifth chapter, from verse 7 to the end, describes the
flourishing estate of the Jews in their own country, from the reign of
Darius, and after the Maccabees; yet in such a manner, that he mingles
several things in it that can apply only to the Church of Jesus Christ.

The two last chapters of Micah contain, first, a long invective against
the iniquities of Samaria: then he foretells the fall of Babylon; the
re-establishment of the cities of Israel; the greatness of the country
possessed by the Israelites; their happiness; the graces wherewith God
will favor them; and all this in such lofty terms, that they chiefly
agree with the Christian Church. St. Jerome says that Micah was buried
at Morasthi, ten furlongs from Eleutheropolis; and Sozomenes says that
his tomb was revealed to Zebennus, bishop of Eleutheropolis, under the
reign of Theodosius the Great. He calls the place of his burial
Beretsate, which is probably the same as Morasthi, ten furlongs from
Eleutheropolis.

Bishop Newcome observes that Micah was of the kingdom of Judah, as he
only makes mention of kings who reigned over that country. It is
supposed that he prophesied farther on in the reign of Hezekiah than
Hosea did; although [Mic 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#005) was
written before the captivity of the ten tribes, which happened in the
sixth year of Hezekiah. It is plain from [Mic
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001), [Mic
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005), [Mic
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#009), [Mic
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#012), [Mic
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#013), that he was sent both to Israel
and Judah. Like Amos and Hosea, he reproves and threatens, with great
spirit and energy, a corrupt people. See [Mic
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#001), [Mic
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#008), [Mic
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#009), [Mic
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#010); [Mic
3:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#002), [Mic
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#006), [Mic
3:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#010); [Mic
7:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#002). And, like Hosea, he inveighs
against the princes and prophets with the highest indignation. See [Mic
3:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#005), [Mic
3:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#009); [Mic
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#003). The reader will observe that
these similar topics are treated of by each prophet with remarkable
variety, and copiousness of expression.

Some of his prophecies are distinct and illustrious ones, as [Mic
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#012), [Mic
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#013); [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012); [Mic
4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001), [Mic
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010); [Mic
5:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002); [Mic
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#013); [Mic
7:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#008).

We may justly admire the elegance of his diction: -

[Mic 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#012) - "I will surely gather, O
Jacob, all of thee:I will surely assemble the residue of Israel.I will
put them together as sheep of Bozra,As a flock in the midst of their
fold:They shall make a tumult from the multitude of men.

[Mic 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#013) - He that forceth a passage
is come up before them:They have forced a passage, and have passed
through the gate; and are gone forth by it:And their King passeth before
them, even Jehovah at the head of them."

[Mic 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001) - "But it shall come to pass,
in the latter days,That the mountain of the temple of Jehovah shall
beEstablished on the top of the mountains,And it shall be exalted above
the hills;And the people shall flow into it:

[Mic 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002) - And many nations shall go,
and shall say,Come, and let us go up unto the mountain of Jehovah,And
unto the temple of the God of Jacob:That he may teach us of his ways,
and that we may walk in his paths.

For from Sion shall go forth a law,And the word of Jehovah from
Jerusalem.

[Mic 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003) - And he shall judge between
many people,And he shall convince strong nations afar off:And they shall
beat their swords into ploughshares,And their spears into
pruninghooks:Nation shall not lift up sword against nation,Neither shall
they any longer learn war."

His animation -

[Mic 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005), lines 3, 4 - "What is the
transgression of Jacob? - is it not that of Samaria?And what are the
high places of Judah? - are they not those of Jerusalem?"

[Mic 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009) - "And now why dost thou cry
out loudly?Is there no king in thee?Hath thy counsellor perished?For
pangs have seized thee, as a woman in travail."

There are few beauties of composition of which examples may not be found
in this prophet. For sublimity and impressiveness in several places, he
is unrivalled. The Lord's controversy, [Mic
6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#001), is equal to any thing even in
the prophet Isaiah. It has a powerful effect on every attentive reader.

His strength of expression: -

[Mic 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#006) - "Therefore will I make
Samaria a heap of the field, a place for the plantings of a vineyard:And
I will pour down her stones into the valley, and I will discover her
foundations."

[Mic 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#002) - "Ye who hate good and love
evil:Who pluck their skin from off them,And their flesh from off their
bones."

[Mic 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#003) - Who have also eaten the
flesh of my people,And have flayed their skin from off them,And have
broken their bones;And have divided them asunder, as flesh in the
pot:And as meat within the caldron."

[Mic 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001) - "Wo is me; for I am
becomeAs the gatherers of late figs, as the gleaners of the
vintage.There is no cluster to eat:My soul desireth the first-ripe fig.

[Mic 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#002) - The good man is perished
from the land,And there is none upright among men.All of them lie in
wait for blood;They hunt every man his brother for his destruction."

His pathos: -

[Mic 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016) - "Make thee bald, and cut
off thine hair for thy delicate children;Enlarge thy baldness as the
eagle;For they are gone into captivity from thee."

[Mic 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#004) - "In that day shall a
proverb be taken up against you;And a grievous lamentation shall be
made:Saying, 'We are utterly laid waste:He hath changed the portion of
my people:How hath he departed from me,To bring again him that divided
our fields!'"

His sublimity: -

[Mic 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002) - "Hear, O ye people, all of
you:Hearken, O land, and all that are therein.And let the Lord Jehovah
be witness against you;Even the Lord from his holy temple.

[Mic 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#003) - For, behold, Jehovah will
go forth from his place:And he will come down, and will tread upon the
high places of the earth.

[Mic 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#004) - And the mountains shall be
molten under him;And the valleys shall cleave asunder;As wax before the
fire, As waters poured down a steep place."

[Mic 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#001) - "Hear ye now what Jehovah
saith:Arise, contend thou before the mountains;And let the hills hear
thy voice."

[Mic 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#016) - "The nations shall see,
and shall be confounded because of their might:They shall lay their hand
upon their mouth; their ears shall be deaf.

[Mic 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#017) - They shall lick the dust
as the serpent;As the creeping things upon the earth, they shall tremble
from their close places:Because of Jehovah our God, they shall stand in
awe; and they shall fear because of thee."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 1](mic001)

</div>
