<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic001)  [Next](mic003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#001)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 2:0</span></span>

Here the prophet denounces a wo against the plotters of wickedness, the
covetous and the oppressor, [Mic 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#001),
[Mic 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#002). God is represented as
devising their ruin, [Mic 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#003). An
Israelite is then introduced as a mourner, personating his people, and
lamenting their fate, [Mic 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#004). Their
total expulsion is now threatened on account of their very numerous
offenses, [Mic 2:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#005). Great
infatuation of the people in favor of those pretenders to Divine
inspiration who prophesied to them peace and plenty, [Mic
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#011). The chapter concludes with a
gracious promise of the restoration of the posterity of Jacob from
captivity; possibly alluding to their deliverance from the Chaldean
yoke, an event which was about two hundred years in futurity at the
delivery of this prophecy, [Mic 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#012),
[Mic 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#013).

[Micah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 2:1</span></span>

Wo to them that devise iniquity - Who lay schemes and plans for
transgressions; who make it their study to find out new modes of
sinning; and make these things their nocturnal meditations, that, having
fixed their plan, they may begin to execute it as soon as it is light in
the morning.

Because it is in the power of their hand - They think they may do
whatever they have power and opportunity to do.

[Micah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mic 2:2</span></span>

They covet fields - These are the rich and mighty in the land; and, like
Ahab, they will take the vineyard or inheritance of any poor Naboth on
which they may fix their covetous eye; so that they take away even the
heritage of the poor.

[Micah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mic 2:3</span></span>

Against this family (the Israelites) do I devise an evil - You have
devised the evil of plundering the upright; I will devise the evil to
you of punishment for your conduct; you shall have your necks brought
under the yoke of servitude. Tiglath-pileser ruined this kingdom, and
transported the people to Assyria, under the reign of Hezekiah, king of
Judah; and Micah lived to see this catastrophe. See on [Mic
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#009) (note).

[Micah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mic 2:4</span></span>

Take up a parable against you - Your wickedness and your punishment
shall be subjects of common conversation; and a funeral dirge shall be
composed and sung for you as for the dead. The lamentation is that which
immediately follows: We be utterly spoiled; and ends, Are these his
doings? [Mic 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#007).

[Micah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mic 2:5</span></span>

None that shall cast a cord - You will no more have your inheritance
divided to you by lot, as it was to your fathers; ye shall neither have
fields nor possessions of any kind.

[Micah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 2:6</span></span>

Prophesy ye not - Do not predict any more evils - we have as many as we
can bear. We are utterly ruined - shame and confusion cover our faces.
The original is singular, and expressive of sorrow and sobbing.
Literally, "Do not cause it to rain; they will cause it to rain; they
cannot make it rain sooner than this; confusion shall not depart from
us." To rain, often means to preach, to prephesy; [Eze
20:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#046), [Eze
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#002); [Amo
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#016); [Deu
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002); [Job
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#022); [Pro
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#003), etc.

The last line Bp. Newcome translates, "For he shall not remove from
himself reproaches;" and paraphrases, "The true prophet will subject
himself to public disgrace by exercising his office."

[Micah 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 2:7</span></span>

Is the Spirit of the Lord straitened? - This is the complaint of the
Israelites, and a part of the lamentation. Doth it not speak by other
persons as well as by Micah? Doth it communicate to us such influences
as it did formerly? Is it true that these evils are threatened by that
Spirit? Are these his doings? To which Jehovah answers, "Do not my words
do good to him that walketh uprightly?" No upright man need fear any
word spoken by me: my words to such yield instruction and comfort; never
dismay. Were ye upright, ye would not complain of the words of my
prophets. The last clause may be translated, "Walking with him that is
upright." The upright man walks by the word; and the word walks with him
who walks by it.

[Micah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 2:8</span></span>

My people is risen up as an enemy - Ye are not only opposed to me, but
ye are enemies to each other. Ye rob and spoil each other. Ye plunder
the peaceable passenger; depriving him both of his upper and under
garment; ye pull off the robe from those who, far from being spoilers
themselves, are averse from war.

[Micah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 2:9</span></span>

The women of my people - Ye are the cause of the women and their
children being carried into captivity - separated from their pleasant
habitations, and from my temple and ordinances - and from the blessings
of the covenant, which it is my glory to give, and theirs to receive.
These two verses may probably relate to the war made on Ahaz by Rezin,
king of Syria, and Pekah, king of Israel. They fell suddenly upon the
Jews; killed in one day one hundred and twenty thousand, and took two
hundred thousand captive; and carried away much spoil. Thus, they rose
up against them as enemies, when there was peace between the two
kingdoms; spoiled them of their goods, carried away men, women, and
children, till, at the remonstrances of the prophet Oded, they were
released. See [Ch2 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#006), etc. Micah
lived in the days of Ahaz, and might have seen the barbarities which he
here describes.

[Micah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mic 2:10</span></span>

Arise ye, and depart - Prepare for your captivity; ye shall have no
resting place here: the very land is polluted by your iniquities, and
shall vomit you out, and it shall be destroyed; and the destruction of
it shall be great and sore.

Some think this is an exhortation to the godly, to leave a land that was
to be destroyed so speedily.

[Micah 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mic 2:11</span></span>

If a man walking in the spirit and falsehood - The meaning is: If a man
who professes to be Divinely inspired do lie, by prophesying of plenty,
etc., then such a person shall be received as a true prophet by this
people. It not unfrequently happens that the Christless worldling, who
has got into the priest's office for a maintenance, and who leaves the
people undisturbed in their unregenerate state, is better received than
the faithful pastor, who proclaims the justice of the Lord, and the
necessity of repentance and forsaking sin, in order to their being made
partakers of that holiness without which no man shall see God.

[Micah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mic 2:12</span></span>

I will surely assemble - This is a promise of the restoration of Israel
from captivity. He compares them to a flock of sheep rushing together to
their fold, the hoofs of which make a wonderful noise or clatter. So
when one hundred sheep run, eight hundred toes or divisions of these
bifid animals make a clattering noise. This appears to be the image.

[Micah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mic 2:13</span></span>

The breaker is come up - He who is to give them deliverance, and lead
them out on the way of their return. He who takes down the hurdles, or
makes a gap in the wall or hedge, to permit them to pass through. This
may apply to those human agents that shall permit and order their
return. And Jehovah being at their head, may refer to their final
restoration, when the Lord Jesus shall become their leader, they having
returned unto him as the shepherd and bishop of their souls; and they
and the Gentiles forming one fold under one shepherd, to go no more out
into captivity for ever. Lord, hasten the time!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 3](mic003)

</div>
