<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic000)  [Next](mic002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

The prophet begins with calling the attention of all people to the awful
descent of Jehovah, coming to execute his judgments against the kingdoms
of Israel and Judah, [Mic 1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001); first
against Samaria, whose fate the prophet laments on the dress of
mourners, and with the doleful cries of the fox or ostrich, [Mic
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#006); and then against Jerusalem,
which is threatened with the invasion of Sennacherib. Other cities of
Judah are likewise threatened; and their danger represented to be so
great as to oblige them to have recourse for protection even to their
enemies the Philistines, from whom they desired at first to conceal
their situation. But all resources are declared to be vain; Israel and
Judah must go into captivity, [Mic
1:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#009).

[Micah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 1:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord that came to Micah the Morasthite - For all
authentic particulars relative to this prophet, see the introduction.

In the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah - These three kings reigned
about threescore years; and Micah is supposed to have prophesied about
forty or fifty years; but no more of his prophecies have reached
posterity than what are contained in this book, nor is there any
evidence that any more was written. His time appears to have been spent
chiefly in preaching and exhorting; and he was directed to write those
parts only that were calculated to profit succeeding generations.

[Micah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mic 1:2</span></span>

Hear, all ye people - The very commencement of this prophecy supposes
preceding exhortations and predictions.

Hearken, O earth - ארץ arets, here, should be translated land, the
country of the Hebrews being only intended.

And let the Lord God be Witness - Let him who has sent me with this
message be witness that I have delivered it faithfully; and be a witness
against you, if you take not the warning.

The Lord from his holy temple - The place where he still remains as your
King, and your Judge; and where you profess to pay your devotions. The
temple was yet standing, for Jerusalem was not taken for many years
after this; and these prophecies were delivered before the captivity of
the ten tribes, as Micah appears to have been sent both to Israel and to
Judah. See [Mic 1:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005), [Mic
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#012), [Mic
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#013).

[Micah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mic 1:3</span></span>

For, behold, the Lord cometh forth - See this clause, [Amo
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#013) (note). He represents Jehovah as
a mighty conqueror, issuing from his pavilion, stepping from mountain to
mountain, which rush down and fill the valleys before him; a consuming
fire accompanying him, that melts and confounds every hill and dale, and
blends all in universal confusion. God is here represented as doing that
himself which other conquerors do by the multitude of their hosts;
levelling the mountains, filling some of the valleys, and digging for
waters in others, and pouring them from hills and dales for the use of
the conquering armies, by pipes and aqueducts.

And why is all this mighty movement? [Mic
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005). "For the transgression of Jacob
is all this, and for the sins of the house of Israel."

[Micah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mic 1:5</span></span>

What is the transgression of Jacob? - Is it not something extremely
grievous? Is it not that of Samaria? Samaria and Jerusalem, the chief
cities, are infected with idolatry. Each has its high places, and its
idol worship, in opposition to the worship of the true God. That there
was idolatry practiced by the elders of Israel, even in the temple of
Jehovah, see [Eze 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001), etc. As the
royal cities in both kingdoms gave the example of gross idolatry, no
wonder that it spread through the whole land, both of Israel and Judah.

[Micah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 1:6</span></span>

I will make Samaria - I will bring it to desolation: and, instead of
being a royal city, it shall be a place for vineyards. Newcome observes,
that Samaria was situated on a hill, the right soil for a vineyard.

I will discover the foundations thereof - I will cause its walls and
fortifications to be razed to the ground.

[Micah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 1:7</span></span>

All the hires thereof shall be burned - Multitudes of women gave the
money they gained by their public prostitution at the temples for the
support of the priesthood, the ornamenting of the walls, altars, and
images. So that these things, and perhaps several of the images
themselves, were literally the hire of the harlots: and God threatens
here to deliver all into the hands of enemies who should seize on this
wealth, and literally spend it in the same way in which it was acquired;
so that "to the hire of a harlot these things should return."

[Micah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 1:8</span></span>

I will make a wailing like the dragons - Newcome translates: -

I will make a wailing like the foxes, (or jackals),

And mourning like the daughters of the ostrich.

This beast, the jackal or shiagal, we have often met with in the
prophets. Travellers inform us that its howlings by night are most
lamentable; and as to the ostrich, it is remarkable for its fearful
shrieking and agonizing groanings after night. Dr. Shaw says he has
often heard them groan as if they were in the greatest agonies.

[Micah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 1:9</span></span>

Her wound is incurable - Nothing shall prevent their utter ruin, for
they have filled up the measure of their iniquity.

He is come - even to Jerusalem - The desolation and captivity of Israel
shall first take place; that of Judah shall come after.

[Micah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mic 1:10</span></span>

Declare ye it not at Gath - Do not let this prediction be known among
the Philistines, else they will glory over you.

House of Aphrah - Or, Beth-aphrah. This place is mentioned [Jos
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#023), as in the tribe of Benjamin.
There is a paronomasia, or play on words, here: בבית לעפרה עפר bebeith
leaphrah aphar, "Roll thyself in the dust in the house of dust."

[Micah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mic 1:11</span></span>

Inhabitant of Saphir - Sapher, Sepphoris, or Sephora, was the strongest
place in Galilee. - Calmet. It was a city in the tribe of Judah, between
Eleutheropolis and Ascalon. - Houbigant.

Zaanan - Another city in the tribe of Judah, [Jos
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013).

Beth-ezel - A place near Jerusalem, [Zac
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005). Some think that Jerusalem itself
is intended by this word.

[Micah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mic 1:12</span></span>

The inhabitant of Maroth - There was a city of a similar name in the
tribe of Judah, [Jos 15:59](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#059).

[Micah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mic 1:13</span></span>

Inhabitant of Lachish - This city was in the tribe of Judah, [Jos
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#039), and was taken by Sennacherib
when he was coming against Jerusalem, [Kg2
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013), etc., and it is supposed that
he wished to reduce this city first, that, possessing it, he might
prevent Hezekiah's receiving any help from Egypt.

She is the beginning of the sin - This seems to intimate that Lachish
was the first city in Judah which received the idolatrous worship of
Israel.

[Micah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mic 1:14</span></span>

Give presents to Moresheth-gath - Calmet says that Moresa or Morashti,
and Achzib, were cities not far from Gath. It is possible that when Ahaz
found himself pressed by Pekah, king of Israel, he might have sent to
these places for succor, that by their assistance he might frustrate the
hopes of the king of Israel; and this may be the meaning of "The houses
of Achzib shall be a lie to the kings of Israel." In these verses there
are several instances of the paronomasia. See [Mic
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010), עפר aphar, dust, and עפרה
aphrah, the name of the city. [Mic
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011). צאנן tsaanan, the city, and יצאה
yatsah, to go out. [Mic 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#013), לכיש
lachish, the city, and רכש rechesh, the swift beast. [Mic
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#014), אכזיב achzib, the city, and אכזב
achzab, a lie. Such paronomasias were reputed ornaments by the prophets.
They occur in Isaiah with great effect. See [Isa
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#007).

[Micah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mic 1:15</span></span>

Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, O - Mareshah - Here is another
instance, הירש haigeresh, to bring an heir, and מרשה mareshah, the city,
the name of which signifies heirship. And so of the above proper names.

Adullam the glory of Israel - This was a fenced city in the south of
Judah (see [Ch2 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#007)) towards the Dead
Sea.

There is much obscurity in the concluding verses of this chapter. They
undoubtedly refer to the captivity of Israel, and to circumstances of
distress, etc., which are not mentioned in any of the historical books,
and therefore their reference and meaning can only be conjectured.

[Micah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mic 1:16</span></span>

Make thee bald - Cutting off the hair was a sign of great distress, and
was practised on the death of near relatives; see [Amo
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#010).

The desolation should be so great that Israel should feel it to her
utmost extent; and the mourning should be like that of a mother for the
death of her most delicate children.

Enlarge thy baldness as the eagle - Referring to the mounting of this
bird, when in casting its feathers and breeding new ones, it is very
sickly, and its strength wholly exhausted.

They are gone into captivity - This is a prediction of the captivity by
Shalmaneser. Samaria, the chief city, is called on to deplore it, as
then fast approaching.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 2](mic002)

</div>
