<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nahum Index](nah)  
  [Previous](nah002)  [Next](hab001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nahum Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#001)

[Nahum](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">nah 3:0</span></span>

The prophet denounces a wo against Nineveh for her perfidy and violence.
He musters up before our eyes the number of her chariots and cavalry;
points to her burnished arms, and to the great and unrelenting slaughter
which she spreads around her, [Nah
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#001). Because Nineveh is a city
wholly given up to the grossest superstition, and is an instructress of
other nations in her abominable rites, therefore she shall come to a
most ignominious and unpitied end, [Nah
3:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#003). Her final ruin shall be similar
to that of No, a famous city of Egypt, [Nah
3:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#008). The prophet then beautifully
describes the great ease with which the strong holds of Nineveh should
be taken, [Nah 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#012), and her judicial
pusillanimity during the siege, [Nah
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#013); declares that all her
preparation, her numbers, opulence, and chieftains, would be of no avail
in the day of the Lord's vengeance, [Nah
3:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#014); and that her tributaries
would desert her, [Nah 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#018). The whole
concludes with stating the incurableness of her malady, and the dreadful
destruction consequently awaiting her; and with introducing the nations
which she had oppressed as exulting at her fall, [Nah
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#019).

[Nahum 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">nah 3:1</span></span>

Wo to the bloody city! - Nineveh: the threatenings against which are
continued in a strain of invective, astonishing for its richness,
variety, and energy. One may hear and see the whip crack, the horses
prancing, the wheels rumbling, the chariots bounding after the galloping
steeds; the reflection from the drawn and highly polished swords; and
the hurled spears, like gashes of lightning, dazzling the eyes; the
slain lying in heaps, and horses and chariots stumbling over them! O
what a picture, and a true representation of a battle, when one side is
broken, and all the cavalry of the conqueror fall in upon them, hewing
them down with their swords, and trampling them to pieces under the
hoofs of their horses! O! infernal war! Yet sometimes thou art the
scourge of the Lord.

[Nahum 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">nah 3:4</span></span>

Because of the multitude of the whoredoms - Above, the Ninevites were
represented under the emblem of a lion tearing all to pieces; here they
are represented under the emblem of a beautiful harlot or public
prostitute, enticing all men to her, inducing the nations to become
idolatrous, and, by thus perverting them, rendering them also objects of
the Divine wrath.

Mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations through her whoredoms -
Using every means to excite to idolatry; and being, by menace or wiles,
successful in all.

[Nahum 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">nah 3:5</span></span>

I will discover thy skirts upon thy face - It was an ancient, though not
a laudable custom, to strip prostitutes naked, or throw their clothes
over their heads, and expose them to public view, and public execration.
This verse alludes to such a custom.

[Nahum 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">nah 3:6</span></span>

I will cast abominable filth upon thee - I will set thee as a
gazing-stock. This was a punishment precisely like our pillory. They put
such women in the pillory as a gazing-stock; and then, children and
others threw mud, dirt, and filth of all kinds at them.

[Nahum 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">nah 3:7</span></span>

Who will bemoan her? - In such cases, who pities the delinquent? She has
been the occasion of ruin to multitudes, and now she is deservedly
exposed and punished. And so it should be thought concerning Nineveh.

[Nahum 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">nah 3:8</span></span>

Art thou better than populous No - No-Ammon, or Diospolis, in the Delta,
on one branch of the Nile. This is supposed to be the city mentioned by
Nahum; and which had been lately destroyed, probably by the Chaldeans.

The waters round about it - Being situated in the Delta, it had the fork
of two branches of the Nile to defend it by land; and its barrier or
wall was the sea, the Mediterranean, into which these branches emptied
themselves: so that this city, and the place it stood on, were wholly
surrounded by the waters.

[Nahum 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">nah 3:9</span></span>

Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength - The land of Cush, not far from
Diospolis; for it was in Arabia, on the Red Sea.

Put and Lubim - A part of Africa and Libya, which were all within reach
of forming alliances with No-Ammon or Diospolis.

[Nahum 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">nah 3:10</span></span>

They cast lots for her honorable men - This refers still to the city
called populous No. And the custom of casting lots among the commanders,
for the prisoners which they had taken, is here referred to.

Great men were bound in chains - These were reserved to grace the
triumph of the victor.

[Nahum 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">nah 3:12</span></span>

Thy strong holds - The effects of the consternation into which the
Ninevites were cast by the assault on their city are here pointed out by
a very expressive metaphor; the first-ripe figs, when at full maturity,
fell from the tree with the least shake; and so, at the first shake or
consternation, all the fortresses of Nineveh were abandoned; and the
king, in despair, burnt himself and household in his own palace.

[Nahum 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">nah 3:13</span></span>

Thy people - are women - They lost all courage, and made no resistance.
O vere Phrygiae, neque enim Phryges: "Verily, ye are Phrygian women, not
Phrygian men." So said Numanus to the Trojans. Virg., Aen. ix.

[Nahum 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">nah 3:14</span></span>

Draw thee waters for the siege - The Tigris ran near to Nineveh, and
here they are exhorted to lay in plenty of fresh water, lest the siege
should last long, and lest the enemy should cut off this supply.

Go into clay, and tread the mortar - This refers to the manner of
forming bricks anciently in those countries; they digged up the clay,
kneaded it properly by treading, mixed it with straw or coarse grass,
moulded the bricks, and dried them in the sun. I have now some of the
identical bricks, that were brought from this country, lying before me,
and they show all these appearances. They are compact and very hard, but
wholly soluble in water. There were however others without straw, that
seem to have been burnt in a kiln as ours are. I have also some
fragments or bats of these from Babylon.

[Nahum 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">nah 3:15</span></span>

Make thyself many as the cankerworm - On the locusts, and their
operations in their various states, see the notes on Joel 2 (note). The
multitudes, successive swarms, and devastation occasioned by locusts, is
one of the most expressive similes that could be used to point out the
successive armies and all-destroying influences of the enemies of
Nineveh. The account of these destroyers from Dr. Shaw, inserted Joel 2,
will fully illustrate the verses where allusion is made to locusts.

[Nahum 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">nah 3:16</span></span>

Thou hast multiplied thy merchants - Like Tyre, this city was a famous
resort for merchants; but the multitudes which were there previously to
the siege, like the locusts, took the alarm, and fled away.

[Nahum 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">nah 3:17</span></span>

Thy crowned are as the locusts - Thou hast numerous princes and numerous
commanders.

Which camp in the hedges in the cold day - The locusts are said to lie
in shelter about the hedges of fertile spots when the weather is cold or
during the night; but as soon as the sun shines out and is hot, they
come out to their forage, or take to their wings.

[Nahum 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">nah 3:18</span></span>

Thy shepherds slumber - That is, the rulers and tributary princes, who,
as Herodotus informs us, deserted Nineveh in the day of her distress,
and came not forward to her succor.

Diodorus Siculus says, lib. ii., when the enemy shut up the king in the
city, many nations revolted, each going over to the besiegers, for the
sake of their liberty; that the king despatched messengers to all his
subjects, requiring power from them to succor him; and that he thought
himself able to endure the siege, and remained in expectation of armies
which were to be raised throughout his empire, relying on the oracle
that the city would not be taken till the river became its enemy. See
the note on [Nah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#006).

[Nahum 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">nah 3:19</span></span>

There is no healing of thy bruise - Thou shalt never be rebuilt.

All that hear the bruit of thee - The report or account.

Shall clap the hands - Shall exult in thy downfall.

For upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed - Thou hast been a
universal oppressor, and therefore all nations rejoice at thy fall and
utter desolation.

Bp. Newton makes some good remarks on the fall and total ruin of
Nineveh.

"What probability was there that the capital city of a great kingdom, a
city which was sixty miles in compass, a city which contained so many
thousand inhabitants, a city which had walls a hundred feet high, and so
thick that three chariots could go abreast upon them, and which had one
thousand five hundred towers, of two hundred feet in height; what
probability was there that such a city should ever be totally destroyed?
And yet so totally was it destroyed that the place is hardly known where
it was situated. What we may suppose helped to complete its ruin and
devastation, was Nebuchadnezzar's enlarging and beautifying Babylon,
soon after Nineveh was taken. From that time no mention is made of
Nineveh by any of the sacred writers; and the most ancient of the
heathen authors, who have occasion to say any thing about it, speak of
it as a city that was once great and flourishing, but now destroyed and
desolate. Great as it was formerly, so little of it is remaining, that
authors are not agreed even about its situation. From the general
suffrage of ancient historians and geographers, it appears to have been
situated upon the Tigris, though others represent it as placed upon the
Euphrates. Bochart has shown that Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, and
Ammianus Marcellinus, all three speak differently of it; sometimes as if
situated on the Euphrates, sometimes as if on the Tigris; to reconcile
whom he supposes that there were two Ninevehs; and Sir John Marsham,
that there were three; the Syrian upon the Euphrates, the Assyrian on
the Tigris, and a third built afterwards upon the Tigris by the
Persians, who succeeded the Parthians in the empire of the East, in the
third century, and were subdued by the Saracens in the seventh century
after Christ. But whether this latter was built in the same place as the
old Nineveh, is a question that cannot be decided.

"There is a city at this time called Mosul, situate upon the western
side of the Tigris; and on the opposite eastern shore are ruins of great
extent, which are said to be those of Nineveh.

"Dr. Prideaux, following Thevenot, observes that Mosul is situated on
the west side of the Tigris, where was anciently only a suburb of the
old Nineveh; for the city itself stood on the east side of the river,
where are to be seen some of its ruins of great extent even to this day.
Even the ruins of old Nineveh, as we may say, have been long ago ruined
and destroyed; such an utter end hath been made of it, and such is the
truth of the Divine predictions!

"These extraordinary circumstances may strike the reader more strongly
by supposing only a parallel instance. Let us then suppose that a person
should come in the name of a prophet, preaching repentance to the people
of this kingdom, or otherwise denouncing the destruction of the capital
city within a few years. 'With an overflowing flood will God make an
utter end of the place thereof; he will make an utter end: its place may
be sought, but it shall never be found.' I presume we should look upon
such a prophet as a madman, and show no farther attention to his message
than to deride and despise it. And yet such an event would not be more
strange and incredible than the destruction and devastation of Nineveh;
for Nineveh was much the larger, stronger, and older city of the two.
And the Assyrian empire had subsisted and flourished more ages than any
form of government in this country; so there is no objecting the
instability of Eastern monarchies in this case. Let us then since this
event would not be more improbable and extraordinary than the other,
suppose again, that things should succeed according to the prediction;
that the floods should arise, and the enemies should come; the city
should be overthrown and broken down, be taken and pillaged, and
destroyed so totally that even the learned could not agree about the
place where it was situated. What would be said or thought in such a
case? Whoever of posterity should read and compare the prophecy and
event together, must they not, by such an illustrious instance, be
thoroughly convinced of the providence of God, and of the truth of his
prophet, and be ready to acknowledge, 'Verily, this is the word which
the Lord hath spoken; verily, there is a God who judgeth the earth?"' -
See Bp. Newton, vol. i., dissert. 9.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk Chapter 1](hab001)

</div>
