<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh001)  [Next](neh003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 2:0</span></span>

Artaxerxes, observing the sorrow of Nehemiah, inquires into the cause,
[Neh 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001), [Neh
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#002). Nehemiah shows him the cause, and
requests permission to go and rebuild the walls of Jerusalem, [Neh
2:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#003). The king grants it, and gives
him letters to the governors beyond the river, [Neh
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#007), [Neh
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#008). He sets out on his journey, [Neh
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#009). Sanballat and Tobiah are grieved
to find he had got such a commission, [Neh
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#010). He comes to Jerusalem; and,
without informing any person of his business, examines by night the
state of the city, [Neh 2:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#011). He
informs the priests, nobles, and rulers, of his design and commission,
[Neh 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#017), [Neh
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#018). The design is turned into
contempt by Sanballat, Tobiah, and Geshem, [Neh
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#019). Nehemiah gives them a suitable
answer, [Neh 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#020).

[Nehemiah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 2:1</span></span>

Month Nisan - Answering to a part of our March and April.

I took up the wine - It is supposed that the kings of Persia had a
different cup-bearer for each quarter of the year, and that it had just
now come to Nehemiah's turn.

[Nehemiah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 2:2</span></span>

Then I was very sore afraid - Probably the king spoke as if he had some
suspicion that Nehemiah harboured some bad design, and that his face
indicated some conceived treachery or remorse.

[Nehemiah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 2:3</span></span>

Let the king live for ever - Far from wishing ill to my master, I wish
him on the contrary to live and prosper for ever. Aelian, Hist. Var.
lib. i. c. 32, uses the same form of speech in reference to Artaxerxes
Mnemon, one of the Persian kings, Βασιλευ Αρταξερξη, δι' αιωνος
βασιλευοις, "O King Artaxerxes, may you reign for ever," when speaking
of the custom of presenting them annually with an offering of earth and
water; as if they had said, May you reign for ever over these!

[Nehemiah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 2:4</span></span>

So I prayed to the God of heaven - Before he dared to prefer his request
to the king, he made his prayer to God, that his suit might be
acceptable: and this he does by mental prayer. To the spirit of prayer
every place is a praying place.

[Nehemiah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 2:5</span></span>

The city of my fathers' sepulchres - The tombs of the dead were sacred
among the ancients, and nothing could appear to them more detestable
than disturbing the ashes or remains of the dead. Nehemiah knew that in
mentioning this circumstance he should strongly interest the feelings of
the Persian king.

[Nehemiah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 2:6</span></span>

The queen also sitting by him - Who probably forwarded his suit. This
was not Esther, as Dean Prideaux supposes, nor perhaps the same
Artaxerxes who had taken her to be queen; nor does שגל shegal signify
queen, but rather harlot or concubine, she who was chief favourite. The
Septuagint translate it παλλακη, harlot; and properly too. See the
introduction.

I set him a time - How long this time was we are not told; it is by no
means likely that it was long, probably no more than six months or a
year; after which he either returned, or had his leave of absence
lengthened; for in the same year we find he was made governor of the
Jews, in which office he continued twelve years, viz., from the
twentieth to the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes, [Neh
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#014). He then returned to Susa; and
after staying a short time, had leave to return to rectify some abuses
that Tobiah the Ammonite had introduced into the temple, [Neh
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#006), [Neh
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#007), and several others of which the
people themselves were guilty. After having performed this service, it
is likely he returned to the Persian king, and died in his office of
cup-bearer; but of this latter circumstance we have no mention in the
text.

[Nehemiah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 2:8</span></span>

Asaph the keeper of the king's forest - הפרדס hapardes of the paradise
of the king. This I believe is originally a Persian word; it frequently
occurs in Arabic, ferdoos, and in Greek, παραδεισος, and in both
signifies a pleasant garden, vineyard, pleasure garden, and what we call
a paradise.

Above the hall of audience, in the imperial palace at Dehli, the
following Persian couplet is inscribed: -

"If there be a paradise on the face of the earth, this is it, this is
it, this is it."

Thus we find that the word is applied to denote splendid apartments, as
well as fine gardens; in a word, any place of pleasure and delight. The
king's forest mentioned in the text might have been the same to
Artaxerxes, as the New Forest was to William the Conqueror, or Windsor
Forest to the late amiable sovereign of the British people, George the
Third.

And the king granted me, etc. - This noble spirited man attributes every
thing to God. He might have said, I had been long a faithful servant to
the king; and he was disposed, in reward of my fidelity, to grant my
request; but he would not say so: "He granted my request, because the
good hand of my God was upon me." God favored me, and influenced the
king's heart to do what I desired.

[Nehemiah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 2:10</span></span>

Sanballat the Horonite - Probably a native of Horonaim, a Moabite by
birth, and at this time governor of the Samaritans under the king of
Persia.

Tobiah the servant - He was an Ammonite; and here, under the Persian
king, joint governor with Sanballat. Some suppose that the Sanballat
here mentioned was the same who persuaded Alexander to build a temple on
Mount Gerizim in favor of the Samaritans. Pelagius thinks there were two
governors of this name.

[Nehemiah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 2:13</span></span>

The dragon well - Perhaps so called because of the representation of a
dragon, out of whose mouth the stream issued that proceeded from the
well.

Dung port - This was the gate on the eastern side of the city, through
which the filth of the city was carried into the valley of Hinnom.

[Nehemiah 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 2:14</span></span>

The gate of the fountain - Of Siloah.

The king's pool - Probably the aqueduct made by Hezekiah, to bring the
waters of Gihon to the city of David. See [Ch2
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#030).

[Nehemiah 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 2:15</span></span>

By the brook - Kidron.

By the gate of the Valley - The valley through which the brook Kidron
flowed. It was by this gate he went out; so he went all round the city,
and entered by the same gate from which he had gone out.

[Nehemiah 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 2:16</span></span>

The rulers knew not whither I went - He made no person privy to his
design, that he might hide every thing as much as possible from their
enemies till he had all things in readiness; lest they should take
measures to defeat the work.

[Nehemiah 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">neh 2:18</span></span>

Then I told them - He opened to them his design and his commission.

[Nehemiah 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">neh 2:19</span></span>

Geshem the Arabian - Some chief of the Arabs contiguous to Samaria, who
had joined with Sanballat and Tobiah to distress the Jews, and hinder
their work.

Will ye rebel against the king? - This they said in order to raise
jealousies in the king's mind, and induce him to recall his ordinance.

[Nehemiah 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">neh 2:20</span></span>

Ye have no portion, nor right - To be a citizen of Jerusalem was a high
honor; and they would not permit those who did not belong to the tribes
of Israel to dwell there. Zerubbabel gave the same answer to the
Samaritans, [Ezr 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#003).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 3](neh003)

</div>
