<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh005)  [Next](neh007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 6:0</span></span>

Sanballat, Tobiah, and Geshem, insidiously desire a conference with
Nehemiah, which he refuses, [Neh
6:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#001). They then charge him with the
design of rebelling, and causing himself to be made king, [Neh
6:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#005); which he denies, and prays to
God for support, [Neh 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#008), [Neh
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#009). A false prophet is hired by
Tobiah and Sanballat, to put him in fear; he discovers the imposture,
and defeats their design, [Neh
6:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#010). He prays to God against them,
[Neh 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#014). The wall is finished in
fifty-two days, [Neh 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#015). He
discovers a secret and treasonable correspondence between Tobiah and
some of the Jewish nobles, [Neh
6:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#016).

[Nehemiah 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 6:2</span></span>

Come, let us meet together in - the plain of Ono - They wished to get
him out of Jerusalem from among his friends, that they might either
carry him off, or murder him. Ono is supposed to have been in the tribe
of Benjamin, near Jordan.

[Nehemiah 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 6:3</span></span>

I am doing a great work - Though he knew their design, he does not think
it prudent to mention it. Had he done so, they would probably have gone
to extremities, finding that they were discovered; and perhaps in a
formidable body attacked Jerusalem, when ill provided to sustain such a
shock. They wished to effect their purpose rather by treachery than by
open violence. I know not any language which a man who is employed on
important labors can use more suitably, as an answer to the thousand
invitations and provocations he may have to remit his work, enter into
useless or trivial conferences, or notice weak, wicked, and malicious
attacks on his work and his motives: "I am doing a great work, so I
cannot stoop to your nonsense, or notice your malevolence. Why should
the work cease, while I leave it, and come down to such as you?"

[Nehemiah 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 6:5</span></span>

With an open letter in his hand - This was an insult to a person of
Nehemiah's quality: as letters sent to chiefs and governors in the East
are always carefully folded up, and put in costly silken bags, and these
carefully sealed. The circumstance is thus marked to show the contempt
he (Sanballat) had for him.

[Nehemiah 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 6:6</span></span>

And Gashmu saith it - You are accused of crimes against the state, and
Geshem, the Arabian, is your accuser.

[Nehemiah 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 6:7</span></span>

Thou hast also appointed prophets - Persons who pretend to be
commissioned to preach to the people, and say, Nehemiah reigneth!

Come now therefore, and let us take counsel - Come and justify yourself
before me. This was a trick to get Nehemiah into his power.

[Nehemiah 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 6:8</span></span>

There are no such things done - You well know that what you say is
false: I shall not, therefore, trouble myself about a false charge.

[Nehemiah 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 6:10</span></span>

Who was shut up - Lived in a sequestered, solitary state; pretending to
sanctity, and to close intercourse with God.

Let us meet together in the house of God - The meaning is, "Shut
yourself up in the temple; appear to have taken sanctuary there, for in
it alone can you find safety." This he said to discourage and disgrace
him, and to ruin the people; for, had Nehemiah taken his advice, the
people would have been without a leader, their enemies would have come
upon them at once, and they would have been an easy prey. Besides, had
Nehemiah done this, he would have been shut up in the temple, his
government would have been declared at an end, and Sanballat would have
assumed the reins.

[Nehemiah 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 6:11</span></span>

Should such a man as I flee? - Shall I, who am governor of the people,
appointed both by God and the king, shall I betray my trust, and leave
the flock without a shepherd? Shall I be a traitor, and abandon the
office to which I am appointed? - No! Who, in my situation, with such
responsibility, and such prospects, would go into the temple to save his
life? I will not: I will stand at my post, and be ready to receive my
enemies whensoever they come; so let Sanballat, Tobiah, and Geshem look
to themselves.

[Nehemiah 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 6:14</span></span>

And on the prophetess Noadiah - Whether this was a prophet or
prophetess, we cannot tell; the Hebrew text only makes her a prophetess;
all the versions have Noadiah the prophet, except the Arabic which has
Younadaa the prophet. I think the ה he at the end of נביאה nebiah is a
mistake, and that we should read Noadiah the prophet.

[Nehemiah 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 6:15</span></span>

The twenty and fifth - of - Elul - This Jewish month answers to a part
of our August and September.

Fifty and two days - I see no difficulty in supposing that several
thousand workmen, each of whom was working as for God, should be able to
complete this wall in fifty-two days. There is little doubt that several
parts of the old wall were entire; in many places the foundations still
remained; there were all the materials of the old wall still at hand;
and though they had to clear and carry away much rubbish, yet they do
not appear to have had any stones to quarry. The work mentioned here was
little when compared to what Caesar did in Gaul and other places; and to
what Titus did at Jerusalem, who built a wall round Jerusalem of five
thousand paces in three days, besides, thirteen towers of ten stadia in
circuit. And Quintus Curtius and Arrian inform us that Alexander the
Great built the walls of Alexandria, on the Tanais, which were nearly
eight miles in compass, in the space of between twenty and thirty days.
Nehemiah therefore had time sufficient in fifty-two days to repair and
restore the walls of Jerusalem. See Calmet on this place.

[Nehemiah 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 6:16</span></span>

This work was wrought of our God - This is an additional reason why we
should not wonder at the shortness of the time in which so great a work
was done, for God helped them by an especial providence; and this was so
very observable, that their carnal enemies could discover it.

[Nehemiah 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">neh 6:17</span></span>

The nobles of Judah sent many letters - The circumstances marked in this
and the following verses show still more clearly the difficulties which
Nehemiah had to encounter; he had enemies without and false friends
within. A treacherous correspondence was carried on between the nobles
of Judah and the Ammonites; and had almost any other man been at the
head of the Jewish affairs, Jerusalem had never been re-established.

[Nehemiah 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">neh 6:18</span></span>

He was the son-in-law of Shechaniah - Previously to the coming of
Nehemiah, the Jews seemed to be fast intermixing with the heathen, by
intermarriages with Ashdodites, Ammonites, and Moabites; see [Neh
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#023). Ezra had many evils of this
kind to redress, ([Ezr 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#003), etc.),
chiefly among the common people, though there were both chiefs and
priests in that trespass. But here we find the heathen and Jewish nobles
interlinked; and the latter were so far imbued with the spirit of
idolatry, that they forgot God, his service, their brethren, and their
own souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 7](neh007)

</div>
