<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh007)  [Next](neh009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 8:0</span></span>

Ezra, Nehemiah, and the Levites, read and interpret the laws to the
people, [Neh 8:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001). The manner in
which they do this important work, [Neh
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#008). The effect produced on the
people's minds by hearing it, [Neh
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009). The people are exhorted to be
glad, and are told that the joy of the Lord is their strength, [Neh
8:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#010). On the second day they
assemble, and find that they should keep the feast of tabernacles; which
they accordingly religiously solemnize for seven days; and Ezra reads to
them from the book of the law, [Neh
8:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013).

[Nehemiah 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 8:1</span></span>

The street that was before the water gate - The gate which led from the
temple to the brook Kidron.

[Nehemiah 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 8:2</span></span>

All that could hear with understanding - Infants, idiots, and children
not likely to receive instruction, were not permitted to attend this
meeting; nor should any such, in any place, be ever brought to the house
of God, if it can be avoided: yet, rather than a poor mother should be
deprived of the ordinances of God, let her come with her child in her
arms; and although it be inconvenient to the congregation, and to some
ministers, to hear a child cry, it is cruel to exclude the mother on
this account, who, having no person to take care of her child while
absent, must bring it with her, or be totally deprived of the ordinances
of the Christian Church.

Upon the first day of the seventh month - This was the first day of what
was called the civil year; and on it was the feast of trumpets, the year
being ushered in by the sound of these instruments.

[Nehemiah 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 8:4</span></span>

Stood upon a pulpit of wood - מגדל migdal, a tower, a platform, raised
up for the purpose, to elevate him sufficiently for the people both to
see and hear him; for it is said, [Neh
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#005), that he was above all the people.
This is the first intimation we have of a pulpit, or structure of this
kind. But we must not suppose that it was any thing similar to those
tubs or barrels ridiculously set up in churches and chapels, in which a
preacher is nearly as much confined, during the time of his preaching,
as if he was in the stocks.

[Nehemiah 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 8:5</span></span>

All the people stood up - This was out of respect to the sacred word: in
imitation of this, when the gospel for the day is read in our churches,
all the people stand up.

[Nehemiah 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 8:6</span></span>

Ezra blessed the Lord - In imitation of this, we say, when the gospel
for the day is commenced, Glory be to God for his holy Gospel! and
conclude this thanksgiving with, Amen.

[Nehemiah 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 8:8</span></span>

So they read in the book - For an explanation of this verse, see the
observations at the end of the chapter, [Neh
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#017) (note).

[Nehemiah 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 8:9</span></span>

Nehemiah, which is the Tirshatha - This puts it out of doubt that, when
the Tirshatha is mentioned, Nehemiah himself is intended, Tirshatha
being the name of his office.

Mourn not, nor weep - This is a holy day to God: a day appointed for
general rejoicing in Him who has turned our captivity, restored to us
his law, and again established among us his ordinances.

[Nehemiah 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 8:10</span></span>

Eat the fat, and drink the sweet - Eat and drink the best that you have;
and while ye are feeding yourselves in the fear of the Lord, remember
those who cannot feast; and send portions to them, that the joy and the
thanksgiving may be general. Let the poor have reason to rejoice as well
as you.

For the joy of the Lord is your strength - This is no gluttonous and
drunken festival that enervates the body, and enfeebles the mind: from
your religious feast your bodies will acquire strength and your minds
power and fervor, so that you shall be able to Do His will, and to do it
cheerfully. Religious joy, properly tempered with continual dependence
on the help of God, meekness of mind, and self-diffidence, is a powerful
means of strengthening the soul. In such a state every duty is
practicable, and every duty delightful. In such a frame of mind no man
an ever fell, and in such a state of mind the general health of the body
is much improved; a cheerful heart is not only a continual feast, but
also a continual medicine.

[Nehemiah 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 8:14</span></span>

In the feast of the seventh month - That is, the feast of tabernacles,
which was held in commemoration of the sojourning of their fathers in
the wilderness after they had been delivered from the Egyptian bondage.
Now, having been delivered from the Babylonish captivity, and the proper
time of the year occurring, it was their especial duty to keep the same
feast.

[Nehemiah 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 8:15</span></span>

Fetch olive branches - For every thing concerning this feast of
tabernacles, see the notes on Leviticus 23 (note), and the other places
there referred to.

[Nehemiah 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 8:16</span></span>

Upon the roof of his house - It need scarcely be repeated, that the
houses in the East are generally built with flat roofs. On these they
reposed; on these they took the air in the heats of summer; and on these
they oftentimes slept.

[Nehemiah 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">neh 8:17</span></span>

Since the days of Joshua - No feast of tabernacles since Joshua's time
had been so heartily and so piously celebrated. The story of the sacred
fire now discovered, which had been hidden by the order of Jeremiah in a
dry well, and now, some of the mud from the bottom being brought upon
the altar, was kindled afresh by the rays of the sun, which suddenly
broke out, though before covered with clouds, etc., is worthy of no
credit. Those who wish to see the detail may consult 2 Maccabees
1:18-36.

On the subject in [Neh 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#008), I beg
leave to make a few observations: - So they read in the book in the law
of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the
reading. The Israelites, having been lately brought out of the
Babylonish captivity, in which they had continued seventy years,
according to the prediction of Jeremiah, [Jer
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011), were not only extremely
corrupt, but it appears that they had in general lost the knowledge of
the ancient Hebrew to such a degree, that when the book of the law was
read, they did not understand it: but certain Levites stood by, and gave
the sense, i. e., translated into the Chaldee dialect. This was not only
the origin of the Chaldee Targums, or translation of the law and
prophets into that tongue but was also, in all probability, the origin
of preaching from a text; for it appears that the people were not only
ignorant of their ancient language, but also of the rites and ceremonies
of their religion, having been so long in Babylon, where they were not
permitted to observe them. This being the case, not only the language
must be interpreted, but the meaning of the rites and ceremonies must
also be explained; for we find from [Neh
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013), etc., of this chapter, that they
had even forgotten the feast of tabernacles, and every thing relative to
that ceremony.

As we nowhere find that what is called preaching on or expounding a text
was ever in use before that period, we are probably beholden to the
Babylonish captivity for producing, in the hand of Divine Providence, a
custom the most excellent and beneficial ever introduced among men.

What the nature of preaching or expounding the word of God was, at this
early period of its institution, we learn from the above cited text.

I. They read in the book of the law of God. - The words of God, the
doctrines of Divine revelation, are the proper matter of preaching; for
they contain the wisdom of the Most High, and teach man the things which
belong to his peace and happiness.

II\. They read distinctly - מפרש mephorash, from פרש parash, to expand;
they analyzed, dilated, and expounded it at large, showing the import
and genuine meaning of every word.

III\. They gave the sense - ושום שכל vesom sechel, they put weight to
it; showed its value and utility, and how intimately concerned they were
in all that was revealed: thus applying verbal criticism, and general
exposition to their true and most important purposes.

IV\. They caused them to understand the reading - ויבינו במקרא vaiyabinu
bammikra: and they understood - had a mental taste and perception of the
things which were in the reading, i. e., in the letter and spirit of the
text. Thus they knew the Divine will, and approved the things that were
more excellent, being (thus) instructed out of the law, [Rom
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#018).

This was the ancient method of expounding the word of God among the
Jews; and this mode is still more necessary for Us: -

1\. Because the sacred writings, as they came from God, are shut up in
languages no longer vernacular; and no translation ever did or ever can
reach the force of the original words, though perhaps our own in
general, comes nearest to this of all versions, whether ancient or
modern.

2\. Ninety-nine out of a hundred know nothing of these languages; and
consequently cannot, of themselves, reap all the requisite benefit from
reading the Scriptures.

3\. Sacred things are illustrated in the Bible by a reference to arts
and sciences, of which the mass of the people are as ignorant as they
are of the original tongues.

4\. Provincial customs and fashions are mentioned in these writings,
which must be understood, or the force and meaning of many texts cannot
be comprehended.

5\. There is a depth in the word of God which cannot be fathomed except
either by Divine inspiration, or by deep study and research, for which
the majority of the people have no time.

6\. The people in general trust to the piety, learning and abilities of
their ministers, and maintain them as persons capable of instructing
them in all the deep things of God; and believing them to be holy men,
they are confident they will not take their tithes, their food, and
their raiment, under a pretense of doing a work for which they have not
the ordinary qualifications. Where there is not such preaching as this,
the people "sit in darkness, and in the valley of the shadow of death;"
sinners are not converted unto God; neither are believers "built up on
their most holy faith."

Reader - Art thou a Christian minister? Dost thou feed the flock of God?
Let thy conduct, thy conscience, and the fruits of thy ministry answer
for thee.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 9](neh009)

</div>
