<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh000)  [Next](neh002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

Account of Nehemiah, [Neh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001). His
inquiry about the Jews that had returned from their captivity, and
concerning the state of Jerusalem, of which he receives the most
discouraging information, [Neh 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#002),
[Neh 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#003). He is greatly affected;
fasts and prays, [Neh 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#004). His prayer
and confession to God, [Neh 1:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#005).

[Nehemiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 1:1</span></span>

The words of Nehemiah - That this book was compiled out of the journal
or memoranda made by Nehemiah himself, there can be no doubt: but that
he was not the compiler is evident from several passages in the work it.
self. As it is written consecutively as one book with Ezra, many have
supposed that this latter was the author: but whoever compares the style
of each, in the Hebrew, will soon be convinced that this is not correct;
the style is so very different, that they could not possibly be the work
of the same person.

It is doubtful even whether the Nehemiah who is mentioned [Ezr
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#002), who came to Jerusalem with
Zerubbabel, be the same with him who is the reputed author of this book.
By the computation of the best chronologists, Zerubbabel came to
Jerusalem in A. M. 3468; and Nehemiah, who is here mentioned, did not
come before the twentieth year of the reign of Artaxerxes, which falls
in with A. M. 3558, ninety years after: and as his account here is
carried down to A. M. 3570, nearly twenty years later, he must at his
death have been about a hundred and thirty, allowing him to have been
only twenty years old at the time that Zerubbabel went up to Jerusalem.
This is by no means likely, as this would make him the king's cupbearer
when he was upwards of a hundred years of age! It seems, therefore,
evident that the Nehemiah of Ezra cannot be the same with the reputed
author of this book, and the cup-bearer of the Persian king.

Son of Hachaliah - Of what tribe or lineage he was, we cannot tell: this
is all we know of his parentage. Some suppose he was a priest, and of
the house of Aaron, on the authority of 2 Maccabees 1:18, 21; but this
is but slender evidence. It is likely he was of a very eminent family,
if not of the blood royal of Judah, as only persons of eminence could be
placed in the office which he sustained in the Persian court.

The month Chisleu - Answering to a part of our November and December.

Twentieth year - That is, of Artaxerxes, A. M. 3558, b.c. 446.

Shushan the palace - The ancient city of Susa; called in Persian
Shuster: the winter residence of the Persian kings.

[Nehemiah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 1:2</span></span>

I asked them concerning the Jews - Josephus gives a probable account of
this business: "Nehemiah, being somewhere out of Susa, seeing some
strangers, and hearing them converse in the Hebrew tongue, he went near;
and finding they were Jews from Jerusalem, he asked them how matters
went with their brethren in that city, and what was their state?" And
the answer they gave him is, in substance, that recorded in the text;
though with several aggravations in Josephus. - Joseph. Ant. lib. xi.,
c. 5.

[Nehemiah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 1:3</span></span>

The wall of Jerusalem also is broken down - This must refer to the
walls, which had been rebuilt after the people returned from their
captivity: for it could not refer to the walls which were broken down
and levelled with the dust by Nebuchadnezzar; for to hear of this could
be no news to Nehemiah.

[Nehemiah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 1:4</span></span>

And mourned certain days - From the month Chisleu to the month Nisan;
about four months from the time he received the above information, till
the time that Artaxerxes noticed his grief, [Neh
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001). All this time he probably spent
in supplication to God; waiting for a favorable opening in the Divine
providence. Every good work is not to be undertaken hastily; prayer and
watchfulness are necessary to its completion. Many good works have been
ruined by making haste.

[Nehemiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 1:5</span></span>

Lord God of heaven - What was, before the captivity, Jehovah, God of
hosts or armies.

Great - Able to do mighty things.

Terrible - able to inflict the heaviest judgments.

[Nehemiah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 1:6</span></span>

Let thine ear - Hear what we say and confess.

Thine eyes open - see what we suffer.

[Nehemiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 1:7</span></span>

Have not kept thy commandments - The moral precepts by which our lives
should be regulated.

Statutes - What refers to the rites and ceremonies of thy religion.

Judgments - The precepts of justice relative to our conduct to each
other.

[Nehemiah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 1:8</span></span>

Thy servant Moses - See the parallel places in [Lev
26:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#033) (note), [Deu
4:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#025) (note), [Deu
28:64](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#064) (note), and the notes there.
Though in an enemy's country, and far from the ordinances of God,
Nehemiah did not forget the law: he read his Bible well, and quotes
correctly.

[Nehemiah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 1:11</span></span>

Mercy in the sight of this man - Favour before the king, Ahasuerus. He
seems then to have been giving him the cup.

For I was the king's cup-bearer - The king's butler, (the Persians call
him saky), which gave him the opportunity of being frequently with the
king; and to be in such a place of trust, he must be in the king's
confidence. No Eastern potentate would have a cup-bearer with whom he
could not trust his life, poison being frequently administered in this
way. This verse seems to have been a mental prayer, which Nehemiah now
put up as he was delivering the cup into the king's hand.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 2](neh002)

</div>
