<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num005)  [Next](num007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 6:0</span></span>

The vow of the Nazarite, [Num 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001),
[Num 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#002). In what it consisted, [Num
6:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#003). When accidentally defiled, how
he is to be purified, [Num 6:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#009). The
sacrifices he is to bring, and the rites he is to perform, when the vow
of his separation is fulfilled, [Num
6:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#013). The manner in which the
priests are to bless the people, [Num
6:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#022). The name of the Lord is to be
put on the children of Israel, whom He promises to bless, [Num
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#027).

[Numbers 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 6:2</span></span>

When either man or woman shall separate, etc. - The word נזיר nazir,
from נזר nazar, to separate, signifies merely a separated person, i. e.,
one peculiarly devoted to the service of God by being separated from all
servile employments. From the Nazarites sprang the Rechabites, from the
Rechabites the Essenes, from the Essenes the Anchorites or Hermits, and
in imitation of those, the different monastic orders. Some contend
strongly that the Nazarite was a type of our Lord; but neither analogy
nor proof can be produced. Our blessed Lord both drank wine and touched
the dead, which no Nazarite would do: as to his either shaving his hair
or letting it grow, we know nothing. His being called a Nazarene, [Mat
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023), is nothing to the purpose, as it
can mean no more than either that he was an inhabitant of Nazareth,
which was a place of no credit, and therefore used as a term of
reproach; or that he was in a general sense consecrated to the service
of God - so were Samson, Samuel, Jeremiah, and John Baptist; or rather,
that he was the נצר netser or Branch, [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001), and צמח tsemach, [Zac
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008); [Zac
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012), which is quite a different word;
but this title is expressly applied to our blessed Lord by the above
prophets; but in no place do they or any other prophets call him a
Nazarite, in the sense in which נזיר nazir is used. Indeed it could not
in truth be applied to him, as the distinguishing marks of a Nazarite
never belonged to him. He was, it is true, the נצר netser or branch out
of the root of Jesse, the genuine heir to the throne of David, whose
dominion should extend over the universe, who should be King of kings,
and Lord of Lords; but the word Ναζωραιος, [Mat
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023), signifies merely a Nazoraean, or
inhabitant of Nazareth.

[Numbers 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 6:3</span></span>

No vinegar of wine, etc. - חמץ chomets signifies fermented wine, and is
probably used here to signify wine of a strong body, or any highly
intoxicating liquor. Dr. Lightfoot supposes that the Leper being the
most defiled and loathsome of creatures, was an emblem of the wretched,
miserable state of man by the fall; and that the Nazarite was the emblem
of man in his state of innocence. Wine and grapes are here particularly
forbidden to the Nazarite because, as the doctor thinks, being an emblem
of man in his paradisiacal state, he was forbidden that tree and its
fruits by eating of which Adam fell; for the doctor, as well as the
Jewish rabbins, believed the tree of knowledge to have been none other
than the vine.

Vinegar of strong drink - See the note on [Lev
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009).

[Numbers 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 6:5</span></span>

There shall no razor come upon his head - The vow of the Nazarite
consisted in the following particulars: -

1\. He consecrated himself in a very especial and extraordinary manner
to God.

2\. This was to continue for a certain season, probably never less than
a whole year, that he might have a full growth of hair to burn in the
fire which is under the sacrifice of the peace-offering, [Num
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#018).

3\. During the time of his separation, or nazarate, he drank no wine nor
strong drink; nor used any vinegar formed from any inebriating liquor,
nor ate the flesh or dried grapes, nor tasted even the kernels or husks
of any thing that had grown upon the vine.

4\. He never shaved his head, but let his hair grow, as the proof of his
being in this separated state, and under vows of peculiar austerity.

5\. He never touched any dead body, nor did any of the last offices,
even to his nearest kin; but was considered as the priests, who were
wholly taken up with the service of God, and regarded nothing else.

6\. All the days of his separation he was holy, [Num
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#008).

During the whole time he was to be incessantly employed in religious
acts.

[Numbers 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 6:7</span></span>

The consecration of his God is upon his head - Literally, The separation
of his God is upon his head; meaning his hair, which was the proof and
emblem of his separation. Now as the hair of the Nazarite was a token of
his subjection to God through all the peculiarities of his nazarate, a
woman, who is married, is considered as a Nazarite for life, i. e.,
separated from all others, and joined to one husband who is her lord;
hence St. Paul, probably alluding to this circumstance, says, [Co1
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010) : The woman ought to have power
upon her head, i.e., wear her hair and veil; for this hair is a proof of
her nazarate, and of her being in subjection to her husband, as the
Nazarite was under subjection to the Lord by the rule of his order.

[Numbers 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 6:10</span></span>

Two turtles, or two young pigeons - The same kind of offering made by
him who had an issue, [Lev 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#014), etc.

[Numbers 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 6:18</span></span>

Shall take the hair - and put it in the fire - The hair was permitted to
grow for this purpose; and as the Nazarite was a kind of sacrifice,
offered to God through the whole term of his nazarate or separation, and
no human flesh or blood could be offered on the altar of the Lord, he
offered his hair at the conclusion of his separation, as a sacrifice -
that hair which was the token of his complete subjection to the Lord,
and which was now considered as the Lord's property. The Hindoos, after
a vow, do not cut their hair during the term of their vow; but at the
expiration of it they shave it off at the place where the vow was made.

That the hair of the head was superstitiously used among different
nations, we have already had occasion to remark; (See the notes on [Lev
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#027)); and that the Gentiles might
have learned this from the Jews is possible, though some learned men
think that this consecration of the hair to a deity was in use among the
heathens before the time of Moses, and in nations who had no intercourse
or connection with the Jews.

[Numbers 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 6:21</span></span>

This is the law of the Nazarite - We learn from Maimonides, in his
Treatise of the Nazarite, that a man might become a Nazarite in behalf
of another; that is, might assist him in bearing the expenses of the
sacrifices, etc. "A son may fulfill the vow his deceased father hath
made, but did not live to accomplish: - He that saith, upon me be the
shaving of a Nazarite, he is bound to bring the offerings of shaving for
cleanness, and may offer them by the hand of what Nazarite he will. If
he say, Upon me be half the oblations of a Nazarite, then he bringeth
half the offerings by what Nazarite he will, and that Nazarite payeth
his offerings out of that which is his."

"By this," says Mr. Ainsworth, "we may see the reason of that which
James said to Paul, though he had no Nazarite's vow upon him: 'We have
four men who have a vow on them; them take and sanctify thyself with
them, and Be At Charges With Them, that they may shave their heads, etc.
Then Paul took the men, and the next day, sanctifying himself with them,
entered into the temple to signify the accomplishment of the days of
sanctification, (or Nazariteship), until that an offering should be
offered for every one of them;' see [Act
21:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#023). For though Paul had not
vowed or fulfilled a Nazariteship himself, yet might he contribute with
them, and partake of their charges about the sacrifices."

[Numbers 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 6:23</span></span>

On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel - The prayer which
God makes for his followers, and puts into their mouth, we are sure must
be right; and to it, when sincerely, faithfully, and fervently offered,
we may confidently expect an answer. If he condescended to give us a
form of blessings or a form of prayer, we may rest assured that he will
accept what he himself has made. This consideration may produce great
confidence in them who come with either prayer or praise to the throne
of grace, both of which should be, as far as circumstances will admit,
in the very words of Scripture; for we can readily attach a consequence
to the words of God, which we shall find difficult to attach to the best
ordered words of men. Take with you words, and turn unto the Lord. What
words? Why those which God immediately puts into their mouths. Take away
all iniquity, and receive us graciously; so will we render the calves of
our lips; we shall then give the sacrifices of which our lips have
spoken, when we made our vows unto thee. See [Hos
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002).

[Numbers 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 6:24</span></span>

The Lord bless thee - There are three forms of blessing here, any or all
of which the priests might use on any occasion. The following is a
verbal translation: -

1\. May Jehovah bless thee and preserve thee!

2\. May Jehovah cause his faces to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee!

3\. May Jehovah lift up his faces upon thee, and may be put prosperity
unto thee!

This is a very comprehensive and excellent prayer, and may be
paraphrased thus: -

1\. May God speak good unto thee, by giving thee his excellent promises!
(See the note on [Gen 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003)). May he
preserve thee in the possession of all the good thou hast, and from all
the evil with which thou art threatened!

2\. May the Holy Trinity illuminate thy heart, giving thee the true
knowledge of thyself and of thy Maker; and may he show thee his
graciousness in pardoning thy sins, and supporting thy soul!

3\. May God give thee communion with the Father, Son, and Spirit, with a
constant sense of his approbation; and grant thee prosperity in thy
soul, and in all thy secular affairs!

This I suppose to be the spirit and design of this form of benediction.
Others will doubtless interpret it after their manner. Several wise and
learned men believe that the mystery of the Holy Trinity is not
obscurely hinted at in it. God the Father blesses and keeps his
followers. God the Son is gracious unto sinners in remitting their
offenses, which he died to blot out. God the Holy Spirit takes of the
things which are Christ's, and shows them unto genuine Christians, and
diffuses the peace of God in their hearts. In a word, Christ, the gift
of the Father by the energy of the Holy Spirit, came to bless every one
of us by turning us away from our iniquities.

1\. Every genuine Christian is a true Nazarite. He is separated from the
world, and dedicated solely to the service of God.

2\. His life is a life of self-denial; he mortifies and keeps the flesh
in obedience to the Spirit.

3\. All this enters into the spirit of his baptismal vow; for in that he
promises to renounce the devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities
of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh - to keep
God's holy word and commandments, and to walk in the same all the days
of his life.

4\. The person who is faithful has the blessing of God entailed upon
him. Thus shall ye bless the children of Israel, etc., etc. See the
notes on [Num 6:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#005) (note).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 7](num007)

</div>
