<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num008)  [Next](num010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 9:0</span></span>

The Israelites are reminded of the law that required them to keep the
passover at its proper time, and with all its rites, [Num
9:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001). They kept the passover on the
fourteenth day of the first month, [Num
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#004), [Num
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#005). The case of the men who, being
unclean through touching a dead body, could not keep the passover, [Num
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#006), [Num
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#007). Moses inquires at the Lord
concerning them, [Num 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#008); and the
Lord appoints the fourteenth day of the second month for all those who
through any accidental uncleanness, or by being absent on a journey,
could not keep it at the usual time, [Num
9:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#009). Those who neglect to keep this
solemn feast to be cut off from among his people, [Num
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#013). The stranger who wishes to keep
the passover is at liberty to do it, [Num
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#014). The cloud covers the tabernacle
both by day and night, from the time of its dedication, [Num
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015), [Num
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#016). This cloud regulates all the
encampments and marchings of the Israelites through the wilderness, [Num
9:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#017). Their journeyings and
restings were all directed by the commandment of the Lord, [Num
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#023).

[Numbers 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 9:1</span></span>

The Lord spake unto Moses - The fourteen first verses of this chapter
certainly refer to transactions that took place at the time of those
mentioned in the commencement of this book, before the numbering of the
people, and several learned men are of opinion that these fourteen
verses should be referred back to that place. We have already met with
instances where transpositions have very probably taken place, and it is
not difficult to account for them. As in very early times writing was
generally on leaves of the Egyptian flag papyrus, or on thin laminae of
different substances, facts and transactions thus entered were very
liable to be deranged; so that when afterwards a series was made up into
a book, many transactions might be inserted in wrong places, and thus
the exact chronology of the facts be greatly disturbed. MSS. written on
leaves of trees, having a hole in each, through which a cord is passed
to keep them all in their places, are frequently to be met with in the
cabinets of the curious, and many such are now before me, especially in
Singalese, Pali, and Burman. Should the cord break, or be accidentally
unloosed, it would be exceedingly difficult to string them all in their
proper places; accidents of this kind I have often met with to my very
great perplexity, and in some cases found it almost impossible to
restore each individual leaf to its own place; for it should be observed
that these separate pieces of oriental writing are not always paged like
the leaves of our printed books; nor are there frequently any
catch-words or signatures at the bottom to connect the series. This one
consideration will account for several transpositions, especially in the
Pentateuch, where they occur more frequently than in any other part of
the sacred writings. Houbigant, who grants the existence of such
transpositions, thinks that this is no sufficient reason why the present
order of narration should be changed: "It is enough," says he, non
ignorare libros eos Mosis esse acta rerum suo tempore gestarum, non
historiam filo perpetuo elaboratam," "to know that these books contain
an account of things transacted in the days of Moses, though not in
their regular or chronological order.'

[Numbers 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 9:3</span></span>

According to all the rites of it - See all those rites and ceremonies
largely explained in the notes on Exodus 12 (note).

[Numbers 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 9:7</span></span>

We are defiled by the dead body of a man - It is probable that the
defilement mentioned here was occasioned by assisting at the burial of
some person - a work both of necessity and mercy. This circumstance
however gave rise to the ordinance delivered in [Num
9:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#010), so that on particular
occasions the passover might be twice celebrated:

1\. At its regular time, the 14th of the first month;

2\. An extra time, the 14th of the second month.

But the man who had no legal hinderance, and did not celebrate it on one
or other of these times, was to be cut off from the people of God; and
the reason given for this cutting off is, that he brought not the
offering of God in his appointed season - therefore that man shall bear
his sin, [Num 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#013).

We have already seen, from the authority of St. Paul, that Christ, our
Passover, is sacrificed for us; and that it was his sacrifice that was
pointed out by the paschal lamb: on this, therefore, we may observe,
that those who do not sooner or later eat the true Passover, and get the
salvation procured by the sprinkling of his blood, shall be cut off from
among those that shall enter into the rest prepared for the people of
God; and for the same reason too; they bring not the offering of God in
its appointed season, and therefore they shall bear their sin.

[Numbers 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 9:15</span></span>

The cloud covered the tabernacle - See the whole account of this
supernatural cloud largely explained, [Exo
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021); and [Exo
40:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034). Calmet observes that the
15th verse, beginning a new subject, should begin a new chapter, as it
has no connection with what goes before; and he thinks this chapter,
begun with the 15th verse, should end with the 28th verse of the
following. ([Exo 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#028))

[Numbers 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 9:21</span></span>

Whether - by day or by night - As the heat of the day is very severe in
that same desert, the night season is sometimes chosen for the
performance of a journey; though it is very likely that in the case of
the Israelites this was seldom resorted to.

[Numbers 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 9:22</span></span>

Two days - a month - a year - It was by the Divine counsel alone that
they were directed in all their peregrinations: and from the above words
we see that their times of tarrying at different stations were very
unequal.

[Numbers 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 9:23</span></span>

Kept the charge of the Lord - When we consider the strong disposition
which this people ever testified to follow their own will in all things,
we may be well surprised to find them, in these journeyings, so
implicitly following the directions of God. There could be no trick or
imposture here. Moses, had he been the most cunning of men, never could
have imitated the appearances referred to in this chapter. The cloud,
and every thing in its motion, was so evidently supernatural, that the
people had no doubt of its being the symbol of the Divine presence. God
chose to keep this people so dependent upon himself, and so submissive
to the decisions of his own will, that he would not even give them
regular times of marching or resting; they were to do both when and
where God saw best. Thus they were ever kept ready for their march,
though perfectly ignorant of the time when they should commence it. But
this was all well; they had the presence of God with them; the cloud by
day and the fire by night demonstrated that God was amongst them.
Reader, thou art here a tenant at will to God Almighty. How soon, in
what place, or in what circumstances, he may call thee to march into the
eternal world, thou knowest not. But this uncertainty cannot perplex
thee, if thou be properly subject to the will of God, ever willing to
lose thy own in it. But thou canst not be thus subject, unless thou have
the testimony of the presence and approbation of God. How awful to be
obliged to walk into the valley of the shadow of death without this!
Reader, prepare to meet thy God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 10](num010)

</div>
