<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num018)  [Next](num020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 19:0</span></span>

The ordinance of the red heifer, [Num
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001), [Num
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#002). She shall be slain by Eleazar
without the camp, and her blood sprinkled before the tabernacle, [Num
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#003), [Num
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#004). Her whole body and appurtenance
shall be reduced to ashes, and while burning, cedar wood, scarlet, and
hyssop, shall be thrown into the fire, [Num
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#005), [Num
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#006). The priest, and he that burns
her, to bathe themselves, and be reputed unclean till the evening, [Num
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#007), [Num
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#008). Her ashes to be laid up for a
water of purification, [Num 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#009). How,
and in what cases it is to be applied, [Num
19:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#010). The law concerning him who
dies in a tent, or who is killed in the open field, [Num
19:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#014). How the persons, tent, and
vessels are to be purified by the application of these ashes, [Num
19:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#017). The unclean person who does
not apply them, to be cut off from the congregation, [Num
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#020). This is to be a perpetual
statute, [Num 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#021), [Num
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#022).

[Numbers 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 19:2</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel that they bring thee, etc. - The
ordinance of the red heifer was a sacrifice of general application. All
the people were to have an interest in it, and therefore the people at
large are to provide the sacrifice. This Jewish rite certainly had a
reference to things done under the Gospel, as the author of the Epistle
to the Hebrews has remarked: "For if," says he, "the blood of bulls and
of goats," alluding, probably, to the sin-offerings and the scape-goat,
"and the ashes of a heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the
purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge
your conscience from dead works to serve the living God!" [Heb
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013), [Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014). As the principal stress of the
allusion here is to the ordinance of the red heifer, we may certainly
conclude that it was designed to typify the sacrifice of our blessed
Lord.

We may remark several curious particulars in this ordinance.

1\. A heifer was appointed for a sacrifice, probably, in opposition to
the Egyptian superstition which held these sacred, and actually
worshipped their great goddess Isis under this form; and this appears
the more likely because males in general were preferred for sacrifice,
yet here the female is chosen.

2\. It was to be a red heifer, because red bulls were sacrificed to
appease the evil demon Typhon, worshipped among the Egyptians. See
Spencer.

3\. The heifer was to be without spot - having no mixture of any other
color. Plutarch remarks, De Iside et de Osiride, that if there was a
single hair in the animal either white or black, it marred the
sacrifice. See Calmet, and see the note on [Num
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007).

4\. Without blemish - having no kind of imperfection in her body; the
other, probably, applying to the hair or color.

5\. On which never came yoke, because any animal which had been used for
any common purpose was deemed improper to be offered in sacrifice to
God. The heathens, who appear to have borrowed much from the Hebrews,
were very scrupulous in this particular. Neither the Greeks nor Romans,
nor indeed the Egyptians, would offer an animal in sacrifice that had
been employed for agricultural purposes. Of this we have the most
positive evidence from Homer, Porphyry, Virgil, and Macrobius.

Just such a sacrifice as that prescribed here, does Diomede vow to offer
to Pallas - Iliad, lib. x., ver. 291.

Ὡς νυν μοι εθελουσα παριστασο, και με φυλασσε·

Σοι δ' αυ εγω ῥεξω βουν ηνιν ευρυμετωπον,

Αδμητην, ἡν ουπω ὑπο ζυγον ηγαγεν ανηρ·

Την τοι εγω ῥεξω, χρυσον κερασιν περιχευας.

"So now be present, O celestial maid;

So still continue to the race thine aid;

A yearling heifer falls beneath the stroke,

Untamed, unconscious of the galling yoke,

With ample forehead and with spreading horns,

Whose tapering tops refulgent gold adorns."

Altered from Pope.

In the very same words Nestor, Odyss., lib. iii., ver. 382, promises a
similar sacrifice to Pallas.

The Romans had the same religion with the Greeks, and consequently the
same kind of sacrifices; so Virgil, Georg. iv., ver. 550.

Quatuor eximios praestanti corpore tauros

Ducit, et intacta totidem cervice juveneas.

" - From his herd he culls

For slaughter four the fairest of his bulls;

Four heifers from his female stock he took,

All fair, and all unknowing of the yoke."

Dryden.

It is very likely that the Gentiles learnt their first sacrificial rites
from the patriarchs; and on this account we need not wonder to find so
many coincidences in the sacrificial system of the patriarchs and Jews,
and all the neighboring nations.

[Numbers 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 19:9</span></span>

For a water of separation - That is, the ashes were to be kept, in order
to be mixed with water, [Num 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#017),
and sprinkled on those who had contracted any legal defilement.

[Numbers 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 19:11</span></span>

He that toucheth the dead body of any man shall be unclean seven days -
How low does this lay man! He who touched a dead beast was only unclean
for one day, [Lev 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#024), [Lev
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#027), [Lev
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#039); but he who touches a dead man
is unclean for seven days. This was certainly designed to mark the
peculiar impurity of man, and to show his sinfulness - seven times worse
than the vilest animal! O thou son of the morning, how art thou fallen!

[Numbers 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 19:12</span></span>

He shall purify himself with it - יתחטא בו yithchatta bo, literally, he
shall sin himself with it. This Hebrew form of speech is common enough
among us in other matters. Thus to fleece, to bark, and to skin, do not
signify to add a fleece, another bark, or a skin, but to take one away;
therefore, to sin himself, in the Hebrew idiom, is not to add sin, but
to take it away, to purify. The verb חטא chata signifies to miss the
mark, to sin, to purify from sin, and to make a sin-offering. See the
note on [Gen 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#013).

The Hebrews generally sacrificed males, no matter of what color; but
here a heifer, and a heifer of a red color, is ordered. The reason of
these circumstances is not very well known.

"The rabbins, with all their boldness," says Calmet, "who stick at
nothing when it is necessary to explain what they do not understand,
declare that the cause of this law is entirely unknown; and that
Solomon, with all his wisdom, could not find it out."

Several fathers, as well modern as ancient, profess to understand the
whole clearly.

1\. The red heifer with them signifies the flesh of our Lord, formed out
of an earthly substance.

2\. Being without spot, etc., the infinite holiness of Christ.

3\. The sex of the animal, the infirmity of our flesh, with which he
clothed himself.

4\. The red color, his passion.

5\. Being unyoked, his being righteous in all his conduct, and never
under the yoke of sin.

6\. Eleazar's sacrificing the heifer instead of Aaron, [Gen
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#003), signifies the change of the
priesthood from the family of Aaron, in order that a new and more
perfect priesthood might take place.

7\. The red heifer being taken without the camp ([Gen
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#003)) to be slain, points out the
crucifixion of our Lord without the city.

8\. The complete consuming of the heifer by fire, the complete offering
of the whole body and soul of Christ as a sacrifice to God for the sin
of man: for as the heifer was without blemish, the whole might be
offered to God; and as Christ was immaculate, his whole body and soul
were made a sacrifice for sin.

9\. As the fire of this sacrifice ascended up to God, so it points out
the resurrection and ascension of our blessed Lord.

10\. And as the ashes of this victim communicated a legal purity to
those who were defiled, so true repentance, signified by those ashes, is
necessary for the expiation of the offenses committed after baptism.

A great part of this is true in itself; but how little evidence is there
that all these things were intended in the ordinance of the red heifer?
See on [Num 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007) (note).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 20](num020)

</div>
