<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num003)  [Next](num005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 4:0</span></span>

Moses is commanded to take the sum of the sons of Kohath from thirty
years old and upward, [Num 4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#001). The
service which they had to perform, [Num
4:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#005). The office of Eleazar, [Num
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#016). The family of Kohath to be
continued among the Levites, [Num
4:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#017). They are not to go into the
holy of holies, [Num 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#020). The sum of
the sons of Gershon, [Num 4:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#021). The
service they had to perform, [Num
4:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#024). They are to be under Ithamar,
[Num 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#028). The sum of the sons of
Merari, [Num 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#029), [Num
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#030). The service they had to perform,
[Num 4:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#031). The sum of all the
families of Kohath, 2,750, [Num
4:34-37](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034). The sum of the families of
Gershon, 2,630, [Num 4:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#038). The sum
of the families of Merari, 3,200, [Num
4:42-45](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#042). The sum total of the families
of Gershon, Kohath, and Merari, 8,580, [Num
4:46-49](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#046).

[Numbers 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 4:3</span></span>

From thirty years old - In [Num 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024),
the Levites are ordered to enter on the service of the tabernacle at the
age of twenty-five years; and in [Ch1
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#024), they were ordered to commence
that work at twenty years of age. How can these different times be
reconciled?

1\. At the time of which Moses speaks here, the Levitical service was
exceedingly severe, and consequently required men full grown, strong,
and stout, to perform it; the age therefore of thirty years was
appointed as the period for commencing this service, the weightier part
of which is probably here intended.

2\. In [Num 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024), Moses seems to speak
of the service in a general way; the severe, which was to be performed
by the full-grown Levites, and the less laborious work which younger men
might assist in: hence the age of twenty-five is fixed.

3\. In David's time and afterwards, in the fixed tabernacle and temple,
the laboriousness of the service no longer existed, and hence twenty
years was the age fixed on for all Levites to enter into the work of the
sanctuary. The rabbins say that the Levites began to learn to do the
service at twenty-five, and that having been instructed five years, they
began the public service at thirty, and thus they reconcile the two
periods referred to above. We may well suppose that the sons of the
prophets continued a considerable time under instructions before they
were called fully to exercise themselves in the prophetic office.

Until fifty years old - This was allowing twenty years for public severe
service; a very considerate and merciful ordinance. A preacher who
devotes his whole time and strength to the service of the Church of God
from twenty to fifty or sixty years of age, should be then excused from
his severer labor, and maintained at the charge of the sanctuary. This
would not only be a great comfort to a worn-out servant of God, but also
of great use to the work of the ministry, which, to be faithfully and
effectually performed, requires all the powers of the body and mind of
man. Old faithful ministers are to be highly respected for their work's
sake, and to be supplied with all the necessaries and comforts of life;
but how little can they do in the public ministry of the word, however
willing to work, when their eye waxes dim and their bodily strength
fails! See [Num 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#025). Both for their
own sakes, and for the good of the Church, they should be excused from a
labor to which they must be almost every way inadequate. But
notwithstanding this comparative inactivity, their counsels, advice, and
experience will always be considered as a treasure to the Church of
Christ

[Numbers 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 4:20</span></span>

When the holy things are covered - Literally, כבלע keballa, when they
are swallowed down; which shows the promptitude with which every thing
belonging to the holy of holies was put out of sight, for these
mysteries must ever be treated with the deepest reverence; and indeed
without this they could not have been to them the representatives of
heavenly realities. See the concluding note [Num
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#036) (note).

[Numbers 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">num 4:36</span></span>

Those that were numbered - In [Num
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#027), etc., we have an account of the
whole number of the Levites, and here of those only who were able to
serve the Lord in the sanctuary. By comparing the two places we find the
numbers to stand thus: -

LeviteFamily AbleMen UnableMen Total Kohathites 2,750 5,850 8,600
Gershonites 2,630 4,870 7,500 Merarites 3,200 3,000 6,200

Thus we find that the whole number of the Levites amounted to 22,300, of
whom 3,580 were fit for service, and 13,720 unfit, being either too old
or too young. What an astonishing number of men, all properly
ecclesiastics; all performing some service by which God was glorified,
and the congregation at large benefited! See Ainsworth.

From this and the preceding chapter we see the very severe labor which
the Levites were obliged to perform while the journeyings of the
Israelites lasted. When we consider that there was not less than 10 tons
13 cwt. 24 lb. 14 oz., i. e., almost ten tons and fourteen hundred
pounds' weight of metal employed in the tabernacle, (see the notes on
Exodus 38 (note)), besides the immense weight of the skins, hangings,
cords, boards, and posts, we shall find it was no very easy matter to
transport this movable temple from place to place.

The Gershonites, who were 7,500 men in the service, had to carry the
tent, coverings, veils, hangings of the court, etc., etc., [Num
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#025), [Num
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#026).

The Kohathites, who were 8,600 men, had to carry the ark, table,
candlestick, altars, and instruments of the sanctuary, [Num
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#031).

The Merarites, who were 6,200 men, had to carry the boards, bars,
pillars, sockets, and all matters connected with these belonging to the
tabernacle, with the pillars of the court, their sockets, pins, and
cords, [Num 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#036), [Num
3:37](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#037).

The tabernacle was an epitome of the temple: the temple and tabernacle
were representatives of the Church of the living God, and of the
humanity of our blessed Lord. As God dwelt in the tabernacle and temple,
so his fullness dwelt in the man Christ Jesus. These again were types of
the Christian Church, which is termed the body of Christ, [Eph
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023), where he dwells in the plenitude
of the graces of his Spirit.

Mr. Ainsworth has a very useful note on the [Num
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#020) verse of this chapter, the most
edifying part of which I shall here lay before the reader. He considers
the tabernacle and temple, not only as pointing out the old
dispensation, the annulling of which was typified by their destruction,
but he considers also the former as emblematical of the body of man.

"The apostle," says he, "treating of the death of the saints, uses this
similitude: 'If our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. For we that are in This Tabernacle do groan, being burdened,
not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality
might be swallowed up of life;' [Co2
5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001). So Peter calls his death the
putting off of his Tabernacle, [Pe2
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#014). And this similitude is very fit;
for, as here, in the tabernacle of Moses,

1\. The holy things were first covered and taken away, (see [Num
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#020)), so the soul and its powers are
first withdrawn from the body by death.

2\. As the curtains and coverings were taken off and folded up, so the
skin and flesh of our bodies are pulled off and consumed.

3\. As the boards of the tabernacle were disjointed and pulled asunder,
so shall our bones and sinews: compare Job's description of the
formation of man, [Num 10:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#008); and
Solomon's account of his dissolution, [Ecc
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#003), [Ecc
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#004).

4\. As the disjointed and dissolved tabernacle was afterwards set up
again, [Num 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#021), so shall our bodies
in the day of the resurrection; see [Co1
15:51-54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 5](num005)

</div>
