<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num007)  [Next](num009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 8:0</span></span>

Directions how the lamps are to be lighted, [Num
8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001). How the candlestick was formed,
[Num 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#004). The Levites to be
consecrated to their service by being cleansed, sprinkled, shaved,
purified, and their clothes washed, [Num
8:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#005). To offer a meat-offering and a
sin-offering, [Num 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#008). The people to
put their hands upon them, [Num 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#009),
[Num 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#010). Aaron is to offer them
before the Lord, [Num 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#011). The
Levites to lay their hands on the heads of the bullocks, etc., [Num
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#012). The Levites are taken to assist
Aaron and his sons in the place of all the first-born of Israel, [Num
8:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#013). Moses and Aaron do as they
were commanded, the Levites are presented, purified, and commence their
service, [Num 8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#020). They are to
begin their service at twenty-five years of age, and leave off at fifty,
[Num 8:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#023). After this they shall
have the general inspection of the service, [Num
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#026).

[Numbers 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 8:2</span></span>

The seven lamps shall give light - The whole seven shall be lighted at
one time, that seven may be ever burning.

[Numbers 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 8:4</span></span>

This work of the candlestick, etc. - See many curious particulars
relative to this candlestick, See the note on [Exo
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031) and [Exo
25:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#039) (note). The candlestick itself
was an emblem of the Church of Christ; the oil, of the graces and gifts
of the Spirit of God; and the light, of those gifts and graces in action
among men. See [Rev 1:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012). God
builds his Church and sends forth his Spirit to dwell in it, to sanctify
and cleanse it, that it may be shown unto the world as his own
workmanship. The seven lights in the candlesticks point out the seven
Spirits of God, the Holy Ghost being thus termed, [Rev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001), from the variety and abundance of
his gifts and influences; seven being used among the Hebrews to denote
any thing full, complete, and perfect. A candlestick or lamp without oil
is of no use; oil not burning is of no use. So a Church or society of
religious people without the influence of the Holy Ghost are dead while
they have a name to live; and if they have a measure of this light, and
do not let it shine by purity of living and holy zeal before men, their
religion is neither useful to themselves nor to others. Reader, it is
possible to be in the Church of God and not be of that Church; it is
possible to have a measure of the Spirit and neither profit nor be
profited. Feel this dreadful possibility, and pray to God that thou be
not a proof of it.

[Numbers 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 8:7</span></span>

Sprinkle water of purifying - מי חטאת mey chattath, water of sin, or
water of the sin-offering. As this purifying water was made by the ashes
of the red heifer, cedar-wood, hyssop, and scarlet; and the heifer
herself was sacrificed, and her blood sprinkled seven times before the
tabernacle, [Num 19:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#003); she may be
considered as a proper sacrifice for sin, and consequently the water
thus prepared be termed the water of the sin-offering. As the ashes were
kept ready at hand for purifying from all legal pollutions, the
preparation might be considered as a concentration of the essential
properties of the sin-offering, and might be resorted to at all times
with comparatively little expense or trouble, and no loss of time. As
there were so many things by which legal pollution might be contracted,
it was necessary to have always at hand, in all their dwellings, a mode
of purifying at once convenient and inexpensive.

As the water by which the Levites were here purified must have been the
water prepared from the ashes of the red heifer, this ordinance was
undoubtedly instituted before this time, though not described till [Num
19:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001) of this book; but that chapter
might be in connection with any of the preceding ordinances, as well as
where it is now found.

We see from [Heb 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013), [Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014), that these ashes mingled with
water, and sprinkled on the unclean, and which sanctified to the
purification of the flesh, were intended to typify the blood of Christ,
which purges the conscience from dead works to serve the living God,
[Heb 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015); for as without this
sprinkling with the water of the sin-offering the Levites were not fit
to serve God in the wilderness, so without this sprinkling of the blood
of Christ no conscience can be purged from dead works to serve the
living God. See the notes on [Num
19:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001) (note).

[Numbers 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 8:10</span></span>

Shall put their hands upon the Levites - It has been argued from this
that the congregation had a part in the appointment of their own
ministers, and that this was done by the imposition of hands. However
that may be, it appears that what was done on this occasion meant no
more than that the people gave up this whole tribe to God in place of
their firstborn; and that by this act they bound themselves to provide
for them who, because of their sacred service, could follow no secular
work. And surely it was right, that they who served the altar should
live by the altar. The ministers of God perform offices for the people
which the people cannot perform for themselves; and nothing can be more
reasonable than that the people should give them the necessaries and
comforts of life while they are thus employed in their behalf.

[Numbers 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 8:17</span></span>

For all the first-born - are mine - See the manner of redeeming the
first-born, [Num 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#006).

[Numbers 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 8:21</span></span>

And Aaron made an atonement for them - Though the Levites had been most
solemnly consecrated to the Lord's service, and though all legal
washings and purifications were duly performed on the occasion, yet they
could not approach God till an atonement had been made for them. How
strange is it, after all these significations, of the will and purpose
of God relative to man, that any priest or any people will attempt to
draw nigh to God without an atonement! As sure as God hath spoken it,
there is no entrance into the holiest but through the blood of Jesus,
[Heb 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019), [Heb
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020).

[Numbers 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 8:24</span></span>

From twenty and five years old - See the note on [Num
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003), where the two terms of
twenty-five and thirty years are reconciled.

[Numbers 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 8:26</span></span>

To keep the charge, and shall do no service - They shall no longer be
obliged to perform any laborious service, but act as general directors
and counsellors; therefore they were to be near the camp, sing praises
to God, and see that no stranger or unclean person was permitted to
enter. So the Jews and many other persons have understood this place.

1\. If it required so much legal purity to fit the Levites for their
work in the tabernacle, can we suppose that it requires less spiritual
purity to fit ministers of the Gospel to proclaim the righteousness of
the Most High, and administer the sacred ordinances of Christianity to
the flock of Christ? If these must be without spot, as the priests
before without blemish, and these were only typical men, we may rest
assured that a Christian minister requires no ordinary measures of
holiness to prepare him for an acceptable and profitable discharge of
his office.

2\. If the Christian ministry be established to prepare men for the
kingdom of God, of the holiness of which the purity of the camp was but
a faint emblem, how can any man expect to enter that place of
blessedness, who has not his heart sprinkled from an evil conscience,
and his body washed with pure water; his life and conversation agreeable
to the sacred precepts laid down in the Gospel of Christ? If the law of
Moses were more read in reference to the Gospel, the Gospel itself and
its requisitions would be much better understood.

Reader, however it may be with thee, Antinomianism is more general among
religious people than is usually imagined. What multitudes of all
denominations are expecting to enter into the kingdom of God without any
proper preparation for the place! Without holiness none shall see the
Lord; and from this decision of the Divine justice there shall never be
any appeal.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 9](num009)

</div>
