<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num024)  [Next](num026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 25:0</span></span>

While Israel abode in Shittim the people commit whoredom with the
daughters of Moab, [Num 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001). They
become idolaters, [Num 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#002). The anger
of the Lord is kindled against them, and he commands the ringleaders to
be hanged, [Num 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#003), [Num
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#004). Moses causes the judges to slay
the transgressors, [Num 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#005). Zimri,
one of the Israelitish princes of the tribe of Simeon, brings a
Midianitish princess, named Cozbi, into his tent, while the people are
deploring their iniquity before the tabernacle, [Num
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006). Phinehas, the son of Eleazar,
incensed by this insult to the laws and worship of God, runs after them
and pierces them both with a javelin, [Num
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007), [Num
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008). Twenty-four thousand die of the
plague, sent as a punishment for their iniquity, [Num
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009). The Lord grants to Phinehas a
covenant of peace and an everlasting priesthood, [Num
25:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#010). The name and quality of the
Israelitish man and Midianitish woman, [Num
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#014), [Num
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#015). God commands the Israelites to
vex and smite the Midianites, who had seduced them to the worship of
Baal-peor, [Num 25:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#016).

[Numbers 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 25:3</span></span>

Israel joined himself unto Baal-peor - The same as the Priapus of the
Romans, and worshipped with the same obscene rites as we have frequently
had occasion to remark.

The joining to Baal-peor, mentioned here, was probably what St. Paul had
in view when he said, [Co2 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014) : Be
ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers. And this joining,
though done even in a matrimonial way, was nevertheless fornication,
(see [Rev 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014)), as no marriage
between an Israelite and a Midianite could be legitimate, according to
the law of God. See the propositions at the close of the preceding
chapter [Num 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#025) (note).

[Numbers 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 25:4</span></span>

Take all the heads of the people, etc. - Meaning the chiefs of those who
had transgressed; as if he had said, "Assemble the chiefs and judges,
institute an inquiry concerning the transgressors, and hang them who
shall be found guilty before the Lord, as a matter required by his
justice." Against the sun - in the most public manner, and in daylight.
Dr. Kennicott has remarked that the Samaritan and Hebrew texts must be
both taken together, to make the sense here complete: And the Lord said
unto Moses, Speak unto all the heads of the people; And Let Them Slay
The Men That Were Joined To Baal-Peor; and hang them up before the Lord
against the sun, etc.

[Numbers 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 25:5</span></span>

Slay ye every one his men - In the different departments where you
preside over thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens, slay all the
culprits that shall be found.

[Numbers 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 25:6</span></span>

One of the children of Israel - Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince of a
chief family in the tribe of Simeon, [Num
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#014), brought a Midianitish woman,
Cozbi, daughter of Zur, head over a people of one of the chief families
in Midian, [Num 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#015). The condition
of these two persons plainly proves it to have been a matrimonial
alliance, the one was a prince, the other a princess; therefore I must
conclude that fornication or whoredom, in the common sense of the word,
was not practiced on this occasion. The matter was bad enough, as the
marriage was in flat opposition to the law of God; and we need not make
it worse by representing the woman as a common prostitute, as the
Vulgate and several others have done. In such a case this is absolutely
inadmissible. Josephus positively says that Zimri had married Cozbi,
Antiq., 1. iv., cap. 6; and if he had not said so, still the thing is
nearly self-evident. See [Num 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#025)
(note).

The children of Israel, who were weeping - This aggravated the crime,
because the people were then in a state of great humiliation, because of
the late impure and illegal transactions.

[Numbers 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 25:8</span></span>

Thrust both of them through - Inspired undoubtedly by the Spirit of the
God of justice to do this act, which can never be a precedent on any
common occasion. An act something similar occurs in our own history. In
1381, in the minority of Richard II., a most formidable insurrection
took place in Kent and Essex; about 100,000 men, chiefly under the
direction of Wat Tyler, seized on London, massacred multitudes of
innocent people, and were proceeding to the greatest enormities, when
the king requiring a conference in Smithfield with the rebel leader, Sir
William Walworth, then mayor of London, provoked at the insolence with
which Tyler behaved to his sovereign, knocked him off his horse with his
mace, after which he was instantly dispatched. While his partisans were
bending their bows to revenge the death of their leader, Richard, then
only sixteen years of age, rode up to them, and with great courage and
presence of mind thus addressed them: "What, my people, will you kill
your king! be not concerned for the death of your leader; follow me, and
I will be your general." They were suddenly appeased, and the rebellion
terminated. The action of Sir William Walworth was that of a zealot, of
essential benefit at the time, and justified only by the pressing
exigencies of the case.

[Numbers 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 25:9</span></span>

Those that died - were twenty and four thousand - St. Paul, [Co1
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#008), reckons only twenty-three
thousand; though some MSS. and versions, particularly the latter Syriac
and the Armenian, have twenty-four thousand, with the Hebrew text.
Allowing the 24,000 to be the genuine reading, and none of the Hebrew
MSS. exhibit any various reading here, the two places may be reconciled
thus: 1,000 men were slain in consequence of the examination instituted
[Num 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#004), and 23,000 in consequence
of the orders given [Num 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#005); making
24,000 in the whole. St. Paul probably refers only to the latter number.

[Numbers 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 25:12</span></span>

My covenant of peace - of an everlasting priesthood - As the word peace
implied all kinds of blessings, both spiritual and temporal, it may mean
no more here than the promise of God, to grant him and his family the
utmost prosperity in reference to both worlds. The everlasting
priesthood refers properly to the priesthood of Christ which was
shadowed out by the priesthood under the law; no matter in what family
it was continued. Therefore the כהנת עולם kehunnath olam, or eternal
priesthood, does not merely refer to any sacerdotal ministrations which
should be continued in the family of Phinehas, during the Mosaic
dispensation, but to that priesthood of Christ typified by that of Aaron
and his successors. The priesthood alone is everlasting, and a covenant
or grant of that was made to Phinehas, and his descendants. The Jews
reckon twelve high priests of the race of Phinehas, from this time to
the days of Solomon, nine more from that time to the captivity, (see
[Ch1 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#004), [Ch1
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#015)), and fifteen from their return
to the time of Antiochus Eupator, the last of whom was Onias, slain by
Lysias. Ezra, the great priest and scribe, was of this line, [Ezr
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001), [Ezr
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#005). The family of Ithamar, uncle of
Phinehas, had the priesthood for about 150 years; but it was restored to
the family of Phinehas in the person of Zadok the priest, [Ch1
6:50](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#050), in which it continued in the
whole about 950 years. Probably the Maccabees were of the same family;
but though this is not certain, there is no evidence against it. See
Calmet. God therefore sufficiently fulfilled his promise; he gave to him
and his descendants almost the utmost temporal length that could be
given of that priesthood which is, in its own nature, eternal. Here then
the word עולם olam means, not a limited time, but what is eternal in its
duration. See the note on [Gen 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#033).

[Numbers 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 25:17</span></span>

Vex the Midianites, etc. - See this order fulfilled, Numbers 31:1-20.
Twelve thousand Israelites attacked the Midianites, destroyed all their
cities, slew their five kings, every male, and every grown up woman, and
took all their spoils.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 26](num026)

</div>
