<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num001)  [Next](num003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 2:0</span></span>

Moses commanded to teach the Israelites how they are to pitch their
tents, and erect the ensigns of their fathers' houses, [Num
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#001), [Num
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#002). Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun, on
the East, amounting to 186,400 men, [Num
2:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#003). Reuben, Simeon, and Gad, on the
South, with 151,450 men, [Num 2:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#010).
The Levites to be in the midst of the camp, [Num
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#017). Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin,
on the West, with 108,100 men, [Num
2:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#018). Dan, Asher, and Naphtali, on
the North, with 157,600 men, [Num
2:25-31](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#025). The sum total of the whole,
v. 603,550 men, [Num 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#032). But the
Levites are not included, [Num 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#033).
The people do as the Lord commands them, [Num
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#034).

[Numbers 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 2:2</span></span>

Every man - shall pitch by his own standard - Commentators, critics,
philosophers, and professional men, have taken a great deal of pains to
illustrate this chapter by showing the best method of encampment for
such a vast number of men, and the manner in which they conceive the
Israelites formed their camp in the wilderness. As God gave them the
plan, it was doubtless in every respect perfect; and fully answered the
double purpose of convenience and security. Scheuchzer has entered into
this subject with his usual ability, and in very considerable detail.
Following the plan of Reyher, as in the preceding chapter, he endeavors
to ascertain the precise order in which the several tribes were
disposed; and as his work is both scarce and dear, the reader will not
be displeased - to meet here with a translation of all that refers to
the subject.

Scheuchzer's Description and Plan of the Encampments of the Israelites
in the Wilderness

"If we form a proper idea of God, of his essence and his attributes, we
shall easily perceive that this infinite and supreme Being wills and
executes what his Divine wisdom appoints; in a word, we shall see that
he is the God of order. This order displays itself in the perfection,
arrangement, and assemblage of all created beings; in the construction
of the earth which we inhabit, where every thing is formed in order,
number, weight, and measure; and in all bodies, great and small. It is
certain that Noah's ark is a perfect model of naval architecture. The
temple of Solomon, and that of Ezekiel were likewise masterpieces in
their kind. But at present we are to consider the Divine arrangement of
the Israelitish camp, and the manner in which it was formed. "The
Israelitish army was divided Into three principal divisions. The first,
which was the least in extent, but the strongest and the most powerful,
occupied the center of the army: this was the throne of God, i. e., the
Tabernacle. The second, which was composed of the priests and Levites,
surrounded the first. The third, and the farthest from the center, took
in all the other tribes of Israel, who were at least about a mile from
the tabernacle. For it appears from Josephus, iii. 4, that the nearest
approach they dared make to the ark, except during the time of worship,
was a distance of 2,000 cubits. The reverence due to the Divine Majesty,
the numerous army of the Israelites, composed of 600,000 soldiers, with
their families, which made about 3,000,000 souls, naturally demanded a
considerable extent of ground. We are not to imagine that all these
families pitched their tents pell-mell, without order, like beasts, or
as the troops of Tartary, and the eastern armies; on the contrary, their
camp was divided according to the most exact rules. And we cannot even
doubt that their camp was laid out, and the place of every division and
tribe exactly assigned by some engineers, or geometricians, before the
army stopped to encamp, in order that every person might at once find
his own quarter, and the road he ought to take to reach the other tents.
"Four divisions, which faced the four quarters of the heavens, each with
his own ensign, formed the center of the army. Judah was placed on the
east, and under him he had Issachar and Zebulun; on the south was
Reuben, and under him Simeon and Gad: on the west was Ephraim, and under
him Manasseh and Benjamin; finally, Dan was on the north, and he had
under him Asher and Naphtali. It has been pretended by some that these
four principal divisions were not alone distinguished by their ensigns,
but that each particular tribe had likewise its standard or ensign. On
this subject we might refer to the Talmudists, who have gone so far as
to define the colors, and the figures or arms, of the very ensigns. They
pretend that on that of Judah a lion was painted, with this inscription:
'Rise, Lord, let thine enemies be dispersed, and let those that hate
thee flee before thee;' and they found this description of Judah's
ensign in [Gen 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009). They give to
Issachar an ass, [Gen 49:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#014); to
Zebulun a ship, [Gen 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013); to Reuben
a river, [Gen 49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004), (others give
Reuben the figure of a man); to Simeon a sword, [Gen
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005); to Gad a lion, [Deu
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#020); to Ephraim a unicorn, [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); an ox to Manasseh, [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); a wolf to Benjamin, [Gen
49:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#027); and a serpent to Dan, [Gen
49:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#017), though others give him an
eagle. In short, they pretend that the ensign of Asher was a handful of
corn, [Gen 49:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#020), and that of Naphtali
a stag, [Gen 49:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#021). "To prove that the
sums here are correctly added, we have but to join together the detached
numbers, and see if they agree with the total. The text will furnish us
with an example of this: there was in the quarter of: -

Judah 186,400 [Num 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#009) Reuben 151,450
[Num 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#016) Ephraim 108,100 [Num
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#024) Dan 157,600 [Num
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#031)

"Among other things we must remark that rule of military tactics which
requires that the advanced and rear guards should be stronger than the
center. "In a well-regulated camp, cleanliness is considered
indispensably necessary; this is particularly remarkable in the
Israelitish army, where the most exact order was maintained. Hence every
person who had any kind of disease, and those who were reputed unclean,
were forbidden to enter it; [Num 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#002),
[Num 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#003); [Deu
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#010). "Those who have the health of
men, and of a whole army confided to them, are not ignorant that
diseases may be easily produced by putrid exhalations from
excrementitious matter; and that such matter will produce in camps
pestilential fevers and dysenteries. For this reason, care should be
always taken that offices, at a distance from the camp, be provided for
the soldiers, and also that those who are sick should be separated from
the others, and sent to hospitals to be properly treated. "In military
tactics we find two distinct wings spoken of; the right and the left.
The Israelitish army not only had them on one side, as is customary, but
on all their four sides. On the eastern side, the tribe of Issachar
formed the right, that of Zebulun the left, and that of Judah the
center. On the south, Simeon formed the right wing, Gad the left, and
Reuben the center. Towards the west, Manasseh composed the right,
Benjamin the left, and Ephraim the center. And on the north, Asher was
on the right wing, Naphtali on the left wing, and Dan in the center.

Notwithstanding this, however, the army was not in danger of being
easily broken; for every tribe being numerous, they were supported by
several ranks, in such a manner that the first being broken, the second
was capable of making resistance; and if the second gave way, or shared
the same fate as the first, it found itself supported by the third, and
so on with the rest. The square form in which the Jewish army was
ordinarily placed, was the very best for security and defense. The use
and importance of the hollow square in military tactics is well known.
"For so large a multitude of people, and for so numerous an army, it was
needful that all the necessary articles of life should be prepared
beforehand, or be found ready to purchase. In these respects nothing was
wanting to the Israelites. Their bread came down to them from heaven,
and they had besides an abundance of every thing that could contribute
to magnificence. If we may credit Josephus, they had amongst them public
markets, and a variety of shops. Ant., i. iii. c. 12, sec. 5. The
tabernacle being erected, it was placed in the midst of the camp, each
of the three tribes stretching themselves on the wings, and leaving
between them a sufficient space to pass. "It was, says Josephus, like a
well appointed market where every thing was ready for sale in due order,
and all sorts of artificers kept their shops; so that this camp might be
considered a movable city. "In [Exo
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027) we likewise find that mention is
made of the gates of the camp: 'Put every man his sword by his side, and
go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp.' From whence we may
certainly conclude that if the camp had gates, the Israelites had also
sentinels to guard them. If this be true, we may also believe that they
were surrounded with entrenchments, or that at least their gates were
defended by some fortifications. Sagittarius (de Jan. Vet., c. 18. 10)
pretends that the tabernacle was not only guarded by the Levites, but
that there were likewise sentinels at the gates, and at the entrance of
the Israelitish camps. See the note on [Exo
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027). "If we examine and compare the
camp of Israel with that of our most numerous armies, which in these
days are composed of 100,000 or of 150,000 men, we cannot but consider
it of vast extent. The Jews say it was twelve miles in circumference;
this is not at all improbable, and consequently the front of each wing
must be three miles in extent. But taking in the tents, the soldiers and
their numerous families, the beasts of burden, the cattle, and the
goods, it certainly must have formed a very considerable enclosure, much
more than twelve miles. See the notes on [Exo
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037), and [Exo
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018) (note). Reyher (Math. Mos., p.
568) assigns to the Tribe of Judah, A space of 298 2/5 cubits in breadth
and 250 in length - Which makes 74,600 square cubits. "We must observe
that we are here merely speaking of the ground which the soldiers of
this tribe occupied whilst remaining close to each other in their ranks,
and that in this computation there is but one cubit square allowed for
each man; wherefore, if we take in the arrangement of the soldiers, the
tents, the necessary spaces, the families, the beasts of burden, and the
movables, a much larger extent of ground is requisite. All those
circumstances do not come into Reyher's calculation. He continues thus:
-

For the tribe of Issachar, 217 3/5cubits in breadth 250 in length -
Total 54,400 square cubits.

For the tribe of Gad, 140 5/11 cubits in breadth 325 in length - Total
45,650 square cubits.

For the tribe of Zebulun, 229 3/4 cubits in breadth 250 in length -
Total 57,400 square cubits.

For the tribe of Ephraim, 202 1/2 cubits in breadth 200 in length -
Total 40,500 square cubits.

For the tribe of Reuben, 143 1/5 cubits in breadth 325 in length - Total
46,500 square cubits.

For the tribe of Manasseh, 161 cubits in breadth 200 in length - Total
32,200 square cubits.

For the tribe of Simeon, 182 6/13 cubits in breadth 325 in length -
Total 59,300 square cubits.

For the tribe of Benjamin, 177 cubits in breadth 200 in length - Total
35,400 square cubits.

For the tribe of Dan, 156 3/4 cubits in breadth 400 in length - Total
62,700 square cubits.

For the tribe of Asher, 103 3/4 cubits in breadth 400 in length - Total
41,500 square cubits.

For the tribe of Naphtali, 133 1/2 cubits in breadth 400 in length -
Total 53,400 square cubits.

"If we make the ichnography, or even the scenography, of the camp on
this plan, in following it we must first, in the center, form a
parallelogram of 100 cubits long and 50 broad for the court of the
tabernacle with an empty space all round of 50 cubits broad. We must
then place the camp of the Levites in the following order: -

To the west, the Gershonites, [Num
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#022), [Num
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#023). Breadth 30 cubits Length 250
cubits - Total 7,500

To the south, the Kohathites, [Num
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#028), [Num
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#029). Breadth 86 cubits Length 100
cubits - Total 8,600

To the north, the Merarites, [Num
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#034), [Num
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#035). Breadth 62 cubits Length 100
cubits - Total 6,200

"On the east we must place tents for Moses, Aaron, and his sons, [Num
3:38](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#038).

"At the place where the camp of the Levites ends, a space must be left
of 2,000 square cubits, after which we must take the dimensions of the
camp of the twelve tribes.

"This plan is in the main well imagined, but it does not afford an
ichnography of sufficient extent. To come more accurately to a proper
understanding of this subject, I shall examine the rules that are now in
use for encampments, and compare them afterward with what is laid down
in the Holy Scriptures, in order that we may hereby form to ourselves an
idea of the camp of God, the grandeur and perfection of which surpassed
every thing of the kind ever seen. I shall now mention what I am about
to propose as the foundation upon which I shall proceed.

"In [Exo 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#021), [Deu
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#015), we find the advice given by
Jethro to Moses respecting political government and military discipline:
'Thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God,
men of truth, hating covetousness; and place such over them, to be
rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and
rulers of tens.' \[See the note on [Exo
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#021)\]. We may very well compare
these tribunes, or rather these chiliarchs, to our colonels, the
centurions or hecatontarchs to commanders or captains, the
quinquagenaries or pentecontarchs to lieutenants, and the decurions or
decarchs to our sergeants. These chiefs, whether they were named
magistrates or officers, were each drawn from his own particular tribe,
so that it was not permitted to place over one tribe an officer taken
from another. Whatever matter the decarchs could not decide upon or
terminate, went to the pentecontarchs, and from thence by degrees to the
hecatontarchs, to the chiliarchs, to Moses, and at length to God
himself, the sovereign head of the army. If we divide the whole army
(such as it was at its departure from Egypt) by the numbers already laid
down, we shall find 600 chiliarchs, 6,000 hecatontarchs, 12,000
pentecontarchs, 60,000 decarchs, which in all make 78,600 officers.
Josephus regulates the number of them still more exactly by saying that
there were chiefs set over 10,000, 1,000, 500, 50, 30, 20, and 10. We
find this regulation in Ant. Jud., b. iii., c. 4: 'Take a review of the
army, and appoint chosen rulers over tens of thousands, and then over
thousands, then divide them into five hundreds, and again into hundreds,
and into fifties, and set rulers over each of them who may distinguish
them into thirties, and keep them in order; and at last number them by
twenties and by tens, and let there be one commander over each number,
to be denominated from the number of those over whom they are rulers.'

"We ought not to pass over in silence this division by tens, for twice
10 make 20, three times 10, 30, five times 10, 50, ten times 10, 100,
ten times 50, 500, ten times 1,000, 10,000. It was in this manner, as is
pretended, that Cangu, the first of the great Khans, (as he is called),
and after him Tamerlane, drew out an army, i.e., by 10, 100, 1,000,
10,000, mentioned in Alhazen, c. v. Probably these Tartars borrowed from
the very Hebrews themselves this manner of laying out a camp. At all
events it is certain that nothing more ancient of the kind can be found
than that mentioned in the books of Moses. To distinguish it from that
of the Greeks and Romans we may with justice call it the Hebrew
castrametation, or, if we judge it more proper, the Divine
castrametation, and consequently the most perfect of all. For although
Moses places the pentecontarchs in the middle, between the hecatontarchs
and the decarchs, i.e., 50 between 100 and 10; and although Josephus
afterward places 1,000 between 500 and 10,000, and 30 and 20 between 10
and 50, this does not at all derange the progression by tens, which Is
the foundation of arithmetic. These subaltern officers were equally
useful and necessary, as we now see that their number, far from creating
confusion, helps maintain order, and that the more there are of them the
better is order preserved. According to the modern method of carrying on
war, the next in rank to the generals of the army (who have the supreme
command) are field marshals and brigadiers, who command 5,000 men.

There are then between the chiliarchs or colonels and the hecatontarchs
or captains, lieutenant-colonels; and between the hecatontarchs and the
decarchs, lieutenant-captains; and these have under them lieutenants and
ensigns. "It is certain that this method of distributing an army by
tens, and of encamping, which is very concise, has far greater
advantages even with respect to expense than the very best plans of the
Greeks, Romans, or any other ancient nation. On this subject we have the
testimony of Simon Steven, Castrametat. c. 1, art. 1, and c. 4. art. 3,
Oper. Math., p. 574 and 596, etc. According to this arrangement each
soldier, or if more proper, each father of a family, being thus placed
by ten and ten in a straight line one after the other, might very easily
name themselves first, second, etc. Each troop in like manner might be
distinguished by its ensigns, that of 100 might have them small, that of
1,000 larger, and that of 10,000 still larger. Every officer, from the
lowest subaltern to the general officers of the camp, and even to the
generalissimos themselves, had only an easy inspection of ten men each;
the decarch had the inspection of 10 soldiers, the hecatontarch of 10
decarchs, and the chiliarch of 10 hecatontarchs. After the chiliarchs,
which in no troop can amount to ten, there is the chief or head of each
tribe. Each then exactly fulfilling the duty assigned him, we may
suppose every thing to be in good order, even were the camp larger and
more numerous. The same may be said respecting the contentions that
might arise among the soldiers, as well as every thing relative to the
general duty of the officers, as to the labors they were to undertake,
whether for striking their tents for works of fortification or for
making entrenchments. This arrangement might be easily retained in the
memory, or a general list be kept of the names of both officers and
soldiers to distribute to them their pay, and to keep exact accounts.
"It was possible in one moment to know the number of those who were
either wanting or were out of their ranks, and to avoid this disorder in
future by obliging each man to attend to his duty and keep in his rank.
If by chance it happened that any one man wished to desert or had
escaped, it was easy to notice him and inflict on him the punishment he
merited. The ensigns being distinguished by their marks, and the company
being known, it was easy to find any soldier whatever. "The armies
themselves might have certain marks to distinguish them, and by that
means they might at once ascertain the person in question; for example:
8. 2. 7. 3. might signify the eighth soldier or father of a family, of
the second rank, of the seventh company, in the third chiliad; 7. 3. 5.
the halberdier of the decurion or sergeant of the seventh line, in the
third company, of the fifth chiliad or thousand; 5. 8. the hecatontarchs
or captains of the fifth company, in the eighth chiliad; 7. the
chiliarchs or colonels of the seventh rank; 0. finally, the general of
the whole army. Farther, by the same means the loss or misplacing of
their arms might be prevented. Again, the soldiers might in a very short
time be instructed and formed to the exercise of arms, each decad having
its sergeant for its master; and the chariots or other carriages might
easily be divided amongst several, 10 under the decurion, 100 under the
hecatontarch; and by thus following the above method, every thing might
be kept in good order.

A Plan of the Whole Israelitish Camp

"We shall finally, in one plate, represent the whole camp of the
Israelites, in that order which appears the most proper. For this
purpose we must extract the square roots of the preceding spaces, in
order that we may be able to assign to each tribe square areas, or
rectangular parallelograms. I therefore find for

Tribe Square Cubits Reuben 3049 Simeon 3443 The Gershonites 1224 The
Kohathites 1311 The Merarites 1113 Judah 3862 Issachar 3298 Zebulun 3388
Gad 3019 Asher 2880 Manasseh 2537 Ephraim 2846 Benjamin 2660 Dan 3541
Naphtali 3268

"The tabernacle, which was 100 cubits long and 50 broad, I place in the
center of the camp, at the distance of 840 feet from the camp of the
Levites, which is placed exactly in the same manner as described in the
sacred writings. I find therefore that the whole space of the camp is
259,600,000 feet. Now, according to the manner we have just divided the
camp for each tribe, the sum total being 125,210,000, it follows that
the space between the tents contained 134,390,000. If, with Eisenschmid,
we estimate the Roman mile at 766 French fathoms and two feet,
(consequently 21,141,604 square feet to a Roman square mile), the
Israelitish camp will contain a little more than 12 such square miles."
The reader will have the goodness to observe that the preceding
observations, as well as the following plate or diagram, which was made
by Scheuchzer on the exactest proportions, could not be accurately
copied here without an engraved plate; and after all, the common reader
could have profited no more by the plate than he can by the diagram. It
is not even hoped that disquisitions of this kind can give any thing
more than a general idea how the thing probably was; for to pretend to
minute exactness, in such cases, would be absurd. The sacred text
informs us that such and such tribes occupied the east, such the west,
etc., etc.; but how they were arranged individually we cannot pretend
absolutely to say. Scheuchzer's plan is such as we may suppose judgment
and skill would lay down; but still it is very probable that the plan of
the Israelites' castrametation was more perfect than any thing we can
well imagine; for as it was the plan which probably God himself laid
down, it must be in every respect what it ought to be, for the comfort
and safety of this numerous multitude. As there are some differences
between the mode of distributing the command of a large army among the
British, and that used on the continent, which is followed by
Scheuchzer, I shall lay down the descending scale of British commanders,
which some may think applies better to the preceding arrangement of the
Israelitish army than the other. The command of a large army in the
British service is thus divided: -

1\. The Commander-in-chief.

2\. Lieutenant-generals, who command divisions of the army: (these
divisions consist of 2 or 3 brigades each, which, on an average, amount
to 5,000 men).

3\. Major-generals, who command brigades: (these brigades consist of
from 2 to 3,000 men \[2,500 is perhaps the average\] according to the
strength of the respective regiments of which the brigade is composed).

4\. Colonels in the army, or lieutenant-colonels, who command single
regiments; they are assisted in the command of these regiments by the
majors of the regiments. \[I mention the major, that there may be no
break in the descending scale of gradation of ranks, as in the event of
the absence of the above two officers, he is the next in command\].

5\. Captains who command companies: these companies (on the war
establishment) consist of 100 men each, and there are 10 companies in
every regiment, consequently a colonel, or lieutenant-colonel, commands
1,000 men.

6\. Lieutenants, of which there are 2 to every company

7\. Ensign; 1 to each company.

The Lietuenants and ensigns are subaltern officers, having no command,
but assisting the captain.

1\. Commander-in-chief2. Lieutenant-generals commanding divisions of
5,000 each3. Major-generals, brigades 2,500. }} These are called general
officers. 4. Colonels, lieutenant-colonels, and majors; }} Three
officers belonging to each regiment in the service, and are solely
employed in the disciplining and commanding the men; these are mounted
on horseback, and termed field-officers. 5. 1 Captain 6. 2 Lieutenants7.
1 Ensign }} to each company

Ascending scale of ranks which every officer must pass through.

EnsignLieutenantCaptainMajorLieutenant-colonelColonel }} to every
regiment Major-general, brigade-commander. Lieutenant-general,
division-commander. General-in-chief, who commands the whole army
Diagram of the Israelitish Camp

Though I particularly refer the reader to the above diagram (see
Scheuchzer's plate \#1) of the Israelitish camp, taken from Scheuchzer's
plate, which I have thought necessary to be subjoined to his
description, yet I think it also proper to introduce that on the next
page (see Scheuchzer's plate \#2), as it gives a general and tolerably
correct idea of this immense camp, in the description of which the
inspired writer has been so very particular; but still I must say these
things are to be considered as probably, not as absolutely certain; as
comprising a general view of what may be supposed probably, likely, and
practicable.

The whole may be said to consist of three camps, viz.,

1\. The camp of the Lord;

2\. The camp of the Levites; and

3\. The camp of the people.

These in the grand camp in the wilderness, corresponded with the holy of
holies, the holy place, and the outward court of the Temple at
Jerusalem. See Ainsworth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 3](num003)

</div>
