<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2)  
  [Previous](pe2001)  [Next](pe2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)

[2 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe2 2:0</span></span>

False teachers foretold, who shall bring in destructive doctrines and
shall pervert many, but at last be destroyed by the judgments of God,
[Pe2 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001). Instances of God's
judgments in the rebellious angels, [Pe2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004). In the antediluvians, [Pe2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005). In the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrha, [Pe2 2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#006). The Lord knoweth
how to deliver the godly, as well as to punish the ungodly, [Pe2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009). The character of those seducing
teachers and their disciples; they are unclean, presumptuous, speak evil
of dignities, adulterous, covetous, and cursed, [Pe2
2:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010). Have forsaken the right way,
copy the conduct of Balaam, speak great swelling words, and pervert
those who had escaped from error, [Pe2
2:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#015). The miserable state of those
who, having escaped the corruption that is in the world, have turned
back like the dog to his vomit, and the washed swine to her wallowing in
the mire, [Pe2 2:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#020).

[2 Peter 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 2:1</span></span>

But there were false prophets - There were not only holy men of God
among the Jews, who prophesied by Divine inspiration, but there were
also false prophets, whose prophecies were from their own imagination,
and perverted many.

As there shall be false teachers among you - At a very early period of
the Christian Church many heresies sprung up; but the chief were those
of the Ebionites, Cerinthians, Nicolaitans, Menandrians, and Gnostics,
of whom many strange things have been spoken by the primitive fathers,
and of whose opinions it is difficult to form any satisfactory view.
They were, no doubt, bad enough, and their opponents in general have
doubtless made them worse. By what name those were called of whom the
apostle here speaks, we cannot tell. They were probably some sort of
apostate Jews, or those called the Nicolaitans. See the preface.

Damnable heresies - Αἱρεσεις απωλειας· Heresies of destruction; such as,
if followed, would lead a man to perdition. And these παρεισαξουσιν,
they will bring in privately - cunningly, without making much noise, and
as covertly as possible. It would be better to translate destructive
heresies than damnable.

Denying the Lord that bought them - It is not certain whether God the
Father be intended here, or our Lord Jesus Christ; for God is said to
have purchased the Israelites, [Exo
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#016), and to be the Father that had
bought them, [Deu 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006), and the words
may refer to these or such like passages; or they may point out Jesus
Christ, who had bought them with his blood; and the heresies, or
dangerous opinions, may mean such as opposed the Divinity of our Lord,
or his meritorious and sacrificial death, or such opinions as bring upon
those who hold them swift destruction. It seems, however, more natural
to understand the Lord that bought them as applying to Christ, than
otherwise; and if so, this is another proof, among many,

1\. That none can be saved but by Jesus Christ.

2\. That through their own wickedness some may perish for whom Christ
died.

[2 Peter 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe2 2:2</span></span>

Many shall follow - Will follow, because determined to gratify their
sinful propensities.

Pernicious ways - Ταις απωλειαις· Their destructions; i.e. the heresies
of destruction, or destructive opinions, mentioned above. But instead of
απωλειαις, destructions, ασελγειαις, lasciviousnesses or uncleannesses,
is the reading of ABC, and upwards of sixty others, most of which are
among the most ancient, correct, and authentic. This is the reading also
of both the Syriac, all the Arabic, the Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian,
Slavonic, Vulgate, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Ecumenius, and Jerome. A
very few, and those of little repute, have the word in the text.

The word lasciviousnesses is undoubtedly the true reading, and this
points out what the nature of the heresies was: it was a sort of
Antinomianism; they pampered and indulged the lusts of the flesh; and,
if the Nicolaitans are meant, it is very applicable to them, for they
taught the community of wives, etc. Griesbach has received this reading
into the text.

By reason of whom - These were persons who professed Christianity; and
because they were called Christians, and followed such abominable
practices, the way of truth - the Christian religion, βλασφημηθησεται,
was blasphemed. Had they called themselves by any name but that of
Christ, his religion would not have suffered.

[2 Peter 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe2 2:3</span></span>

And through covetousness - That they might get money to spend upon their
lusts, with feigned words, πλαστοις λογοις, with counterfeit tales,
false narrations, of pretended facts, lying miracles, fabulous legends.
"In this single sentence," says Dr. Macknight, "there is a clear
prediction of the iniquitous practices of those great merchants of
souls, the Romish clergy, who have rated all crimes, even the most
atrocious, at a fixed price; so that if their doctrine be true, whoever
pays the price may commit the crime without hazarding his salvation."
How the popish Church has made merchandise of souls, needs no particular
explanation here. It was this abominable doctrine that showed to some,
then in that Church, the absolute necessity of a reformation.

Whose judgment now of a long time - From the beginning God has condemned
sin, and inflicted suitable punishments on transgressors; and has
promised in his word, from the earliest ages, to pour out his
indignation on the wicked. The punishment, therefore, so long ago
predicted, shall fall on these impure and incorrigible sinners; and the
condemnation which is denounced against them slumbers not - it is alert,
it is on its way, it is hurrying on, and must soon overtake them.

[2 Peter 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe2 2:4</span></span>

For if God spared not the angels - The angels were originally placed in
a state of probation; some having fallen and some having stood proves
this. How long that probation was to last to them, and what was the
particular test of their fidelity, we know not; nor indeed do we know
what was their sin; nor when nor how they fell. St. Jude says they kept
not their first estate, but left their own habitation; which seems to
indicate that they got discontented with their lot, and aspired to
higher honors, or perhaps to celestial domination. The tradition of
their fall is in all countries and in all religions, but the accounts
given are various and contradictory; and no wonder, for we have no
direct revelation on the subject. They kept not their first estate, and
they sinned, is the sum of what we know on the subject; and here
curiosity and conjecture are useless.

But cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness -
Αλλα σειραις ζοφου ταρταρωσας παρεδωκεν εις κρισιν τετηρημενους· But
with chains of darkness confining them in Tartarus, delivered them over
to be kept to judgment; or, sinking them into Tartarus, delivered them
over into custody for punishment, to chains of darkness. Chains of
darkness is a highly poetic expression. Darkness binds them on all
hands; and so dense and strong is this darkness that it cannot be broken
through; they cannot deliver themselves, nor be delivered by others.

As the word Tartarus is found nowhere else in the New Testament, nor
does it appear in the Septuagint, we must have recourse to the Greek
writers for its meaning. Mr. Parkhurst, under the word ταρταροω, has
made some good collections from those writers, which I here subjoin.

"The Scholiast on Aeschylus, Eumen., says: Pindar relates that Apollo
overcame the Python by force; wherefore the earth endeavored ταρταρωσαι,
to cast him into Tartarus. Tzetzes uses the same word, ταρταροω, for
casting or sending into Tartarus; and the compound verb καταταρταρουν,
is found in Apollodorus; in Didymus' Scholia on Homer; in Phurnutus, De
Nat, Deor., p. 11, edit. Gale; and in the book Περι Ποταμων, which is
extant among the works of Plutarch. And those whom Apollodorus styles
καταταρταρωθεντας, he in the same breath calls ῥιφθεντας εις Ταρταρον,
cast into Tartarus. Thus the learned Windet, in Pole's Synopsis. We may
then, I think, safely assert that ταρταρωσας, in St. Peter, means not,
as Mede (Works, fol., p. 23) interprets it, to adjudge to, but to cast
into, Tartarus; ῥιπτειν εις Ταρταρον, as in Homer, cited below. And in
order to know what was the precise intention of the apostle by this
expression, we must inquire what is the accurate import of the term
Ταρταρος. Now, it appears from a passage of Lucian, that by Ταρταρος was
meant, in a physical sense, the bounds or verge of this material system;
for, addressing himself to ΕΡΩΣ, Cupid or Love, he says: Συ γαρ εξ
αφανους και κεχυμενης αμορφιας ΤΟ ΠΑΝ εμορφωσας, κ. τ. λ. 'Thou formedst
the universe from its confused and chaotic state; and, after separating
and dispersing the circumfused chaos, in which, as in one common
sepulchre, the whole world lay buried, thou drovest it to the confines
or recesses of outer Tartarus -

'Where iron gates and bars of solid brass

Keep it in durance irrefrangible,

And its return prohibit.'

"The ancient Greeks appear to have received, by tradition, an account of
the punishment of the 'fallen angels,' and of bad men after death; and
their poets did, in conformity I presume with that account, make
Tartarus the place where the giants who rebelled against Jupiter, and
the souls of the wicked, were confined. 'Here,' saith Hesiod, Theogon.,
lin. 720, 1, 'the rebellious Titans were bound in penal chains.'

Τοσσον ενερθ' ὑπο γης, ὁσον ουρανος εστ'απο γαιης.

Ισον γαρ τ' απο γης ες ΤΑΡΤΑΡΟΝ ηεροεντα.

'As far beneath the earth as earth from heaven;

For such the distance thence to Tartarus.'

Which description will very well agree with the proper sense of
Tartarus, if we take the earth for the center of the material system,
and reckon from our zenith, or the extremity of the heavens that is over
our heads. But as the Greeks imagined the earth to be of a boundless
depth, so it must not be dissembled that their poets speak of Tartarus
as a vast pit or gulf in the bowels of it. Thus Hesiod in the same poem,
lin. 119, calls it -

ΤΑΡΤΑΡΑ τ' ηεροεντα μυχῳ χθονος ευρυοδειης·

'Black Tartarus, within earth's spacious womb.'

"And Homer, Iliad viii., lin. 13, etc., introduces Jupiter threatening
any of the gods who should presume to assist either the Greeks or the
Trojans, that he should either come back wounded to heaven, or be sent
to Tartarus.

Η μιν ἑλων ῥιψω ες ΤΑΡΤΑΡΟΝ ηεροεντα,

Τηλε μαλ', ἡχι βαθιστον ὑπο χθονος εστι βερεθρον,

Ενθα σιδηρειαι τε πυλαι, και χαλκεος ουδος,

Τοσσον ενερθ' αιδεω, ὁσον ονρανος εστ' απο γαιης.

'Or far, O far, from steep Olympus thrown,

Low in the deep Tartarean gulf shall groan.

That gulf which iron gates and brazen ground

Within the earth inexorably bound;

As deep beneath th' infernal center hurl'd,

As from that center to the ethereal world.'

Pope.

'Where, according to Homer's description, Iliad viii., lin. 480, 1, -

\- - Ουτ' αυγης ὑπεριονος ηελιοιο

Τερποντ', ουτ' ανεμοισι· βαθυς δε τε ΤΑΡΤΑΡΟΣ αμφις.

'No sun e'er gilds the gloomy horrors there,

No cheerful gales refresh the lazy air,

But murky Tartarus extends around.'

Pope.

"Or, in the language of the old Latin poet, (cited by Cicero, Tuscul.,
lib. i. cap. 15),

Ubi rigida constat crassa caligo inferum.

"On the whole, then, ταρταρουν, in St. Peter, is the same as ῥιπτειν ες
Ταρταρον, to throw into Tartarus, in Homer, only rectifying the poet's
mistake of Tartarus being in the bowels of the earth, and recurring to
the original sense of that word above explained, which when applied to
spirits must be interpreted spiritually; and thus ταρταρωσας will import
that God cast the apostate angels out of his presence into that ζοφος
του σκοτους, blackness of darkness, ([Pe2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017); [Jde
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#013)), where they will be for ever
banished from the light of his countenance, and from the beatifying
influence of the ever blessed Three, as truly as a person plunged into
the torpid boundary of this created system would be from the light of
the sun and the benign operations of the material heavens." By chains of
darkness we are to understand a place of darkness and wretchedness, from
which it is impossible for them to escape.

[2 Peter 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe2 2:5</span></span>

Spared not the old world - The apostle's argument is this: If God spared
not the rebellious angels, nor the sinful antediluvians, nor the cities
of Sodom and Gomorrha, he will not spare those wicked teachers who
corrupt the pure doctrines of Christianity.

Saved Noah the eighth - Some think that the words should be translated,
Noah the eighth preacher of righteousness; but it seems most evident,
from [Pe1 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020), that eight persons are
here meant, which were the whole that were saved in the ark, viz. Shem,
Ham, Japhet, and their three wives, six; Noah's wife seven; and Noah
himself the eighth. The form of expression, ογδοον Νωε, Noah the eighth,
i.e. Noah and seven more, is most common in the Greek language. So in
Appian, Bell. Pun., p. 12, Τριτος δε ποτε εν σπηλαιῳ κρυπτομενος ελαθε,
sometimes he the third (i.e. he with two others) lay hid in a cave.
Andocides, Orat. iv. p. 295: Αἱρεθεις επι τουτῳ δεκατος αυτος, he
himself the tenth (i.e. he and nine others) were chosen to this. See a
number of other examples in Kypke.

World of the ungodly - A whole race without God - without any pure
worship or rational religion.

[2 Peter 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe2 2:6</span></span>

The cities of Sodom and Gomorrha - See the notes on Genesis 19 (note),
for an account of the sin and punishment of these cities.

Making them an ensample - These three words, ὑποδειγμα, παραδειγμα, and
δειγμα, are used to express the same idea; though the former may signify
an example to be shunned, the second an example to be followed, and the
third a simple exhibition. But these differences are not always
observed.

[2 Peter 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe2 2:7</span></span>

Vexed with the filthy conversation - Καταπονουμενον ὑπο της των αθεσμων
εν ασελγεια αναστροφης· Being exceedingly pained with the unclean
conduct of those lawless persons. What this was, see in the history,
Genesis 19., and the notes there.

[2 Peter 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe2 2:8</span></span>

That righteous man dwelling among them - Lot, after his departure from
Abraham, A. M. 2086, lived at Sodom till A. M. 2107, a space of about
twenty years; and, as he had a righteous soul, he must have been
tormented with the abominations of that people from day to day.

The word εβασανιζεν, tormented, is not less emphatic than the word
καταπονουμενον, grievously pained, in the preceding verse, and shows
what this man must have felt in dwelling so long among a people so
abandoned.

[2 Peter 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe2 2:9</span></span>

The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly - The preservation and
deliverance of Lot gave the apostle occasion to remark, that God knew as
well to save as to destroy; and that his goodness led him as forcibly to
save righteous Lot, as his justice did to destroy the rebellious in the
instances already adduced. And the design of the apostle in producing
these examples is to show to the people to whom he was writing that,
although God would destroy those false teachers, yet he would powerfully
save his faithful servants from their contagion and from their
destruction. We should carefully observe,

1\. That the godly man is not to be preserved from temptation.

2\. That he will be preserved in temptation.

3\. That he will be delivered out of it.

[2 Peter 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe2 2:10</span></span>

But chiefly them that walk - That is, God will in the most signal manner
punish them that walk after the flesh - addict themselves to sodomitical
practices, and the lust of pollution; probably alluding to those most
abominable practices where men abuse themselves and abuse one another.

Despise government - They brave the power and authority of the civil
magistrate, practising their abominations so as to keep out of the reach
of the letter of the law; and they speak evil of dignities - they
blaspheme civil government, they abhor the restraints laid upon men by
the laws, and would wish all governments destroyed that they might live
as they list.

Presumptuous are they - Τολμηται· They are bold and daring, headstrong,
regardless of fear.

Self-willed - Αυθαδεις· Self-sufficient; presuming on themselves;
following their own opinions, which no authority can induce them to
relinquish.

Are not afraid to speak evil of dignities - They are lawless and
disobedient, spurn all human authority, and speak contemptuously of all
legal and civil jurisdiction. Those in general despise governments, and
speak evil of dignities, who wish to be under no control, that they may
act as freebooters in the community.

[2 Peter 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe2 2:11</span></span>

Whereas angels, etc. - This is a difficult verse, but the meaning seems
to be this: The holy angels, who are represented as bringing an account
of the actions of the fallen angels before the Lord in judgment, simply
state the facts without exaggeration, and without permitting any thing
of a bitter, reviling, or railing spirit, to enter into their
accusations. See [Zac 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001), and [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009); to the former of which St. Peter
evidently alludes. But these persons, not only speak of the actions of
men which they conceive to be wrong, but do it with untrue colourings,
and the greatest malevolence. Michael, the archangel, treated a damned
spirit with courtesy; he only said, The Lord rebuke thee, Satan! but
these treat the rulers of God's appointment with disrespect and calumny.

Before the Lord - Παρα Κυριῳ is wanting in a number of MSS. and most of
the versions.

[2 Peter 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 2:12</span></span>

But these, as natural brute beasts - 'Ὡς αλογα ζωα φυσικα· As those
natural animals void of reason, following only the gross instinct of
nature, being governed neither by reason nor religion.

Made to be taken and destroyed - Intended to be taken with nets and
gins, and then destroyed, because of their fierce and destructive
nature; so these false teachers and insurgents must be treated; first
incarcerated, and then brought to judgment, that they may have the
reward of their doings. And thus, by blaspheming what they do not
understand, they at last perish in their own corruption; i.e. their
corrupt doctrines and vicious practices.

[2 Peter 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe2 2:13</span></span>

They that count it pleasure to riot in the day time - Most sinners, in
order to practice their abominable pleasures, seek the secrecy of the
night; but these, bidding defiance to all decorum, decency, and shame,
take the open day, and thus proclaim their impurities to the sun.

Spots - and blemishes - They are a disgrace to the Christian name.

Sporting themselves - Forming opinions which give license to sin, and
then acting on those opinions; and thus rioting in their own deceits.

With their own deceivings - Εν ταις απαταις. But instead of this, AB,
and almost all the versions and several of the fathers, have εν ταις
αγαπαις, in your love feasts, which is probably the true reading.

While they feast with you - It appears they held a kind of communion
with the Church, and attended sacred festivals, which they desecrated
with their own unhallowed opinions and conduct.

[2 Peter 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe2 2:14</span></span>

Having eyes full of adultery - Μοιχαλιδος· Of an adulteress; being ever
bent on the gratification of their sensual desires, so that they are
represented as having an adulteress constantly before their eyes, and
that their eyes can take in no other object but her. But instead of
μοιχαλιδος of an adulteress, the Codex Alexandrinus, three others, with
the Coptic, Vulgate, and one copy of the Itala, together with several of
the fathers, have μοιχαλιας, of adultery.

Cannot cease from sin - Which cease not from sin; they might cease from
sin, but they do not; they love and practice it. Instead of
ακαταπαυστους, which cannot cease, several MSS. and versions have
ακαταπαυστου, and this requires the place to be read, Having eyes full
of adultery and incessant sin. The images of sinful acts were
continually floating before their disordered and impure fancy. This
figure of speech is very common in the Greek writers; and Kypke gives
many instances of it, which indeed carry the image too far to be here
translated.

Beguiling unstable souls - The metaphor is taken from adulterers
seducing unwary, inexperienced, and light, trifling women; so do those
false teachers seduce those who are not established in righteousness.

Exercised with covetous practices - The metaphor is taken from the
agonistae in the Grecian games, who exercised themselves in those feats,
such as wrestling, boxing, running, etc., in which they proposed to
contend in the public games. These persons had their hearts schooled in
nefarious practices; they had exercised themselves till they were
perfectly expert in all the arts of seduction, overreaching, and every
kind of fraud.

Cursed children - Such not only live under God's curse here, but they
are heirs to it hereafter.

[2 Peter 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe2 2:15</span></span>

Which have forsaken the right way - As Balaam did, who, although God
showed him the right way, took one contrary to it, preferring the reward
offered him by Balak to the approbation and blessing of God.

The way of Balaam - Is the counsel of Balaam. He counselled the Moabites
to give their most beautiful young women to the Israelitish youth, that
they might be enticed by them to commit idolatry. See the notes on [Num
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#005), etc., and [Num
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#001) (note), etc.

The son of Bosor - Instead of Βοσορ, Bosor two ancient MSS. and some of
the versions have Βεωρ, Beor, to accommodate the word to the Hebrew text
and the Septuagint. The difference in this name seems to have arisen
from mistaking one letter for another in the Hebrew name, בעור Beor, for
בצור Betsor or Bosor; tsaddi צ and ain ע, which are very like each
other, being interchanged.

[2 Peter 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe2 2:16</span></span>

The dumb ass, speaking with man's voice - See the note on [Num
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#028).

The madness of the prophet - Is not this a reference to the speech of
the ass, as represented in the Targums of Jonathan ben Uzziel and
Jerusalem? "Wo to thee, Balaam, thou sinner, thou madman: there is no
wisdom found in thee." These words contain nearly the same expressions
as those in St. Peter.

[2 Peter 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe2 2:17</span></span>

These are wells without water - Persons who, by their profession, should
furnish the water of life to souls athirst for salvation; but they have
not this water; they are teachers without ability to instruct; they are
sowers, and have no seed in their basket. Nothing is more cheering in
the deserts of the east than to meet with a well of water; and nothing
more distressing, when parched with thirst, than to meet with a well
that contains no water.

Clouds that are carried with a tempest - In a time of great drought, to
see clouds beginning to cover the face of the heavens raises the
expectation of rain; but to see these carried off by a sudden tempest is
a dreary disappointment. These false teachers were equally as
unprofitable as the empty well, or the light, dissipated cloud.

To whom the mist of darkness is reserved - That is, an eternal
separation from the presence of God, and the glory of his power. They
shall be thrust into outer darkness, [Mat
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012); into the utmost degrees of
misery and despair. False and corrupt teachers will be sent into the
lowest hell; and be "the most downcast, underfoot vassals of perdition."

It is scarcely necessary to notice a various reading here, which, though
very different in sound, is nearly the same in sense. Instead of
νεφελαι, clouds, which is the common reading, και ὁμιχλαι, and mists, or
perhaps more properly thick darkness, from ὁμου, together, and αχλυς,
darkness, is the reading in ABC, sixteen others, Erpen's Arabic, later
Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic, and Vulgate, and several of the fathers. This
reading Griesbach has admitted into the text.

[2 Peter 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe2 2:18</span></span>

They speak great swelling words of vanity - The word ὑπερογκα signifies
things of great magnitude, grand, superb, sublime; it sometimes
signifies inflated, tumid, bombastic. These false teachers spoke of
great and high things, and no doubt promised their disciples the
greatest privileges, as they themselves pretended to a high degree of
illumination; but they were all false and vain, though they tickled the
fancy and excited the desires of the flesh; and indeed this appears to
have been their object. And hence some think that the impure sect of the
Nicolaitans is meant. See the preface.

Those that were clean escaped - Those who, through hearing the doctrines
of the Gospel, had been converted, were perverted by those false
teachers.

[2 Peter 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe2 2:19</span></span>

While they promise them liberty - Either to live in the highest degrees
of spiritual good, or a freedom from the Roman yoke; or from the yoke of
the law, or what they might term needless restraints. Their own conduct
showed the falsity of their system; for they were slaves to every
disgraceful lust.

For of whom a man is overcome - This is an allusion to the ancient
custom of selling for slaves those whom they had conquered and
captivated in war. The ancient law was, that a man might either kill him
whom he overcame in battle, or keep him for a slave. These were called
servi, slaves, from the verb servare, to keep or preserve. And they were
also called mancipia, from manu capiuntur, they are taken captive by the
hand of their enemy. Thus the person who is overcome by his lusts is
represented as being the slave of those lusts. See [Rom
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016), and the note there.

[2 Peter 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe2 2:20</span></span>

The pollutions of the world - Sin in general, and particularly
superstition, idolatry, and lasciviousness. These are called μιασματα,
miasmata, things that infect, pollute, and defile. The word was
anciently used, and is in use at the present day, to express those
noxious particles of effluvia proceeding from persons infected with
contagious and dangerous diseases; or from dead and corrupt bodies,
stagnant and putrid waters, marshes etc., by which the sound and healthy
may be infected and destroyed. The world is here represented as one
large, putrid marsh, or corrupt body, sending off its destructive
miasmata everywhere and in every direction, so that none can escape its
contagion, and none can be healed of the great epidemic disease of sin,
but by the mighty power and skill of God. St. Augustine has improved on
this image: "The whole world," says he, "is one great diseased man,
lying extended from east to west, and from north to south; and to heal
this great sick man, the almighty Physician descended from heaven." Now,
it is by the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as says St.
Peter, that we escape the destructive influence of these contagious
miasmata. But if, after having been healed, and escaped the death to
which we were exposed, we get again entangled, εμπλακεντες, enfolded,
enveloped with them; then the latter end will be worse than the
beginning: forasmuch as we shall have sinned against more light, and the
soul, by its conversion to God, having had all its powers and faculties
greatly improved, is now, being repolluted, more capable of iniquity
than before, and can bear more expressively the image of the earthly.

[2 Peter 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe2 2:21</span></span>

For it had been better for them not to have known - For the reasons
assigned above; because they have sinned against more mercy, are capable
of more sin, and are liable to greater punishment.

The holy commandment - The whole religion of Christ is contained in this
one commandment, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy strength; and thy
neighbor as thyself." He who obeys this great commandment, and this by
the grace of Christ is possible to every man, is saved from sinning
either against his God or against his neighbor. Nothing less than this
does the religion of Christ require.

[2 Peter 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pe2 2:22</span></span>

According to the true proverb - This seems to be a reference to [Pro
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#011) : ככלב שב אל קאו kekeleb shab al
keo; as the dog returneth to his vomit, so a fool repeateth his folly.
In substance this proverb is found among the rabbins; so Midrash Ruth,
in Sohar Chadash, fol. 62: Orphah is returned to her mire, Ruth
persevered in spirit; and again, Ibid. fol. 64: "Orphah, which is נפש
הבהמית nephesh habbehemith, the bestial soul, is returned to her mire."

The Greeks have something like it; so Arrian, Dissert. Epict. l. iv. c.
11, says: Απελθε και χοιρῳ διαλεγου, ἱν' εν βορβορῳ μη κυλιηται, "Go and
reason with the swine, lest he be rolled in the mire." This is called a
true proverb: for it is a fact that a dog will eat up his own vomit; and
the swine, howsoever carefully washed, will again wallow in the mire. As
applied here it is very expressive: the poor sinner, having heard the
Gospel of Christ, was led to loathe and reject his sin; and, on his
application to God for mercy, was washed from his unrighteousness. But
he is here represented as taking up again what he had before rejected,
and defiling himself in that from which he had been cleansed.

Here is a sad proof of the possibility of falling from grace, and from
very high degrees of it too. These had escaped from the contagion that
was in the world; they had had true repentance, and cast up "their
soursweet morsel of sin;" they had been washed from all their
filthiness, and this must have been through the blood of the Lamb; yet,
after all, they went back, got entangled with their old sins, swallowed
down their formerly rejected lusts, and rewallowed in the mire of
corruption. It is no wonder that God should say, the latter end is worse
with them than the beginning: reason and nature say it must be so; and
Divine justice says it ought to be so; and the person himself must
confess that it is right that it should be so. But how dreadful is this
state! How dangerous when the person has abandoned himself to his old
sins! Yet it is not said that it is impossible for him to return to his
Maker; though his case be deplorable, it is not utterly hopeless; the
leper may yet be made clean, and the dead may be raised. Reader, is thy
backsliding a grief and burden to thee? Then thou art not far from the
kingdom of God; believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shalt be saved.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 3](pe2003)

</div>
