<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philemon Index](plm)  
  [Previous](tit003)  [Next](plm001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philemon Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001)

[Philemon](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">plm 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to Philemon

It may be thought strange that a short letter, written entirely on a
private subject, without reference to the proof or defense of any
doctrine of the Gospel, should, by the general consent of the Church of
God, from the highest Christian antiquity, have been received into the
sacred canon, not only as a genuine production of St. Paul, but as a
piece designed by the Holy Spirit for the edification of the Church.
However, such is the fact; and we may add, that this very piece was held
so sacred that even the ancient heretics did not attempt to impugn its
authenticity or corrupt its matter, while making dangerously free with
the four gospels, and all the other epistles!

Philemon, the person to whom it is addressed, was undoubtedly, at the
time in which this epistle was sent, an inhabitant of Colosse,
(concerning which city, see the preface to the Epistle to the
Colossians), and was probably a Colossian by birth, though some suppose
that he was of Ephesus. It is evident, from [Plm
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#019) of this epistle, that he was
converted to the Christian faith by St. Paul; this is agreed on all
hands; but as some suppose that the apostle had not visited Colosse
previously to the writing of this epistle, they think it probable that
he might have met with him at Ephesus, or in same other part of Asia
Minor, where he formed an acquaintance with him, and became the means of
his conversion. But there is no need for this supposition, as it is most
probable that the apostle had not only visited Colosse prior to this,
but that the Gospel was planted in that city, as in all other parts of
Phrygia, by himself. See the preface to the Colossians, and the note on
[Col 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001).

That Philemon was a person of some consideration in his own city, and in
the Church in that place, is very evident from this epistle. He had a
Church in his house, [Plm 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#002), and was
so opulent as to be extensive in works of charity, and in entertaining
those Christians who from different quarters had occasion to visit
Colosse. See [Plm 1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#005).

Whether he had any office in the Church is not clear: some think he was
a bishop, others an elder or deacon; but of this there is no evidence.
He was probably no more than a private member, whose house, hand, and
property were consecrated to God, his Church, and the poor. He who, by
the good providence of God, has property and influence thus to employ,
and a heart to do it, need not envy the state of the highest
ecclesiastic in the Church of Christ. Both the heart and the means to do
secular good are possessed by few, whereas multitudes are found willing
both to teach in and govern the Church.

The occasion of writing this letter was the following: Onesimus, a
slave, had on some pretense or other run away from his master Philemon,
and had come to Rome, where St. Paul was at that time in prison, though
not in close confinement, for he dwelt in his own hired house, in which
he assiduously preached the Gospel, being guarded only by one soldier.
See [Act 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#016), [Act
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#023).

It appears that Onesimus sought out Paul, whose public preaching, both
to Jews and Gentiles, had rendered him famous in the city; and it is
very likely that he was led to visit the apostle from having formerly
seen him at his master's house in Colosse, and the word of life,
preached by the apostle, became the means of his conversion. Being thus
brought back to God, he became affectionately attached to his spiritual
father, and served him zealously as his son in the Gospel. Onesimus,
being thus brought to the acknowledgment of the truth which is according
to godliness, gave the apostle a full account of his elopement from his
master, and no doubt intimated his wish to return and repair the breach
which he had made.

Though he was now both dear and necessary to St. Paul, yet, as justice
required that reparation should be made, he resolved to send him back;
and to remove all suspicion from the mind of Philemon, and to reconcile
him to his once unfaithful servant, he wrote the following letter, in
which, as Dr. Macknight expresses it, "with the greatest softness of
expression, warmth of affection, and delicacy of address, he not only
interceded for Onesimus's pardon, but urged Philemon to esteem him, and
put confidence in him as a sincere Christian; and because restitution,
by repairing the injury that had been done, restores the person who did
it to the character he had lost, the apostle, to enable Onesimus to
appear in Philemon's family with some degree of reputation, bound
himself in this epistle, by his handwriting, [Plm
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#018), [Plm
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#019), not only to repay all that
Onesimus owed to Philemon, but to make full reparation also for whatever
injury he had done to him by running away." It is generally thought that
Onesimus had robbed his master; but there is certainly nothing in the
epistle from which this can be legitimately inferred; the words, "If he
hath wronged thee, or oweth thee aught, put that on mine account," [Plm
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#018), certainly do not prove it; they
only state a possible case, that he might have wronged his master, or
have been under some pecuniary obligation to him; and the apostle, by
appearing to assume this, greatly strengthened his own argument, and met
the last objection which Philemon could be supposed capable of making.
There is neither justice nor piety in making things worse than they
appear to be, or in drawing the most unfavourable conclusions from
premises which, without constraint, will afford others more consonant to
the spirit of charity.

That this epistle was written about the same time with those to the
Philippians and Colossians is proved by several coincidences. "As the
letter to Philemon and that to the Colossians were written," says Dr.
Paley, "at the same time, and sent by the same messenger, the one to a
particular inhabitant, the other to the Church of Colosse, it may be
expected that the same or nearly the same persons would be about St.
Paul, and join with him, as was the practice, in the salutations of the
epistle. Accordingly we find the names of Aristarchus, Marcus, Epaphras,
Luke, and Demas, in both epistles. Timothy, who is joined with St. Paul
in the superscription of the Epistle to the Colossians, is joined with
him in this. Tychicus did not salute Philemon because he accompanied the
epistle to Colosse, and would undoubtedly there see him." It will not be
forgotten that Onesimus, the bearer of this epistle, was one of the
bearers of that sent to the Colossians, [Col
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#009); that when the apostle wrote that
he was in bonds, [Col 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003), [Col
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#018), which was his case also when he
wrote this; (see [Plm 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001), [Plm
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#010), [Plm
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#013), [Plm
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#023)); from which, and various other
circumstances, we may conclude that they were written about the same
time, viz. the ninth year of Nero, a.d. 62. Other particulars relative
to this epistle will be pointed out in the course of the notes, and
particularly the uses which the Church of God and the private Christian
may derive from it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon Chapter 1](plm001)

</div>
