<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro002)  [Next](pro004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 3:0</span></span>

An exhortation to obedience, [Pro
3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#001); trust in God's providence, [Pro
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#005), [Pro
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#006); to humility, [Pro
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#007), [Pro
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#008); to charity, [Pro
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#009), [Pro
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#010); to submission to God's
chastening, [Pro 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#011), [Pro
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012). The profitableness of wisdom in
all the concerns of life, [Pro
3:13-26](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#013). No act of duty should be
deferred beyond the time in which it should be done, [Pro
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#027), [Pro
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#028). Brotherly love and forbearance
should he exercised, [Pro 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#029), [Pro
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#030). We should not envy the wicked,
[Pro 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#031), [Pro
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#032). The curse of God is in the house
of the wicked; but the humble and wise shall prosper, [Pro
3:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#033).

[Proverbs 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">pro 3:32</span></span>

But his secret - סודו sodo, his secret assembly; godly people meet
there, and God dwells there.

[Proverbs 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">pro 3:33</span></span>

The curse of the Lord - No godly people meet in such a house; nor is God
ever an inmate there.

But he blesseth the habitation of the just - He considers it as his own
temple. There he is worshipped in spirit and in truth; and hence God
makes it his dwelling-place.

[Proverbs 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">pro 3:34</span></span>

Surely he scorneth the scorners; but he giveth grace unto the lowly -
The Septuagint has Κυριος ὑπερηφανοις αντιτασσεται, ταπεινοις δε διδωσι
χαριν. The Lord resisteth the proud; but giveth grace to the humble.
These words are quoted by St. Peter, [Pe1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005), and by St. James, [Jam
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006), just as they stand in the
Septuagint, with the change of ὁ Θεος, God, for Κυριος, the Lord.

[Proverbs 3:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">pro 3:35</span></span>

The wise - The person who follows the dictates of wisdom, as mentioned
above, shall inherit glory; because, being one of the heavenly family, a
child of God, he has thereby heaven for his inheritance; but fools, such
as those mentioned chapters 1 and 2, shall have ignominy for their
exaltation. Many such fools as Solomon speaks of are exalted to the
gibbet and gallows. The way to prevent this and the like evils, is to
attend to the voice of wisdom.

[Proverbs 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 3:1</span></span>

My son - The preceptor continues to deliver his lessons.

Forget not my law - Remember what thou hast heard, and practice what
thou dost remember; and let all obedience be from the heart: "Let thy
heart keep my commandments."

[Proverbs 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 3:2</span></span>

For length of days - Three eminent blessings are promised here:

1\. ארך ימים orech yamim, long days;

2\. שנות חיים shenoth chaiyim, years of lives;

3\. שלום shalom, prosperity; i.e. health, long life, and abundance.

[Proverbs 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 3:3</span></span>

Let not mercy and truth forsake thee - Let these be thy constant
companions through life.

Bind them about thy neck - Keep them constantly in view. Write them upon
the table of thine heart - let them be thy moving principles; feel them
as well as see them.

[Proverbs 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 3:4</span></span>

So shalt thou find favor - Thou shalt be acceptable to God, and thou
shalt enjoy a sense of his approbation.

And good understanding - Men shall weigh thy character and conduct; and
by this appreciate thy motives, and give thee credit for sincerity and
uprightness. Though religion is frequently persecuted, and religious
people suffer at first where they are not fully known; yet a truly
religious and benevolent character will in general be prized wherever it
is well known. The envy of men is a proof of the excellence of that
which they envy.

[Proverbs 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 3:5</span></span>

Trust in the Lord with all thine heart - This is a most important
precept:

1\. God is the Fountain of all good.

2\. He has made his intelligent creatures dependent upon himself.

3\. He requires them to be conscious of that dependence.

4\. He has promised to communicate what they need.

5\. He commands them to believe his promise, and look for its
fulfillment.

6\. And to do this without doubt, fear, or distrust; "with their whole
heart."

Lean not unto thine own understanding - אל תשען al tishshaen, do not
prop thyself. It is on God, not on thyself, that thou art commanded to
depend. He who trusts in his own heart is a fool.

[Proverbs 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 3:6</span></span>

In all thy ways acknowledge him - Begin, continue, and end every work,
purpose, and device, with God. Earnestly pray for his direction at the
commencement; look for his continual support in the progress; and so
begin and continue that all may terminate in his glory: and then it will
certainly be to thy good; for we never honor God, without serving
ourselves. This passage is well rendered in my old MS. Bible: Have trost
in the Lord of all thin herte and ne lene thou to thi prudence: in all
thi weys think hym, and he shal right rulen thi goyuges; ne be thou wiis
anentis thiself. Self-suf ficiency and self-dependence have been the
ruin of mankind ever since the fall of Adam. The grand sin of the human
race is their continual endeavor to live independently of God, i.e., to
be without God in the world. True religion consists in considering God
the fountain of all good, and expecting all good from him.

[Proverbs 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 3:8</span></span>

It shall be health to thy navel - We need not puzzle ourselves to find
out what we may suppose to be a more delicate meaning for the original
word שר shor than navel; for I am satisfied a more proper cannot be
found. It is well known that it is by the umbilical cord that the fetus
receives its nourishment all the time it is in the womb of the mother.
It receives nothing by the mouth, nor by any other means: by this alone
all nourishment is received, and the circulation of the blood kept up.
When, therefore, the wise man says, that "trusting in the Lord with the
whole heart, and acknowledging him in all a man's ways, etc., shall be
health to the navel, and marrow to the bones;" he in effect says, that
this is as essential to the life of God in the soul of man, and to the
continual growth in grace, as the umbilical cord is to the life and
growth of the fetus in the womb. Without the latter, no human being
could ever exist or be born; without the former, no true religion can
ever be found. Trust or faith in God is as necessary to derive grace
from him to nourish the soul, and cause it to grow up unto eternal life,
as the navel string or umbilical cord is to the human being in the first
stage of its existence. I need not push this illustration farther: the
good sense of the reader will supply what he knows. I might add much on
the subject.

And marrow to thy bones - This metaphor is not less proper than the
preceding. All the larger bones of the body have either a large cavity,
or they are spongious, and full of little cells: in both the one and the
other the oleaginous substance, called marrow, is contained in proper
vesicles, like the fat. In the larger bones, the fine oil, by the gentle
heat of the body, is exhaled through the pores of its small vesicles,
and enters some narrow passages which lead to certain fine canals
excavated in the substance of the bone, that the marrow may supply the
fibres of the bones, and render them less liable to break. Blood-vessels
also penetrate the bones to supply this marrow and this blood; and
consequently the marrow is supplied in the infant by means of the
umbilical cord. From the marrow diffused, as mentioned above, through
the bones, they derive their solidity and strength. A simple experiment
will cast considerable light on the use of the marrow to the bones: -
Calcine a bone, so as to destroy all the marrow from the cells, you will
find it exceedingly brittle. Immerse the same bone in oil so that the
cells may be all replenished, which will be done in a few minutes; and
the bone reacquires a considerable measure of its solidity and strength;
and would acquire the whole, if the marrow could be extracted without
otherwise injuring the texture of the bone. After the calcination, the
bone may be reduced to powder by the hand; after the impregnation with
the oil, it becomes hard, compact, and strong. What the marrow is to the
support and strength of the bones, and the bones to the support and
strength of the body; that, faith in God, is to the support, strength,
energy, and salvation of the soul. Behold, then, the force and elegance
of the wise man's metaphor. Some have rendered the last clause, a lotion
for the bones. What is this? How are the bones washed? What a pitiful
destruction of a most beautiful metaphor!

[Proverbs 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 3:9</span></span>

Honor the Lord with thy substance - The מנחה Minchah or
gratitude-offering to God, commanded under the law, is of endless
obligation. It would be well to give a portion of the produce of every
article by which we get our support to God, or to the poor, the
representatives of Christ. This might be done either in kind, or by the
worth in money. Whatever God sends us in the way of secular prosperity,
there is a portion of it always for the poor, and for God's cause. When
that portion is thus disposed of, the rest is sanctified; when it is
withheld, God's curse is upon the whole. Give to the poor, and God will
give to thee.

[Proverbs 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 3:11</span></span>

Despise not the chastening of the Lord - The word מוסר musar signifies
correction, discipline, and instruction. Teaching is essentially
necessary to show the man the way in which he is to go; discipline is
necessary to render that teaching effectual; and, often, correction is
requisite in order to bring the mind into submission, without which it
cannot acquire knowledge. Do not therefore reject this procedure of God;
humble thyself under his mighty hand, and open thy eyes to thy own
interest; and then thou wilt learn specially and effectually. It is of
no use to rebel; if thou do, thou kickest against the pricks, and every
act of rebellion against him is a wound to thine own soul. God will
either end thee or mend thee; wilt thou then kick on?

[Proverbs 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 3:12</span></span>

Whom the Lord loveth - To encourage thee to bear correction, know that
it is a proof of God's love to thee; and thereby he shows that he treats
thee as a father does his son, even that one to whom he bears the
fondest affection.

The last clause the Septuagint translate μαστιγοι δε παντα υἱον ὁν
παραδεχεται, "and chasteneth every son whom he receiveth;" and the
apostle, [Heb 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006), quotes this
literatim. Both clauses certainly amount to the same sense. Every son
whom he receiveth, and the son in whom he delighteth, have very little
difference of meaning.

[Proverbs 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 3:13</span></span>

Happy is the man that findeth wisdom - This refers to the advice given
in [Pro 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#004) (note); where see the
note.

[Proverbs 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 3:14</span></span>

For the merchandise - סחר sachar, the traffic, the trade that is carried
on by going through countries and provinces with such articles as they
could carry on the backs of camels, etc.; from סחר sachar, to go about,
traverse. Chaffarynge; Old MS. Bible.

And the gain thereof - תבואתה tebuathah, its produce; what is gained by
the articles after all expenses are paid. The slaves, as we have already
seen, got their liberty if they were so lucky as to find a diamond of so
many carats' weight; he who finds wisdom - the knowledge and salvation
of God - gets a greater prize; for he obtains the liberty of the Gospel,
is adopted into the family of God, and made an heir according to the
hope of an eternal life.

[Proverbs 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 3:15</span></span>

She is more precious than rubies - מפנינים mippeninim. The word
principally means pearls, but may be taken for precious stones in
general. The root is פנה panah, he looked, beheld; and as it gives the
idea of the eye always being turned towards the observer, Mr. Parkhurst
thinks that it means the loadstone; see the note on [Job
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#018) (note), where this subject is
considered at large. If the oriental ruby, or any other precious stone,
be intended here, the word may refer to their being cut and polished, so
that they present different faces, and reflect the light to you in
whatever direction you may look at them.

All the things thou canst desire - Superior to every thing that can be
an object of desire here below. But who believes this?

[Proverbs 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 3:16</span></span>

Length of days is in her right hand - A wicked man shortens his days by
excesses; a righteous man prolongs his by temperance.

In her left hand riches and honor - That is, her hands are full of the
choicest benefits. There is nothing to be understood here by the right
hand in preference to the left.

[Proverbs 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 3:17</span></span>

Her ways are ways of pleasantness - These blessings of true religion
require little comment. They are well expressed by the poet in the
following elegant verses: -

"Wisdom Divine! Who tells the price

Of Wisdom's costly merchandise?

Wisdom to silver we prefer,

And gold is dross compared to her.

Her hands are fill'd with length of days,

True riches, and immortal praise;

Riches of Christ, on all bestow'd,

And honor that descends from God.

To purest joys she all invites,

Chaste, holy, spiritual delights;

Her ways are ways of pleasantness,

And all her flowery paths are peace.

Happy the man that finds the grace,

The blessing of God's chosen race;

The wisdom coming from above,

The faith that sweetly works by love!"

Wesley.

[Proverbs 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 3:18</span></span>

She is a tree of life - עץ חיים ets chaiyim, "the tree of lives,"
alluding most manifestly to the tree so called which God in the
beginning planted in the garden of Paradise, by eating the fruit of
which all the wastes of nature might have been continually repaired, so
as to prevent death for ever. This is an opinion which appears probable
enough. The blessings which wisdom - true religion - gives to men,
preserve them in life, comfort them through life, cause them to triumph
in death, and ensure them a glorious immortality.

[Proverbs 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 3:19</span></span>

The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth - Here wisdom is taken in its
proper acceptation, for that infinite knowledge and skill which God has
manifested in the creation and composition of the earth, and in the
structure and economy of the heavens. He has established the order as
well as the essence of all things; so that though they vary in their
positions, etc., yet they never change either their places, or their
properties. Composition and analysis are not essential changes; the
original particles, their forms and properties, remain the same.

[Proverbs 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 3:20</span></span>

By his knowledge the depths are broken up - He determined in his wisdom
how to break up the fountains of the great deep, so as to bring a flood
of waters upon the earth; and by his knowledge those fissures in the
earth through which springs of water arise have been appointed and
determined; and it is by his skill and influence that vapours are
exhaled, suspended in the atmosphere, and afterwards precipitated on the
earth in rain, dews, etc. Thus the wisest of men attributes those
effects which we suppose to spring from natural causes to the Supreme
Being himself.

[Proverbs 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 3:21</span></span>

Let not them depart from thine eyes - Never forget that God, who is the
author of nature, directs and governs it in all things; for it is no
self-determining agent.

Keep sound wisdom and discretion - תושיה ומזמה tushiyah umezimmah. We
have met with both these words before. Tushiyah is the essence or
substance of a thing; mezimmah is the resolution or purpose formed in
reference to something good or excellent. To acknowledge God as the
author of all good, is the tushiyah, the essence, of a godly man's
creed; to resolve to act according to the directions of his wisdom, is
the mezimmah, the religious purpose, that will bring good to ourselves
and glory to God. These bring life to the soul, and are ornamental to
the man who acts in this way, [Pro
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#022).

[Proverbs 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 3:24</span></span>

When thou liest down - In these verses ([Pro
3:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#023)) the wise man describes the
confidence, security, and safety, which proceed from a consciousness of
innocence. Most people are afraid of sleep, lest they should never
awake, because they feel they are not prepared to appear before God.
They are neither innocent nor pardoned. True believers know that God is
their keeper night and day; they have strong confidence in him that he
will be their director and not suffer them to take any false step in
life, [Pro 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#023). They go to rest in
perfect confidence that God will watch over them; hence their sleep,
being undisturbed with foreboding and evil dreams, is sweet and
refreshing, [Pro 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#024). They are not
apprehensive of any sudden destruction, because they know that all
things are under the control of God; and they are satisfied that if
sudden destruction should fall upon their wicked neighbor, yet God knows
well how to preserve them, [Pro 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#025).
And all this naturally flows from the Lord being their confidence, [Pro
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#026).

[Proverbs 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 3:27</span></span>

Withhold not good from them to whom it is due - מבעליו mibbealaiv, from
the lords of it. But who are they? The poor. And what art thou, O rich
man? Why, thou art a steward, to whom God has given substance that thou
mayest divide with the poor. They are the right owners of every farthing
thou hast to spare from thy own support, and that of thy family; and God
has given the surplus for their sakes. Dost thou, by hoarding up this
treasure, deprive the right owners of their property? If this were a
civil case, the law would take thee by the throat, and lay thee up in
prison; but it is a case in which God alone judges. And what will he do
to thee? Hear! "He shall have judgment without mercy, who hath showed no
mercy;" [Jam 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013). Read, feel,
tremble, and act justly.

[Proverbs 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 3:28</span></span>

Say not unto thy neighbor - Do not refuse a kindness when it is in thy
power to perform it. If thou have the means by thee, and thy neighbor's
necessities be pressing, do not put him off till the morrow. Death may
take either him or thee before that time.

[Proverbs 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 3:30</span></span>

Strive not with a man - Do not be of a litigious, quarrelsome spirit. Be
not under the influence of too nice a sense of honor. If thou must
appeal to judicial authority to bring him that wrongs thee to reason,
avoid all enmity, and do nothing in a spirit of revenge. But, if he have
done thee no harm, why contend with him? May not others in the same way
contend with and injure thee!

[Proverbs 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 3:31</span></span>

Envy thou not the oppressor - O how bewitching is power! Every man
desires it; and yet all hate tyrants. But query, if all had power, would
not the major part be tyrants?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 4](pro004)

</div>
