<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro015)  [Next](pro017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 16:0</span></span>

Man prepares, but God governs. God has made all things for himself; he
hates pride. The judgments of God. The administration of kings; their
justice, anger, and clemency. God has made all in weight, measure, and
due proportion. Necessity produces industry. The patient man. The lot is
under the direction of the Lord.

[Proverbs 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 16:1</span></span>

The preparations of the heart in man - The Hebrew is לאדם מערכי לב
leadam maarchey leb, which is, literally, "To man are the dispositions
of the heart; but from the Lord is the answer of the tongue." Man
proposes his wishes; but God answers as he thinks proper. The former is
the free offspring of the heart of man; the latter, the free volition of
God. Man may think as he pleases, and ask as he lists; but God will
give, or not give, as he thinks proper. This I believe to be the meaning
of this shamefully tortured passage, so often vexed by critics, their
doubts, and indecisions. God help them! for they seldom have the faculty
of making any subject plainer! The text does not say that the
"preparations," rather dispositions or arrangements, מערכי maarchey "of
the heart," as well as "the answer of the tongue, is from the Lord;"
though it is generally understood so; but it states that the
dispositions or schemes of the heart (are) man's; but the answer of the
tongue (is) the Lord's. And so the principal versions have understood
it.

Hominis est animam preparare; et Domini gubernare linguam - Vulgate. "It
is the part of man to prepare his soul: it is the prerogative of the
Lord to govern the tongue."

מן בר נש תרעיתא דלבא ומן יי ממללא דלישנא min bar nash taritha delibba;
umin yeya mamlala delishana - Chaldee. "From the son of man is the
counsel of the heart; and from the Lord is the word of the tongue."

The Syriac is the same. καρδια ανδρος λογζεσθω δικαια, Ἱνα ὑπο του θεου
διορθωθῃ τα διαβηματα αυτῃ - Septuagint. "The heart of man deviseth
righteous things, that its goings may be directed by God."

The Arabic takes great latitude: "All the works of an humble man are
clean before the Lord; and the wicked shall perish in an evil day." Of a
man fit to maken redy the inwitt: and of the Lorde to governe the tunge.
- Old MS. Bible.

"A man maye well purpose a thinge in his harte: but the answere of the
tonge cometh of the Lorde. - Coverdale.

Matthew's Bible, 1549, and Becke's Bible of the same date, and
Cardmarden's of 1566, follow Coverdale. The Bible printed by R. Barker,
at Cambridge, 4th., 1615, commonly called the Breeches Bible, reads the
text thus: - "The preparations of the hart are in man; but the answere
of the tongue is of the Lord." So that it appears that our first, and
all our ancient versions, understood the text in the same way; and this,
independently of critical torture, is the genuine meaning of the Hebrew
text. That very valuable version published in Italian, at Geneva, fol.
1562, translates thus: Le dispositioni del cuore sono de l'huomo, ma la
risposta del la lingua e dal Signore. "The dispositions of the heart are
of man; but the answer of the tongue is from the Lord."

The modern European versions, as far as I have seen, are the same. And
when the word dispositions, arrangements, schemes, is understood to be
the proper meaning of the Hebrew term, as shown above, the sense is
perfectly sound; for there may be a thousand schemes and arrangements
made in the heart of man which he may earnestly wish God to bring to
full effect, that are neither for his good nor God's glory; and
therefore it is his interest that God has the answer in his own power.
At the same time, there is no intimation here that man can prepare his
own heart to wait upon, or pray unto the Lord; or that from the human
heart any thing good can come, without Divine influence; but simply that
he may have many schemes and projects which he may beg God to
accomplish, that are not of God, but from himself. Hence our own
proverb: "Man proposes, but God disposes." I have entered the more
particularly into the consideration of this text, because some are very
strenuous in the support of our vicious reading, from a supposition that
the other defends the heterodox opinion of man's sufficiency to think
any thing as of himself. But while they deserve due credit for their
orthodox caution, they will see that no such imputation can fairly lie
against the plain grammatical translation of the Hebrew text.

[Proverbs 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 16:3</span></span>

Commit thy works unto the Lord - See that what thou doest is commanded;
and then begin, continue, and end all in his name. And thy thoughts
shall be established - these schemes or arrangements, though formed in
the heart, are agreeable to the Divine will, and therefore shall be
established. His thoughts - his meditations - are right; and he begins
and ends his work in the Lord; and therefore all issues well.

[Proverbs 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 16:4</span></span>

The Lord hath made all things for himself - He has so framed and
executed every part of his creation, that it manifests his wisdom,
power, goodness, and truth.

Even the wicked for the day of evil - וגם רשע ליום רעה vegam rasha leyom
raah. The whole verse is translated by the Chaldee thus: "All the works
of the Lord are for those who obey him; and the wicked is reserved for
the evil day." As רעה raah literally signifies to feed, it has been
conjectured that the clause might be read, yea, even the wicked he feeds
by the day, or daily.

If we take the words as they stand in our present version, they mean no
more than what is expressed by the Chaldee and Spriac: and as far as we
can learn from their present confused state, by the Septuagint and
Arabic, that "the wicked are reserved for the day of punishment."
Coverdale has given, as he generally does, a good sense: "The Lorde
dotll all thinges for his owne sake; yea, and when he kepeth the ungodly
for the daye of wrath." He does not make the wicked or ungodly man; but
when man has made himself such, even then God bears with him. But if he
repent not, when the measure of his iniquity is filled up, he shall fall
under the wrath of God his Maker.

[Proverbs 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 16:5</span></span>

Though hand join in hand, he shall not be unpunished - The day of wrath
shall come on the wicked, whatever means he may take to avoid it. See
[Pro 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#021).

[Proverbs 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 16:6</span></span>

By mercy and truth iniquity is purged - This may be misunderstood, as if
a man, by showing mercy and acting according to truth, could atone for
his own iniquity. The Hebrew text is not ambiguous: בחסד ואמת יכפר עון
bechesed veemeth yechapper avon; "By mercy and truth he shall atone for
iniquity." He - God, by his mercy, in sending his son Jesus into the
world, - "shall make an atonement for iniquity" according to his truth -
the word which he declared by his holy prophets since the world began.
Or, if we retain the present version, and follow the points in יכפר
yecuppar, reading "iniquity is purged" or "atoned for," the sense is
unexceptionable, as we refer the mercy and the truth to God. But what an
awful comment is that of Don Calmet, in which he expresses, not only his
own opinion, but the staple doctrine of his own Church, the Romish! The
reader shall have his own words: "'L'iniquite se rachete par la
misericorde et la verite.' On expie ses pechez par des oeuvres de
misericorde envers le prochein; par la clemence, par la douceur, par
compassion, par les aumones: et par la verite-par la fidelity, la bonne
foi, la droiture, requite dans le commerce. Voyez [Pro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003), [Pro
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#022), [Pro
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#028)." "'Iniquity is redeemed by
mercy and truth.' We expiate our sins by works of mercy towards our
neighbor; by clemency, by kindness, by compassion, and by alms: and by
truth - by fidelity, by trustworthiness, by uprightness, by equity in
commerce." If this be so, why was Jesus incarnated? Why his agony and
bloody sweat, his cross and passion, his death and burial, his
resurrection and ascension? Was it only to supply a sufficient portion
of merit for those who had neglected to make a fund for themselves? Is
the guilt of sin so small in the sight of Divine justice, that a man can
atone for it by manifesting good dispositions towards his neighbors, by
giving some alms, and not doing those things for which he might be
hanged? Why then did God make such a mighty matter of the redemption of
the world? Why send his Son at all? An angel would have been more than
sufficient; yea, even a sinner who had been converted by his own
compassion, alms-deeds, etc., would have been sufficient. And is not
this the very doctrine of this most awfully fallen and corrupt Church?
Has she not provided a fund of merit in her saints, of what was more
than requisite for themselves that it might be given, or sold out, to
those who had not enough of their own? Now such is the doctrine of the
Romish Church - grossly absurd, and destructively iniquitous! And
because men cannot believe this, cannot believe these monstrosities,
that Church will burn them to ashes. Ruthless Church! degenerated,
fallen, corrupt, and corrupting! once a praise now a curse, in the
earth. Thank the blessed God, whose blood alone can expiate sin, that he
has a Church upon the earth; and that the Romish is not the Catholic
Church; and that it has not that political power by which it would
subdue all things to itself.

[Proverbs 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 16:7</span></span>

When a man's ways please the Lord - God is the guardian and defense of
all that fear and love him; and it is truly astonishing to see how
wondrously God works in their behalf, raising them up friends, and
turning their enemies into friends.

[Proverbs 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 16:9</span></span>

A man's heart deviseth his way - This is precisely the same sentiment as
that contained in the first verse, on the true meaning of which so much
has been already said.

[Proverbs 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 16:10</span></span>

A divine sentence - קסם kesem, "divination," as the margin has it. Is
the meaning as follows? Though divination were applied to a righteous
king's lips, to induce him to punish the innocent and spare the guilty,
yet would not his lips transgress in judgment; so firmly attached is he
to God, and so much is he under the Divine care and influence. Whatever
judgment such a one pronounces, it may be considered as a decision from
God.

[Proverbs 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 16:11</span></span>

All the weights of the bag are his - Alluding, probably, to the standard
weights laid up in a bag in the sanctuary, and to which all weights in
common use in the land were to be referred, in order to ascertain
whether they were just: but some think the allusion is to the weights
carried about by merchants in their girdles, by which they weigh the
money, silver and gold, that they take in exchange for their
merchandise. As the Chinese take no coin but gold and silver by weight,
they carry about with them a sort of small steelyard, by which they
weigh those metals taken in exchange.

[Proverbs 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 16:12</span></span>

It is an abomination to kings, etc. - In all these verses the wise man
refers to monarchical government rightly administered. And the proverbs
on this subject are all plain.

[Proverbs 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 16:16</span></span>

How much better - to get wisdom than gold? - Who believes this, though
spoken by the wisest of men, under Divine inspiration?

[Proverbs 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 16:17</span></span>

The highway of the upright - The upright man is ever departing from
evil; this is his common road: and by keeping on in this way, his soul
is preserved.

[Proverbs 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 16:18</span></span>

Pride goeth before destruction - Here pride is personified: it walks
along, and has destruction in its train.

And a haughty spirit before a fall - Another personification. A haughty
spirit marches on, and ruin comes after.

In this verse we find the following Masoretic note in most Hebrew
Bibles. חצי הספר chatsi hassepher: "the middle of the book." This verse
is the middle verse; and the first clause makes the middle of the words
of the book of Proverbs.

[Proverbs 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 16:22</span></span>

Understanding is a well-spring of life - מקור חיים mekor chaiyim;
another allusion to the artery that carries the blood from the heart to
distribute it to all the extremities of the body.

[Proverbs 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 16:23</span></span>

The heart of the wise teacheth his mouth - He has a wise heart; he
speaks as it dictates; and therefore his speeches are all speeches of
wisdom.

[Proverbs 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 16:24</span></span>

Pleasant words are as a honey-comb - The honey of which is sweeter than
that which has been expressed from it, and has a much finer flavour
before it has come in contact with the atmospheric air.

[Proverbs 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 16:25</span></span>

There is a way that seemeth right - This whole verse is precisely the
same as that [Pro 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#012).

[Proverbs 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 16:26</span></span>

He that laboureth - No thanks to a man for his labor and industry; if he
do not work he must starve.

[Proverbs 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 16:27</span></span>

An ungodly man diggeth up evil - How will the following suit?

Effodiuntur opes irritamenta malorum

"Wealth, the incitement to all evil, is digged up out the earth."

A wicked man labors as much to bring about an evil purpose, as the
quarryman does to dig up stones.

In his lips - a burning fire - His words are as inflammable, in
producing strife and contention among his neighbors, as fire is in
igniting dry stubble.

[Proverbs 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 16:30</span></span>

He shutteth his eyes to devise, etc. - He meditates deeply upon ways and
means to commit sin. He shuts his eyes that he may shut out all other
ideas, that his whole soul may be in this.

[Proverbs 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 16:31</span></span>

The hoary head is a crown of glory - The latter part of the verse is
very well added, for many a sinner has a hoary head.

[Proverbs 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">pro 16:32</span></span>

He that ruleth his spirit, than he that taketh a city - It is much
easier to subdue an enemy without than one within. There have been many
kings who had conquered nations, and yet were slaves to their own
passions. Alexander, who conquered the world, was a slave to intemperate
anger, and in a fit of it slew Clytus, the best and most intimate of all
his friends, and one whom he loved beyond all others.

The spirit of this maxim is so self-evident, that most nations have
formed similar proverbs. The classical reader will remember the
following in Hor., Odar. lib. ii., Od. 2: -

Latius regnes, avidum domando

Spiritum, quam si Libyam remotis

Gadibus jungas, et uterque Poenus

Serviat uni.

"By virtue's precepts to control

The furious passions of the soul,

Is over wider realms to reign,

Unenvied monarch, than if Spain\\\\\\ppar You could to distant Libya
join,

And both the Carthages were thine."

Francis.

And the following from Ovid is not less striking: -

Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit

Moenia, nec virtus altius ire potest.

"He is more of a hero who has conquered himself, than he who has taken
the best fortfied city."

Beyond this self-conquest the highest courage can not extend; nor did
their philosophy teach any thing more sublime.

[Proverbs 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">pro 16:33</span></span>

The lot is cast into the lap - On the lot, see the note on [Num
26:55](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#055). How far it may be proper now to
put difficult matters to the lot, after earnest prayer and supplication,
I cannot say. Formerly, it was both lawful and efficient; for after it
was solemnly cast, the decision was taken as coming immediately from the
Lord. It is still practiced, and its use is allowed even by writers on
civil law. But those who need most to have recourse to the lot are those
who have not piety to pray nor faith to trust to God for a positive
decision. The lot should never be resorted to in indifferent matters;
they should be those of the greatest importance, in which it appears
impossible for human prudence or foresight to determine. In such cases
the lot is an appeal to God, and he disposes of it according to his
goodness, mercy, and truth. The result, therefore, cannot be fortuitous.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 17](pro017)

</div>
