<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro025)  [Next](pro027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 26:0</span></span>

Honor is not seemly in a fool. The correction and treatment suitable to
such. Of the slothful man. Of him who interferes with matters which do
not concern him. Contentions to be avoided. Of the dissembler and the
lying tongue.

[Proverbs 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 26:1</span></span>

As snow in summer - None of these is suitable to the time; and at this
unsuitable time, both are unwelcome: so a fool to be in honor is
unbecoming.

[Proverbs 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 26:2</span></span>

As the bird - צפור tsippor is taken often for the sparrow; but means
generally any small bird. As the sparrow flies about the house, and the
swallow emigrates to strange countries; so an undeserved malediction may
flutter about the neighborhood for a season: but in a short time it will
disappear as the bird of passage; and never take effect on the innocent
person against whom it was pronounced.

[Proverbs 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 26:3</span></span>

A whip for the horse - Correction is as suitable to a fool, as a whip is
for a horse, or a bridle for an ass.

[Proverbs 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 26:4</span></span>

Answer not a fool - On this and the following verse Bishop Warburton,
who has written well on many things, and very indifferently on the
doctrine of grace, has written with force and perspicuity: "Had this
advice been given simply, and without circumstance, to answer the fool,
and not to answer him, one who had reverence for the text would satisfy
himself in supposing that the different directions referred to the doing
a thing in and out of season;

1\. The reasons given why a fool should not be answered according to his
folly, is, "lest he (the answerer) should be like unto him."

2\. The reason given why the fool should be answered according to his
folly, is, "lest he (the fool) should be wise in his own conceit."

1\. "The cause assigned for forbidding to answer, therefore, plainly
insinuates that the defender of religion should not imitate the insulter
of it in his modes of disputation, which may be comprised in sophistry,
buffoonery, and scurrility.

2\. "The cause assigned for directing to answer, as plainly intimates
that the sage should address himself to confute the fool upon his own
false principles, by showing that they lead to conclusions very wide
from, very opposite to, those impieties he would deduce from them. If
any thing can allay the fool's vanity, and prevent his being wise in his
own conceit, it must be the dishonor of having his own principles turned
against himself, and shown to be destructive of his own conclusions." -
Treatise on Grace. Preface.

[Proverbs 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 26:6</span></span>

Cutteth off the feet - Sending by such a person is utterly useless. My
old MS. Bible translates well: Halt in feet and drinking wickednesse
that sendith wordis bi a foole messager. Nothing but lameness in himself
can vindicate his sending it by such hands; and, after all, the
expedient will be worse than the total omission, for he is likely to
drink wickedness, i.e., the mischief occasioned by the fool's
misconduct. Coverdale nearly hits the sense as usual: "He is lame of his
fete, yee dronken is he in vanite, that committeth eny thinge to a
foole."

[Proverbs 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 26:8</span></span>

As he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so is he that giveth honor to a
fool - It is entirely thrown away. This, however, is a difficult
proverb; and the versions give but little light on the subject. The
Hebrew may be translated, "As a piece of precious stone among a heap of
stones, so is he that giveth honor to a fool." Or, As he that putteth a
precious stone in a heap of stones. See Parkhurst: but on this
interpretation the meaning would rather be, "It is as useless to throw a
jewel among a heap of stones to increase its bulk, as to give honor to a
fool."

As he that sendith a stoon into a hepe of monee; so he that geveth to an
unwiisman wirschip - Old MS. Bible.

"He that setteth a foole in hye dignite, that is even as yf a man dyd
caste a precious stone upon the galous." - Coverdale. This translator
refers to the custom of throwing a stone to the heap under which a
criminal lay buried. The Vulgate gives some countenance to this
translation: "He who gives honor to a fool is like one who throws a
stone to Mercury's heap." Mercury was considered the deity who presided
over the highways; and stones were erected in different places to guide
the traveler. Hence those lines of Dr. Young: -

"Death stands like Mercuries in every way;

And kindly points us to our journey's end."

[Proverbs 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 26:10</span></span>

The great God that formed all things - Or, A great man grieveth all, and
he hireth the fool, he hireth also transgressors, where this verse is
very differently translated. I shall add that of Coverdale: "A man of
experience discerneth all thinges well: but whoso hyreth a foole, hyreth
soch one as wyl take no hede." The רב rab may mean either the great God,
or a great man: hence the two renderings, in the text and in the margin.

[Proverbs 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 26:11</span></span>

As a dog returneth to his vomit - See note on [Pe2
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022).

[Proverbs 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 26:13</span></span>

The slothful man saith - See the note on [Pro
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#013) (note).

[Proverbs 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 26:16</span></span>

Than seven men that can render a reason - Seven here only means
perfection, abundance, or multitude. He is wiser in his own eyes than a
multitude of the wisest men. "Than seven men that sytt and teach." -
Coverdale; i.e., than seven doctors of the law, or heads of the schools
of the prophets, who always sat while they taught.

[Proverbs 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 26:17</span></span>

He that passeth by - This proverb stands true ninety-nine times out of a
hundred, where people meddle with domestic broils, or differences
between men and their wives.

[Proverbs 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 26:19</span></span>

Am not I in sport? - How many hearts have been made sad, and how many
reputations have been slain, by this kind of sport! "I designed no harm
by what I said;" "It was only in jest," etc. Sportive as such persons
may think their conduct to be, it is as ruinous as that of the mad man
who shoots arrows, throws firebrands, and projects in all directions
instruments of death, so that some are wounded, some burnt, and some
slain.

[Proverbs 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 26:20</span></span>

Where no wood is, there the fire goeth out - The tale-receiver and the
tale-bearer are the agents of discord. If none received the slander in
the first instance, it could not be propagated. Hence our proverb, "The
receiver is as bad as the thief." And our laws treat them equally; for
the receiver of stolen goods, knowing them to be stolen, is hanged, as
well as he who stole them.

[Proverbs 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 26:22</span></span>

The words of a tale-bearer - The same with [Pro
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#008) (note), where see the note.

[Proverbs 26:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 26:23</span></span>

Burning lips and a wicked heart - Splendid, shining, smooth lips; that
is, lips which make great professions of friendship are like a vessel
plated over with base metal to make it resemble silver; but it is only a
vile pot, and even the outside is not pure.

[Proverbs 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 26:25</span></span>

When he speaketh fair - For there are such hypocrites and false friends
in the world.

Believe him not - Let all his professions go for nothing.

For there are seven abominations in his heart - That is, he is full of
abominations.

[Proverbs 26:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 26:27</span></span>

Whoso diggeth a pit - See note on [Psa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015). There is a Latin proverb like
this: Malum consilium consultori pessimum, "A bad counsel, but worst to
the giver." Harm watch; harm catch.

[Proverbs 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 26:28</span></span>

A lying tongue hateth those that are afflicted by it - He that injures
another hates him in proportion to the injury he has done him; and,
strange to tell, in proportion to the innocence of the oppressed. The
debtor cannot bear the sight of his creditor; nor the knave, of him whom
he has injured.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 27](pro027)

</div>
