<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa095)  [Next](psa097) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 96](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 96:0</span></span>

All the inhabitants of the earth are invited to praise the Lord, [Psa
96:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001). His supreme majesty, [Psa
96:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#003). The tribes of Israel are
invited to glorify him, [Psa 96:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#007);
and to proclaim him among the heathen, [Psa
96:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#010). The heavens and the earth are
commamded to rejoice in him, [Psa
96:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#011).

This Psalm has no title, either in the Hebrew or Chaldee. The Syriac:
"Of David. A prophecy of the advent of Christ and the calling of the
Gentiles to believe in him." The Vulgate, Septuagint, Ethiopic, and
Arabic have, "A Song of David, when the House was built after the
Captivity." We have seen in [Ch1
16:23-33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#023) (note) a Psalm nearly like
this, composed by David, on bringing the ark to Sion, from the house of
Obed-edom. See the notes on the above place. But the Psalm, as it stands
in the Chronicles, has thirty verses; and this is only a section of it,
from the twenty-third to the thirty-third. It is very likely that this
part was taken from the Psalm above mentioned, to be used at the
dedication of the second temple. The one hundred and fifth Psalm is
almost the same as that in Chronicles, but much more extensive. Where
they are in the main the same, there are differences for which it is not
easy to account.

[Psalms 96:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 96:1</span></span>

Sing unto the Lord a new song - A song of peculiar excellence, for in
this sense the term new is repeatedly taken in the Scriptures. He has
done extraordinary things for us, and we should excel in praise and
thanksgiving.

[Psalms 96:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 96:2</span></span>

Show forth his salvation from day to day - The original is very
emphatic, בשרו מיום ליום ישועתו basseru miyom leyom yeshuatho "Preach
the Gospel of his salvation from day to day." To the same effect the
Septuagint, Ευαγγελιζεσθε ἡμεραν εξ ἡμερας το σωτηριον αυτου,
"Evangelize his salvation from day to day."

[Psalms 96:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 96:3</span></span>

Declare his glory among the heathen - The heathen do not know the true
God: as his being and attributes are at the foundation of all religion,
these are the first subjects of instruction for the Gentile world.
Declare, ספרו sapperu, detail, number out his glory, כבודו kebodo, his
splendor and excellence.

His wonders among all people - Declare also to the Jews his wonders,
נפלאותיו niphleothaiv, his miracles. Dwell on the works which he shall
perform in Judea. The miracles which Christ wrought among the Jews were
full proof that he was not only the Messiah, but the mighty power of
God.

[Psalms 96:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 96:4</span></span>

He is to be feared above all gods - I think the two clauses of this
verse should be read thus: -

Jehovah is great, and greatly to be praised.

Elohim is to be feared above all.

I doubt whether the word אלהים Elohim is ever, by fair construction,
applied to false gods or idols. The contracted form in the following
verse appears to have this meaning.

[Psalms 96:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 96:5</span></span>

All the gods of the nations are idols - אלהי elohey. All those reputed
or worshipped as gods among the heathens are אלילים elilim, vanities,
emptinesses, things of nought. Instead of being Elohim, they are elilim;
they are not only not God, but they are nothing." "Jehovah made the
heavens." He who is the creator is alone worthy of adoration.

[Psalms 96:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 96:6</span></span>

Honour and majesty are before him - Does this refer to the cloud of his
glory that preceded the ark in their journeying through the wilderness?
The words strength and beauty, and glory and strength, [Psa
96:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#007), are those by which the ark is
described, [Psa 78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061).

[Psalms 96:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 96:7</span></span>

Ye kindreds of the people - Ye families, all the tribes of Israel in
your respective divisions.

[Psalms 96:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 96:8</span></span>

Come into his courts - Probably referring to the second temple. The
reference must be either to the tabernacle or temple.

[Psalms 96:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 96:9</span></span>

Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness - I think בהדרת קדש behadrath
kodesh, signifies holy ornaments, such as the high priest wore in his
ministrations. These were given him for glory and beauty; and the
psalmist calls on him to put on his sacerdotal garments, to bring his
offering, מנחה minchah, and come into the courts of the Lord, and
perform his functions, and make intercession for the people.

[Psalms 96:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 96:10</span></span>

Say among the heathen that the Lord reigneth - Justin Martyr, in his
dialogue with Trypho the Jew, quotes this passage thus: Ειπατε εν τοις
εθνεσι, ὁ Κυριος εβασιλευσε απο του ξυλου, "Say among the nations, the
Lord ruleth by the wood," meaning the cross; and accuses the Jews of
having blotted this word out of their Bibles, because of the evidence it
gave of the truth of Christianity. It appears that this reading did
exist anciently in the Septuagint, or at least in some ancient copies of
that work, for the reading has been quoted by Tertullian, Lactantius,
Arnobius, Augustine, Cassiodorus, Pope Leo, Gregory of Tours, and
others. The reading is still extant in the ancient Roman Psalter,
Dominus regnavit a ligno, and in some others. In an ancient MS. copy of
the Psalter before me, while the text exhibits the commonly received
reading, the margin has the following gloss: Regnavit a ligno crucis,
"The Lord reigns by the wood of the cross." My old Scotico - Latin
Psalter has not a ligno in the text, but seems to refer to it in the
paraphrase: For Criste regned efter the dede on the crosse. It is
necessary, however, to add, that no such words exist in any copy of the
Hebrew text now extant, nor in any MS. yet collated, nor in any of the
ancient Versions. Neither Eusebius nor Jerome even refer to it, who
wrote comments on the Psalms; nor is it mentioned by any Greek writer
except Justin Martyr.

The world also shall be established - The word תבל tebel signifies the
habitable globe, and may be a metonymy here, the container put for the
contained. And many think that by it the Church is intended; as the
Lord, who is announced to the heathen as reigning, is understood to be
Jesus Christ; and his judging among the people, his establishing the
holy Gospel among them, and governing the nations by its laws.

[Psalms 96:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 96:11</span></span>

Let the heavens rejoice - The publication of the Gospel is here
represented as a universal blessing; the heavens the earth, the sea, and
its inhabitants, the field, the grass, and the trees of the wood, are
all called to rejoice at this glorious event. This verse is well and
harmoniously translated in the old Psalter: -

Fayne be hevenes - and the erth glad;

Styrde be the see, - and the fulnes of it;

Joy sal feldes, - and al that ere in thaim.

And the paraphrase is at least curious: -

Hevens, haly men. Erthe, meke men that receyves lare (learning). Feldes,
that is even men, mylde and softe: they shall joy in Criste. And all
that is in thaim, that es, strengh, wyttes & skill."

I shall give the remaining part of this ancient paraphrase, which is an
echo of the opinion of most of the Latin fathers.

[Psa 96:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#012) Thou sal glad al the trese
of woddes - Thou, that is in another Iyfe. Trese of woddes. - Synful men
that were fyrst withouten frut, and sithen taken into God's temple.

[Psa 96:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#013). For he coms, he coms. He
coms, fyrste to be man - Sythen he comes to deme the erth.

He sal deme in ebenes the erth: - and folk in his sothfastnes. Nothing
is evener, or sothfaster, than that he geder with hym perfyte men; to
deme and to deperte to the rig hande (thaim) that did mercy: - pase to
the lefte hande (thaim) that did it nogt.

The psalmist here in the true spirit of poetry, gives life and
intelligence to universal nature, producing them all as exulting in the
reign of the Messiah, and the happiness which should take place in the
earth when the Gospel should be universally preached. These predictions
seem to be on the eve of complete fulfillment. Lord, hasten the time!
For a fuller explanation see the following analysis.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 97](psa097)

</div>
