<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa057)  [Next](psa059) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 58](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 58:0</span></span>

David reproves wicked counsellors and judges, who pervert justice, and
stir up the strong against the weak and innocent, [Psa
58:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001). He foretells their
destruction, and describes the nature of it, [Psa
58:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006). The righteous, seeing this,
will magnify God's justice and providence, [Psa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010), [Psa
58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011).

The title seems to have no reference to the subject of the Psalm. See
the introduction to [Psa 57:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001)
(note). Saul having attempted the life of David, the latter was obliged
to flee from the court, and take refuge in the deserts of Judea. Saul,
missing him, is supposed by Bishop Patrick to have called a council,
when they, to ingratiate themselves with the monarch, adjudged David to
be guilty of treason in aspiring to the throne of Israel. This being
made known to David was the cause of this Psalm. It is a good lesson to
all kings, judges, and civil magistrates; and from it they obtain maxims
to regulate their conduct and influence their decisions; and at the same
time they may discern the awful account they must give to God, and the
dreadful punishment they shall incur who prostitute justice to serve
sinister ends.

[Psalms 58:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 58:1</span></span>

Do ye indeed speak righteousness - Or, O cabinet seeing ye profess to
act according to the principles of justice, why do ye not give righteous
counsels and just decisions, ye sons of men? Or, it may be an irony:
What excellent judges you are! well do ye judge according to law and
justice, when ye give decisions not founded on any law, nor supported by
any principle of justice! To please your master, ye pervert judgment;
and take part against the innocent, in order to retain your places and
their emoluments. Saul's counsellors appear to have done so, though in
their consciences they must have been satisfied of David's innocence.

[Psalms 58:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 58:2</span></span>

Yea, in heart ye work wickedness - With their tongues they had spoken
maliciously, and given evil counsel. In their hearts they meditated
nothing but wickedness. And though in their hands they held the scales
of justice, yet in their use of them they were balances of injustice and
violence. This is the fact to which the psalmist alludes, and the figure
which he uses is that of justice with her scales or balances, which,
though it might be the emblem of the court, yet it did not prevail in
the practice of these magistrates and counsellors.

[Psalms 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 58:3</span></span>

The wicked are estranged from the womb - "This," says Dr. Kennicott,
"and the next two verses, I take to be the answer of Jehovah to the
question in the two first verses, as the [Psa
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006), [Psa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007), and [Psa
58:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008), are the answer of the psalmist,
and the remainder contains the decree of Jehovah." He calls these wicked
men, men who had been always wicked, originally and naturally bad, and
brought up in falsehood, flattery, and lying. The part they acted now
was quite in character.

[Psalms 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 58:4</span></span>

Their poison is like the poison of a serpent - When they bite, they
convey poison into the wound, as the serpent does. They not only injure
you by outward acts, but by their malevolence they poison your
reputation. They do you as much evil as they can, and propagate the
worst reports that others may have you in abhorrence, treat you as a bad
and dangerous man; and thus, as the poison from the bite of the serpent
is conveyed into the whole mass of blood, and circulates with it through
all the system, carrying death every where; so they injurious speeches
and vile insinuations circulate through society, and poison and blast
your reputation in every place. Such is the slanderer, and such his
influence in society. From such no reputation is safe; with such no
character is sacred; and against such there is no defense. God alone can
shield the innocent from the envenomed tongue and lying lips of such
inward monsters in the shape of men.

Like the deaf adder that stoppeth her ear - It is a fact that cannot be
disputed with any show of reason, that in ancient times there were
persons that charmed, lulled to inactivity, or professed to charm,
serpents, so as to prevent them from biting. See [Ecc
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#011); [Jer
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017). The prince of Roman poets states
the fact, Virg. Ecl. viii., ver. 71.

Frigidus in prati cantando rumpitur anguis.

"In the meadows the cold snake is burst by incantation."

The same author, Aen. vii., ver. 750, gives us the following account of
the skill of Umbro, a priest of the Marrubians: -

Quin et Marru bia venit de gente sacerdos,

Fronde super galeam, et felici comptus oliva,

Archippi regis missu, fortissimus Umbro;

Vipereo generi et graviter spirantibus hydris,

Spargere qui somnos cantuque manuque solebat,

Mulcebatque iras, et morsus arte levabat.

"Umbro, the brave Marubian priest, was there,

Sent by the Marsian monarch to the war.

The smiling olive with her verdant boughs

Shades his bright helmet, and adorns his brows.

His charms in peace the furious serpent keep,

And lull the envenomed viper's race to sleep:

His healing hand allayed the raging pain;

And at his touch the poisons fled again."

Pitt.

There is a particular sect of the Hindoos who profess to bring serpents
into subjection, and deprive them of their poison, by incantation. See
at the end of this Psalm.

[Psalms 58:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 58:5</span></span>

Which will not hearken to the voice of charmers - The old Psalter
translates and paraphrases these two verses curiously: -

Vulg. Furor illis secundum similitudinem serpentis; sicut aspidis surdae
et obturantis aures suas: Quae non exaudiet vocem incantantium et
venefici in cantantis sapienter.

Trans. Wodes (madness) til thaim aftir the liking of the neddir, as of
the snake doumb and stoppand her eres.

Paraph. Right calles he tham wod, (mad), for that hafe na witte to se
whider that ga: for that louke thair eghen, and rennys till the are
thaire wodness til clumsthed that wil noght be turned as of the snake
that festis (fastens) the ta ere til the erth, and the tother ere
stoppis with hir taile: Sua do thai that thai here not Godis word; that
stope thair eris with luf of erthli thing that thai delite thaim in; and
with thair taile, that es with all synnes, that that will noght amend.

Trans. The whith salle noght here the voyce of charmand, and of the
venim in akare of charmand wisli.

Paraph. This snake stopis hir eres that she be noght broth to light; for
if she herd it, she come forth sone, he charmes swa wysli in his craft.
Swa the wikkid men wit noght here the voyce of Crist and his lufers that
are wys charmes; for thi wild (would) bring them till light of heven.
Wyt ye well (know) that he (i.e., Christ) lufes noght charmars and venim
makers but be (by) vices of bestes, he takes lickening of vices of men.

It seems as if there were a species of snake or adder that is nearly
deaf; and as their instinct informs them that if they listen to the
sounds which charmers use they shall become a prey; therefore they stop
their ears to prevent the little hearing they have from being the means
of their destruction. To this the Old Psalter refers. We have also an
account of a species of snake, which, if it cast its eye on the charmer,
feels itself obliged to come out of its hole; it therefore keeps close,
and takes care neither to see nor be seen. To this also the Old Psalter
alludes; and of this fact, if it be one, he makes a good use.

[Psalms 58:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 58:6</span></span>

Break their teeth - He still compares Saul, his captains, and his
courtiers, to lions; and as a lion's power of doing mischief is greatly
lessened if all his teeth be broken, so he prays that God may take away
their power and means of pursuing their bloody purpose. But he may
probably have the serpents in view of which he speaks in the preceding
verse; break their teeth - destroy the fangs of these serpents, in which
their poison is contained. This will amount to the same meaning as
above. Save me from the adders - the sly and poisonous slanderers: save
me also from the lions - the tyrannical and blood-thirsty men.

[Psalms 58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 58:7</span></span>

Let them melt away as waters - Let them be minished away like the waters
which sometimes run in the desert, but are soon evaporated by the sun,
or absorbed by the sand.

When he bendeth his bow - When my adversaries aim their envenomed shafts
against me, let their arrows not only fall short of the mark, but he
broken to pieces in the flight. Some apply this to God. When he bends
his bow against them, they shall all be exterminated.

[Psalms 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 58:8</span></span>

As a snail which melteth - The Chaldee reads the verse thus: "They shall
melt away in their sins as water flows off; as the creeping snail that
smears its track; as the untimely birth and the blind mole, which do not
see the sun."

The original word שבלול shablul, a snail, is either from שביל shebil, a
path, because it leaves a shining path after it by emitting a portion of
slime, and thus glaring the ground; and therefore might be emphatically
called the pathmaker; or from ישב yashab to dwell, ב be, in, לול lul, a
winding or spiral shell, which is well known to be its house, and which
it always inhabits; for when it is not coiled up within this shell, it
carries it with it wheresoever it goes. See Bochart. These figures need
no farther explanation.

[Psalms 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 58:9</span></span>

Before your pots can feel the thorns - Ye shall be destroyed with a
sudden destruction. From the time that the fire of God's wrath is
kindled about you, it will be but as a moment before ye be entirely
consumed by it: so very short will be the time, that it may be likened
to the heat of the first blaze of dry thorns under a pot, that has not
as yet been able to penetrate the metal, and warm what is contained in
it.

A whirlwind - Or the suffocating simoon that destroys life in an
instant, without previous warning: so, without pining sickness - while
ye are living - lively and active, the whirlwind of God's wrath shall
sweep you away.

[Psalms 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 58:10</span></span>

The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance - He shall have
a strong proof of the Divine providence, of God's hatred against
sinners, and his continual care of his followers.

He shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked - This can only mean
that the slaughter would be so great, and at the same time so very nigh
to the dwelling of the righteous, that he could not go out without
dipping his feet in the blood of the wicked. The Syriac, Vulgate,
Septuagint, Ethiopic, Arabic, and Anglo-Saxon, read hands instead of
feet. Every thing that is vindictive in the Psalms must be considered as
totally alien from the spirit of the Gospel, and not at all, under our
dispensation, to be imitated. If the passage above be really vindictive,
and it certainly will admit of the interpretation given above, it is to
be considered as not belonging to that state in which the Son of man is
come, not to destroy men's lives, but to save.

[Psalms 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 58:11</span></span>

So that a man shall say - That is, people, seeing these just judgments
of God, shall say, There is a reward (פרי peri, fruit) to the righteous
man. He has not sown his seed in vain; he has not planted and watered in
vain: he has the fruit of his labors, he eats the fruit of his doings.
But wo to the wicked, it is ill with him; for the reward of his hands
has been given him.

He is a God that judgeth in the earth - There is a God who does not
entirely defer judgment till the judgment-day; but executes judgment
now, even in this earth; and thus continues to give such a proof of his
hatred to sin and love to his followers that every considerate mind is
convinced of it. And hence arise the indisputable maxims: "There is,
even here, a reward for the righteous;" "There is a God who, even now,
judgeth in the earth."

I have seen Indian priests who professed to charm, not only serpents,
but the most ferocious wild beasts; even the enraged elephant, and the
royal tiger! Two priests of Budhoo, educated under my own care, repeated
the Sanscrit incantations to me, and solemnly asserted that they had
seen the power of them repeatedly and successfully put to the test. I
have mislaid these incantations, else I should insert them as a
curiosity; for to charms of the same nature the psalmist most
undoubtedly alludes.

The term חובר chober, which we translate charmer, comes from חבד to
join, or put together; i.e., certain unintelligible words or sentences,
which formed the spell.

I once met with a man who professed to remove diseases by pronouncing an
unintelligible jingling jargon of words oddly tacked together. I met
with him one morning proceeding to the cure of a horse affected with the
farcin. With a very grave countenance he stood before the diseased
animal, and, taking off his hat, devoutly muttered the following words;
which, as a matter of peculiar favor, he afterwards taught me, well
knowing that I could never use them successfully, because not taught me
by a woman; "for," said he, "to use them with success, a man must be
taught them by a woman, and a woman by a man." What the genuine
orthography may be I cannot pretend to say, as I am entirely ignorant of
the language, if the words belong to any language: but the following
words exactly express his sounds: -

Murry fin a liff cree

Murry fin a liss cree

Ard fin deriv dhoo

Murry fin firey fu

Murry fin elph yew

When he had repeated these words nine times, he put on his hat and
walked off, but he was to return the next morning, and so on for nine
mornings successively, always before he had broken his fast. The mother
of the above person, a very old woman, and by many reputed a witch,
professed to do miracles by pronouncing, or rather muttering, certain
words or sounds, and by measuring with a cord the diseased parts of the
sick person. I saw her practice twice: 1st, on a person afflicted with a
violent headache, or rather the effects of a coup de soleil; and, 2ndly,
on one who had got a dangerous mote or splinter in his eye. In the first
case she began to measure the head, round the temples, marking the
length; then from the vertex, under the chin, and so up to the vertex
again, marking that length. Then, by observing the dimensions, passed
judgment on the want of proportion in the two admeasurements, and said
the brain was compressed by the sinking down of the skull. She then
began her incantations, muttering under her breath a supplication to
certain divine and angelic beings, to come and lift up the bones, that
they might no longer compress the brain. She then repeated her
admeasurements, and showed how much was gained towards a restoration of
the proportions from the spell already muttered. The spell was again
muttered, the measurements repeated, and at each time a comparison of
the first measurement was made with the succeeding, till at last she
said she had the due proportions; that the disease, or rather the cause
of it, was removed; and that the operations were no longer necessary.

In the case of the diseased eye, her manner was different. She took a
cup of clean pure water, and washed her mouth well. Having done so, she
filled her mouth with the same water, and walked to and fro in the
apartment (the patient sitting in the midst of the floor) muttering her
spell, of which nothing could be heard but a grumbling noise. She then
emptied her mouth into a clean white bason, and showed the motes which
had been conveyed out of the patient's eye into the water in her mouth,
while engaged in muttering the incantation! She proffered to teach me
her wonder-working words; but the sounds were so very uncouth, if not
barbarous, that I know no combination of letters by which I could convey
the pronunciation.

Ridiculous as all this may appear, it shows that this incantation work
is conducted in the present day, both in Asia and Europe, where it is
professed, in precisely the same manner in which it was conducted
formerly, by pronouncing, or rather muttering certain words or sounds,
to which they attach supernatural power and efficiency. And from this
came the term spell: Anglo-Saxon a word, a charm, composed of such
supposed powerful words; and wyrkan spell signified among our ancestors
to use enchantments.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 59](psa059)

</div>
