<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa059)  [Next](psa061) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 60](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 60:0</span></span>

The psalmist complains of the desolation which had fallen on the land;
prays for deliverance, [Psa 60:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001);
and promises himself victory over Shechem, Succoth, Gilead, Ephraim,
Moab, Idumea, and the Philistines, by the special help and assistance of
God, [Psa 60:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006).

The title, "To the chief Musician upon the hexachord, or lily of the
testimony, a golden Psalm of David, for instruction; when he strove with
Aram Naharaim, Syria of the two rivers (Mesopotamia) and Aram-Zobah,
Syria of the watchmen, (Coelosyria), when Joab returned, and smote
twelve thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt." I have only to remark
here that there is nothing in the contents of this Psalm that bears any
relation to this title. According to the title it should be a song of
victory and triumph; instead of which the first part of it is a tissue
of complaints of disaster and defeat, caused by the Divine desertion.
Besides, it was not Joab that slew twelve thousand men in the Valley of
Salt; it was Abishai, the brother of Joab; and the number twelve
thousand here is not correct; for there were eighteen thousand slain in
that battle, as we learn from [Ch1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012). The valley of salt or salt pits
is in Idumea. To reconcile the difference between the numbers, various
expedients nave been hit on; but still the insuperable objection
remains; the contents of this Psalm and this title are in opposition to
each other. That the Psalm deplores a defeat, is evident from the three
first and two last verses. And the Targumist seems to have viewed it in
this light, perhaps the proper one, by expressing the title thus: "To
give praise for the ancient testimony, (סהדותא sahadutha), of the sons
of Jacob and Laban, (see [Gen 31:47](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#047)),
an exemplar by the hand of David, to give instruction when he gathered
together the people, and passed by the heap of testimony, (איגר סהדותא
ayegar sahadutha), and set the battle in array against Aram, which is by
the Euphrates; and against Aram, which is by Izobah. And after this Joab
returned and smote the Idumeans in the Valley of Salt; and of the armies
of David and Joab there fell twelve thousand men." The Psalm, therefore,
seems to deplore this disastrous event; for although they had the
victory at last, twelve thousand of the troops of Israel were justly
considered too great a sacrifice for such a conquest, and a proof that
God had not afforded them that succor which they had long been in the
habit of receiving. The latter part of the Psalm seems to be intended to
put God in remembrance of his ancient promise of putting Israel in
possession of the whole land by driving out the ancient iniquitous
inhabitants. Others consider the Psalm as descriptive of the distracted
state of the land after the fatal battle of Gilboa, till David was
anointed king of the whole at Hebron.

This is the last of the six Psalms to which מכתם michtam is prefixed;
the others are [Psa 16:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001), [Psa
56:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001), [Psa
57:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001), [Psa
58:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001), and 59: I have said something
relative to this word in the introduction to Psalm xvi., but some
observations of Mr. Harmer lead me to consider the subject more at
large. It is well known that there were seven most eminent Arabic poets
who flourished before and at the commencement of the career of Mohammed:
their names were Amriolkais, Amru, Hareth, Tharafah, Zohair, Lebeid, and
Antarah. These poets produced each a poem, which because of its
excellence was deemed worthy to be suspended on the walls of the temple
of Mecca; and hence the collection of the seven poems was termed Al
Moallakat, The Suspended; and Al Modhahebat, The Gilded or Golden,
because they were written in letters of gold upon the Egyptian papyrus.
The six michtams of David might have this title for the same reason;
they might have been written in letters of gold, or on gilded vellum, or
the Egyptian papyrus; for the word מכתם michtam is generally supposed to
signify golden, and כתם kethem is used to signify gold, probably stamped
or engraqven with figures or letters. That the Moallakat were written in
this way, there can be no question; and that the works of men of great
eminence in Asiatic countries are still thus written, my own library
affords ample evidence. Copies of the following works are written on
paper all powdered with gold, with gold borders, and highly illuminated
anwans or titles: The Misnavi of Jelaluddeen Raumy; The Deevan of Zuheer
Faryabi; The Hadikatusani, or Garden of Praise; The Suhbet Al Abrar; The
Deevan of Hafiz; Gulistan of Saady; Deevan of Shahy, with many more, all
works of eminent authors, written in the finest manner, ruled with gold
borders, etc.

Copies of the Koran are often done in the same manner: one in 12 mo., so
thickly powdered over with gold that the ground on which the text is
written appears to be almost totally gilded; another large octavo, all
powdered with gold, and golden flowers down every margin; another small
octavo, that might be almost called the Codex Aureus, with rich golden
borders on every page. And, lastly, one in large folio, which besides
superbly illuminated anwans, has three gold lines to every page; one at
the top, one in the middle, and one at the bottom. To the above may be
added a small folio, that opens out about eleven feet, every page of
which is like a plate of solid gold, with the characters engraven on it.
It is a collection of elegant extracts. Another of the same kind, large
folio, opens out sixty-two feet, on which every page is finished in the
same manner, with a vast variety of borders, sprigs, and flowers. And to
close the whole, a copy of the Borda, supposed to be the most elegant
MS. in Europe, entirely covered with gold flowers and lines, the writing
the most perfect I ever saw; so that of this MS. it might be truly said,
splendid as it is, materiam superabit opus.

As Mr. Harmer has alluded to accounts which he has collected from other
writers in order to illustrate the michtams of David, I have above
produced a number of evidences to bear witness to the fact that such is
and such was the custom in the east, to write the works of the most
eminent authors in letters of gold, or on a page highly ornamented with
the utmost profusion of golden lines, figures, flowers, etc. In this way
these Psalms might have been written, and from this circumstance they
may have derived their name. I may just add, that I think these titles
were made long after the Psalms were composed.

[Psalms 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 60:1</span></span>

O God, thou hast cast us off - Instead of being our general in the
battle, thou hast left us to ourselves; and then there was only the arm
of flesh against the arm of flesh, numbers and physical power were left
to decide the contest. We have been scattered, our ranks have been
broken before the enemy, and thou hast caused the whole land to tremble
at our bad success; the people are become divided and seditious. "Thou
hast made the land to tremble, even the breaches of it, for it shaketh,
it is all in commotion," [Psa 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002).

[Psalms 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 60:3</span></span>

Thou hast made us to drink the wine of astonishment - We reel as drunken
men; we are giddy, like those who have drank too much wine; but our
giddiness has been occasioned by the astonishment and dismay that have
taken place in consequence of the prevalence of our enemies, and the
unsettled state of the land. It has been remarked that the three first
verses of this Psalm do not agree with the rest, and it also appears
that the three first verses of [Psa
85:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#001) : do not agree with the rest
of that Psalm. But let them change places, and the three first verses of
this be set instead of the three first verses of Psa lxxxv., and let
those be placed here instead of these and then the whole of each Psalm
will be consistent. This was first suggested by Bishop Hare, and the
supposition seems to be well founded. Some imagine that the whole of the
Psalm refers to the distracted state of the land after the death of Saul
till the time that David was anointed king over all Israel, at Hebron;
others, to the disastrous war with the Syrians. See before.

[Psalms 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 60:4</span></span>

Thou hast given a banner - נס nes, a sign, something that was capable of
being fixed on a pole.

That it may be displayed - להתנוסס lehithnoses, that it may be unfurled.

Because of the truth - מפני קשט mippeney koshet, from the face of truth;
which has been thus paraphrased: If we have displayed the ensign of
Israel, and gone forth against these our enemies, who have now made such
a terrible breach among us, ([Psa
60:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)), it was because of thy truth -
the promises of victory which we supposed would attend us at all times.

Mr. Mudge, thus: "Thou givest to them that fear thee a signal to be
displayed before the truth. That thy favored ones may be delivered,
clothe thy right arm with victory, and answer us. God speaketh in his
sanctuary, I will exult; I shall portion out Shechem, and measure the
valley of Succoth." The fourth verse seems to mean that God had
appointed for the consolation of his people a certain signal of favor,
with which therefore he prays him to answer them. This, accordingly, he
does. God speaketh in his sanctuary, called rybd debir or oracle for
that very reason. What he desires then, as he stands imploring the mercy
of God before the oracle, is, that he may see the usual signal of favor
proceed from it; a voice, perhaps joined with some luminous emanations,
whence the phrase of the light of God's countenance. The expression in
the sixth verse seems to be proverbial, and means, "I shall divide the
spoils of my enemies with as much ease as the sons of Jacob portioned
out Shechem, and measured out for their tents the valley of Succoth."
Mr. Harmer gives a very ingenious illustration of the giving the banner.
"Albertus Aquensis informs us that when Jerusalem was taken in 1099 by
the crusaders, about three hundred Saracens got on the roof of a very
high building, and earnestly begged for quarter; but could not be
induced by any promises of safety to come down, till they had received
the banner of Tanered, one of the crusade generals, as a pledge of life.
The event showed the faithlessness of these zealots, they put the whole
to the sword. But the Saracens surrendering themselves upon the
delivering of a standard to them, proves in how strong a light they
looked upon the giving a banner, since it induced them to trust it, when
they would not trust any promises. Perhaps the delivery of a banner was
anciently esteemed in like manner an obligation to protect; and the
psalmist might here consider it in this light when he says, Thou hast
shown thy people hard things; but thou hast given a banner to them that
fear thee. Though thou didst for a time give up thy Israel into the
hands of their enemies, thou hast now given them an assurance of thy
having received them under thy protection. Thus God gave them a banner
or standard that it might be displayed, or lifted up; or rather, that
they may lift up a banner to themselves, or encourage themselves with
the confident persuasion that they are under the protection of God:
because of the truth - the word of promise, which is an assurance of
protection - like the giving me and my people a banner, the surest of
pledges." - Harmer's Observations. See at the end of the chapter.

[Psalms 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 60:6</span></span>

God hath spoken - Judah shall not only be re-established in Jerusalem,
but shall possess Samaria, where Shechem is, and the country beyond
Jordan, in which is situated the valley of Succoth. Dividing and meting
out signify possession.

[Psalms 60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 60:7</span></span>

Gilead is mine - This country was also beyond Jordan, and Manasseh and
Ephraim are put for the tribes that formed the kingdom of Israel. All
these, after the return from the captivity, formed but one people, the
Jews and Israelites being united.

The strength of mine head - It shall be the principal support of the
new-found kingdom, when all distinctions shall be buried.

Judah is my lawgiver - This tribe was chief of all those who returned
from the captivity; and Zerubbabel, who was their leader, was chief of
that tribe, and of the family of David. As this part of the Psalm
appears to relate to the return of the captives from Babylon, and their
repossession of their own land, the psalmist may refer, not only to the
promises of their restoration, but also to the principal person under
whose superintendence they returned.

[Psalms 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 60:8</span></span>

Moab is my washpot - The Moabites shall be reduced to the meanest
slavery.

Over Edom will I cast out my shoe - I will make a complete conquest of
Idumea, and subject the Edomites to the meanest offices, as well as the
Moabites.

Philistia, triumph thou because of me - John Hyrcanus subdued the
Idumeans, and caused them to receive circumcision, and profess the
Jewish religion. The words here seem to predict their entire
subjugation.

In an essay for a new translation of the Bible, there is what appears to
me a correct paraphrase of the seventh and eighth verses: "Gilead and
Manasseh have submitted unto me; Ephraim furnishes me with valiant men,
and Judah with men of prudence and wisdom. I will reduce the Moabites to
servitude; I will triumph over the Edomites, and make them my slaves;
and the Philistines shall add to my triumph."

[Psalms 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 60:9</span></span>

Who will bring me into the strong city? - If this part of the Psalm,
from the sixth to the twelfth verse, refer to the return of the captives
from Babylon, as I think probable; then the strong city may mean either
Petra, the capital of Idumea; Bozra, in Arabia, near the mountains of
Gilead; Rabba, the capital of the Ammonites; or Tyre, according to the
Chaldee, the capital of Phoenicia; or Jerusalem itself, which, although
dismantled, had long been one of the strongest cities of the east. Or it
may imply, Who shall give me the dominion over the countries already
mentioned? who will lead me into Edom? who will give me the dominion
over that people?

[Psalms 60:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 60:10</span></span>

Wilt not thou, O God - It is God alone from whom we can expect our
enlargement. He who has cast us off, and has abandoned us in battle; it
is that very God alone from whom we expect complete enlargement, the
repossession of our own land, and the subduction of the surrounding
nations; and we expect this, because he has graciously promised these
mercies.

[Psalms 60:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 60:11</span></span>

Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man - We have done
all we can do, and have trusted too much in ourselves; now, Lord,
undertake for us.

[Psalms 60:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 60:12</span></span>

Through God we shall do valiantly - Through thee alone shall we do
valiantly; thou alone canst tread down our enemies; and to thee alone we
look for conquest.

The author to whom Harmer refers in the note on the fourth verse, is one
of the writers in a work entitled Gesta dei per Francos, fol. Hanoviae,
1611, 2 vols. And the places quoted by Harmer may be found in vol. i.,
p. 282; and as the passage is singular, and a good use has been made of
it for the illustration of a difficult passage, I shall lay the words of
the original before the reader: "Proxima ab hinc die sabbati
clarescente, quidam Sarracenorum spe vitae in summitatem tecti domus
praecelsae Solomonis ab armis elapsi, circiter trecenti, confugerant.
Qui multa prece pro vita flagitantes, in mortis articulo positi, nullius
fiducia aut promissione audebant descendere, quousque vexillum Tankradi
in signum protectionis vivendi susceperunt. Sed minime misellis profuit.
Nam plurimis super hoc indignantibus, et Christianis furore commotis, ne
unus quidem illorum evasit."

It is very properly added by Albertus, that the noble spirit of Tancred
was filled with indignation at this most horrible breach of faith; and
he was about to take a summary revenge on the instigators and
perpetrators of this unprincipled butchery, when the chiefs interposed,
and not only maintained the expediency of the massacre that had already
been committed, but the necessity of putting all the inhabitants to the
sword. On this the savage fiends, called Christians, flew to arms, and
made a universal slaughter of all that remained of the inhabitants. They
drew out the prisoners, chopped off their heads, stabbed all they met
with in the streets, and-but I can translate no farther; it is too
horrible. I shall give my author's words, who was an ecclesiastic, and
wrote down the account from eye-witnesses: "Concilio hoc accepto, (the
determination of the chiefs to put all to the sword), tertio die post
victoriam egressa est sententia a majoribus: et ecce universi arma
rapiunt, et miserabili caede in omne vulgus Gentilium, quod adhuc erat
residuum, exsurgunt, alios producentes e vinculis et decollantes: alios
per vicos et plateas civitatis inventos trucidantes, quibus antea causa
pecuniae, aut humana pietate pepercerunt. Puellas vero, mulieres,
matronas nobiles, et faetas cum puellis tenellis detruncabant, aut
lapidibus obruebant, in nullis aliquam considerantes aetatem. E contra,
puellae, mulieres, matronae, metu momentaneae mortis angustiatae et
horrore gravissimae necis concussae Christianos in jugulum utriusque
sexus debacchantes ac saevientes, medios pro liberanda vita
amplexabantur, quaedam pedibus eorum advolvebantur, de vita et salute
sua illos nimium miserando fletu et ejulatu solicitantes. Pueri vero
quinquennes aut triennes matrum patrumque crudelem casum intuentes, una
miserum clamorem et fletum multiplicabant. Sed frustra haec pietatis et
misericordiae signa fiebant: nam Christiani sic neci totum laxaverunt
animum, ut non lugens masculus aut faemina, nedum infans unius anni
vivens, manum percussoris evaderet. Unde plateae totius civitatis
Jerusalem corporibus extinctis virorum et mulierum, lacerisque membris
infantium, adeo stratae et opertae fuisse referuntur, ut non solum in
vicis, soliis et palatiis, sed etiam in locis desertae solitudinis copia
occisorum reperiretur innumerabilis.'GestA Dei Vol. I., p. 283.

This is one specimen of the spirit of the crusaders, and is it any
wonder that God did not shine on such villanous measures! No wonder that
the Mohammedans have so long hated the name of Christian, when they had
no other specimen of Christianity than what the conduct of these
ferocious brutes exhibited; and these were called Gesta Dei, the
transactions of God!

There are many difficulties in this Psalm; whether they are in general
removed by the preceding notes, the reader must judge. The following
analysis is constructed on the supposition that the Psalm speaks of the
distracted state of the kingdom from the fatal battle of Gilboa, in
which Saul fell, to the death of Ishbosheth, when the whole kingdom was
united under David.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 61](psa061)

</div>
