<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa013)  [Next](psa015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 14:0</span></span>

The sentiments of atheists and deists, who deny the doctrine of a Divine
providence. Their character: they are corrupt, foolish, abominable, and
cruel, [Psa 14:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001). God fills them
with terror, [Psa 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005); reproaches
them for their oppression of the poor, [Psa
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#006). The psalmist prays for the
restoration of Israel, [Psa 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007).

There is nothing particular in the title; only it is probable that the
word לדוד ledavid, of David, is improperly prefixed, as it is
sufficiently evident, from the construction of the Psalm, that it speaks
of the Babylonish captivity. The author, whoever he was, (some say
Haggai, others Daniel, etc)., probably lived beyond the Euphrates. He
describes here, in fervid colors, the iniquity of the Chaldeans. He
predicts their terror and destruction; he consoles himself with the
prospect of a speedy return from his exile; and hopes soon to witness
the reunion of the tribes of Israel and Judah. It may be applied to
unbelievers in general.

[Psalms 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 14:1</span></span>

The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God - נבל nabal, which we
render fool, signifies an empty fellow, a contemptible person, a
villain. One who has a muddy head and an unclean heart; and, in his
darkness and folly, says in his heart, "There is no God." "And none,"
says one, "but a fool would say so." The word is not to be taken in the
strict sense in which we use the term atheist, that is, one who denies
the being of a God, or confounds him with matter. 1. There have been
some, not many, who have denied the existence of God. 2. There are
others who, without absolutely denying the Divine existence, deny his
providence; that is, they acknowledge a Being of infinite power, etc.,
but give him nothing to do, and no world to govern. 3. There are others,
and they are very numerous, who, while they profess to acknowledge both,
deny them in their heart, and live as if they were persuaded there was
no God either to punish or reward.

They are corrupt - They are in a state of putrescence and they have done
abominable works - the corruption of their hearts extends itself through
all the actions of their lives. They are a plague of the most deadly
kind; propagate nothing but destruction; and, like their father the
devil, spread far and wide the contagion of sin and death. Not one of
them does good. He cannot, for he has no Divine influence, and he denies
that such can be received.

[Psalms 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 14:2</span></span>

The Lord looked down from heaven - Words spoken after the manner of men.
From this glorious eminence God is represented as looking down upon the
habitable globe, to see if there were any that did understand that there
was a Supreme Being, the governor and judge of men; and, in consequence,
seek God for his mercy, support, and defense.

[Psalms 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 14:3</span></span>

They are all gone aside - They will not walk in the straight path. They
seek crooked ways; and they have departed from truth, and the God of
truth.

They are all together become filthy - נאלחו neelachu. They are become
sour and rancid; a metaphor taken from milk that has fermented and
turned sour, rancid, and worthless.

There is none that doeth good, no, not one - This is not only the state
of heathen Babylon! but the state of the whole inhabitants of the earth,
till the grace of God changes their heart. By nature, and from nature,
by practice, every man is sinful and corrupt. He feels no good; he is
disposed to no good; he does no good. And even God himself, who cannot
be deceived, cannot find a single exception to this! Lord, what is man?

The Vulgate, the Roman copy of the Septuagint, the Athtopic, and the
Arabic, add those six verses here which are quoted by St. Paul, [Rom
3:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013) (note). See the observations
at the end of this Psalm.

[Psalms 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 14:4</span></span>

Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? - Is there not one of
them who takes this dreadful subject into consideration? To their deeply
fallen state they add cruelty; they oppress and destroy the poor,
without either interest or reason.

Who eat up my people as they eat bread - Ye make them an easy and
unresisting prey. They have no power to oppose you, and therefore you
destroy them. That this is the meaning of the expression, is plain from
the speech of Joshua and Caleb relative to the Canaanites. [Num
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#009) : "Neither fear ye the people or
the land; for they are bread for us."

And call not upon the Lord - They have no defense, for they invoke not
the Lord. They are all either atheists or idolaters.

[Psalms 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 14:5</span></span>

There were they in great fear - This is a manifest allusion to the
history of the Canaanitish nations; they were struck with terror at the
sight of the Israelites, and by this allusion the psalmist shows that a
destruction similar to that which fell upon them, should fall on the
Babylonians. Several of the versions add, from [Psa
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#005), "Where no fear was." They were
struck with terror, where no real cause of terror existed. Their fears
had magnified their danger.

For God is in the generation - They feared the Israelites, because they
knew that the Almighty God was among them.

[Psalms 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 14:6</span></span>

Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor - Instead of תבישו tabishu, "Ye
have shamed," Bishop Horsley proposes to read תבישם tabishem, and
translates the clause thus: "The counsel of the helpless man shall put
them to shame." But this is not authorized by MS. or version. There is
no need for any change: the psalmist refers to the confidence which the
afflicted people professed to have in God for their deliverance, which
confidence the Babylonians turned into ridicule. The poor people took
counsel together to expect help from God and to wait patiently for it;
and this counsel ye derided, because ye did not know - did not consider,
that God was in the congregation of the righteous.

[Psalms 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 14:7</span></span>

O that the salvation - Or, more literally, Who will give from Zion
salvation to Israel? From Zion the deliverance must come; for God alone
can deliver them; but whom will he make his instruments?

When the Lord bringeth back - For it is Jehovah alone who can do it.
Jacob shall rejoice and Israel shall be glad. That is, according to
Calmet, the remains of the kingdom of Israel and those of Judah, shall
be rejoined, to their mutual satisfaction, and become one people,
worshipping the same God; and he has endeavoured to prove, in a
dissertation on the subject, that this actually took place after the
return from the Babylonish captivity.

Many of the fathers have understood this verse as referring to the
salvation of mankind by Jesus Christ; and so it is understood by my old
MS. Psalter, as the following paraphrase will show: Qwa sal gyf of Syon
hele til Israel? qwen Lord has turned a way the captyfte of his folk,
glad sal Jacob, and fayne be Israel. Qwa bot Crist that ge despyse, qwen
ge wit nout do his counsaile of Syon fra heven, sal gyf hele til Israel?
that es, sal saf al trew cristen men, noght als ge er that lufs noght
God. And qwen our Lord has turned o way the captyfte of his folk: that
es, qwen he has dampned the devel, and al his Servaundes, the qwilk
tourmentes gude men, and makes tham captyfs in pyne. Then glade sal
Jacob; that es, al that wirstils o gayns vices and actyf: and fayne sal
be Israel: that es, al that with the clene egh of thair hert, sees God
in contemplatyf lyf. For Jacob es als mikil at say als, Wrestler, or
suplanter of Syn. Israel es, man seand God.

Of the two chief opinions relative to the design of this Psalm:

1\. That it refers to Absalom's rebellion.

2\. That it is a complaint of the captives in Babylon; I incline to the
latter, as by far the most probable.

I have referred, in the note on [Psa
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003), to that remarkable addition of
no less than six verses, which is found here in the Vulgate, the Vatican
copy of the Septuagint, the Ethiopic, and the Arabic, and also in St.
Paul's Epistle to the Romans, [Rom
3:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013), which he is supposed to have
quoted from this Psalm as it then stood in the Hebrew text; or in the
version of the Seventy, from which it has been generally thought he
borrowed them. That they are not interpolations in the New Testament is
evident from this, that they are not wanting in any MS. yet discovered;
and they exist in all the ancient versions, the Vulgate, Syriac,
Ethiopic, and Arabic. Yet it has been contended, particularly by St.
Jerome, that St. Paul did not quote them from this Psalm; but, being
intent on showing the corruption and misery of man, he collected from
different parts several passages that bore upon the subject, and united
them here, with his quotation from [Psa
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003), as if they had all belonged to
that place: and that succeeding copyists, finding them in Romans, as
quoted from that Psalm, inserted them into the Septuagint, from which it
was presumed they had been lost. It does not appear that they made a
part of this Psalm in Origen's Hexapla. In the portions that still exist
of this Psalm there is not a word of these additional verses referred to
in that collection, neither here nor in the parallel [Psa
53:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001).

The places from which Jerome and others say St. Paul borrowed them are
the following: -

[Rom 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013) : "Their mouth is an open
sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit." Borrowed from [Psa
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#010). "The poison of asps is under
their lips." From [Psa 140:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#003).

[Rom 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#014) : "Whose mouth is full of
cursing and bitterness." From [Psa
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007).

[Rom 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#015) : "Their feet are swift to
shed blood." From [Pro 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#016), or [Isa
59:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#007).

[Rom 3:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#016) : "Destruction and misery
are in their ways, the way of peace they have not known, and there is no
fear of God before their eyes." From [Isa
59:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#007), [Isa
59:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#008).

When the reader has collated all these passages in the original, he will
probably feel little satisfaction relative to the probability of the
hypothesis they are summoned to support.

These verses are not found in the best copies of the Vulgate, though it
appears they were in the old Itala or Antehieronymain version. They are
not in the Codex Alexandrinus of the Septuagint; nor are they in either
the Greek or Latin text of the Complutenstan Polyglot. They are wanting
also in the Antwerp and Parisian Polyglots. They are neither in the
Chaldee nor Syriac versions. They are not acknowledged as a part of this
Psalm by Theodoret, Chrysostom, Euthymius, Arnobius, Apollinaris, the
Greek Catena, Eusebius, of Caesarea, nor Jerome. The latter, however,
acknowledges that they were in his time read in the churches. I have
seen no Latin MS. without them; and they are quoted by Justin Martyr and
Augustine. They are also in the Editio Princeps of the Vulgate, and in
all the ancient Psalters known. They are in that Psalter which I have
frequently quoted, both in the Latino - Scotico - English version and
paraphrase.

Of this version the following is a faithful copy, beginning with the
third verse of the fourteenth Psalm: -

Al tha helddid togyher; thai er made unprofytable:

Thar es none that dos gude; thar es none til one.

A grave opynnand, es the throte of tham.

With thaire tunges trycherusly thai wroght

Venym of snakes undir the lippis of tham.

Qwhas mouth es ful of werying and bitternes:

Swyft thaire fete to spil blode.

Brekyng and wikednes in thair waies:

And the way of pees thai knew noght:

The drede of God es noght byfore the eghen of thaim.

There is a good deal of difference between this, and that version
attributed to Wiclif, as it stands in my large MS. Bible, quoted in
different parts of the New Testament, particularly in [Co1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001), etc. I shall give it here line
for line with the above.

Alle boweden aweye to gydre: thei ben maad unprofitable:

There is not that doith good thing, ther is not to oon.

A Sepulcre opnyng is the throote of hem:

With her tungis thei diden gylinly; or trecherously:

The venym of eddris, that is clepid Aspis, under her lippis:

The mouth of whom is ful of cursing, or worrying and bittrenesse:

The feet of hem ben swift to schede out blood:

Contricion or defouling to God, and infelicite or cursidnesse, the wayes
of hem;

And thei knewen not the weyes of pees;

The dreed of God is not bifore her ygen.

The words underlined in the above are added by the translator as
explanatory of the preceding terms. It is worthy of remark that
Coverdale inserts the whole of the addition in this Psalm, and
Cardmarden has inserted it in his Bible, but in a letter different from
the text.

It is now time to state what has been deemed of considerable importance
to the authenticity of these verses; viz., that they are found in a
Hebrew MS., numbered by Kennicott in his catalogue 649. It is in the
public library at Leyden; contains the Psalms with a Latin version and
Scholia; and appears to have been written about the end of the
fourteenth century and probably by some Christian. I shall give the text
with a literal translation, as it stands in this MS., line for line with
the preceding: -

קבר פתוח גרונם

An open sepulcher is their throat;

לשונם יחליקיו

With their tongues they flatter;

חמת עכשוב תחת לשונם

The venom of the asp is under their tongue;

אשר פיהם אלה ומרמה מלא

Whose mouth of cursing and bitterness is full;

קלו רגליהם לשפוך דם

Swift are their feet to shed blood;

מזל רע ופגע רע בדרכיהם

An evil aspect, and an evil event, in their ways:

ודרך שלום לא ידעו

And the way of peace they know not.

אי פחד אלהים לנגר עיניהם

No fear of God before their eyes.

It would be easy to criticise upon the Hebrew In this long quotation. I
shall content myself with what Calmet, who received his information from
others that had inspected the Leyden MS., says of this addition: "Les
seavans, qui ont examine ce manuscrit, y ont remarque un Hebreu barbare
en cet endroit; et des facons de parler, qui ne sentent point les
siecles ou la langue Hebraique etoit en usage." "Learned men, who have
examined this MS., have remarked a barbarous Hebraism in this place, and
modes of speech which savor not of those ages in which the Hebrew
language was in use."

If this be an interpolation in the Psalm, it is very ancient; as we have
the testimony of Jerome, who was prejudiced against it, that it was read
in all the churches in his time, and how long before we cannot tell. And
that these verses are a valuable portion of Divine revelation, as they
stand in [Rom 3:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013), none can
successfully deny. See Rosenmuller, Kennicott, and De Rossi.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 15](psa015)

</div>
