<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa084)  [Next](psa086) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 85](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 85:0</span></span>

Thanksgiving to God for restoration to the Divine favor, [Psa
85:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#001); prayer for farther mercies,
[Psa 85:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#004); the psalmist waits for a
gracious answer in full confidence of receiving it, [Psa
85:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#008). He receives the assurance of the
greatest blessings, and exults in the prospect, [Psa
85:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#009).

The title of this Psalm we have seen before, [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001) : As to the time, it seems to
have been written during, or even after, the return from the Babylonish
captivity. In the three first verses the psalmist acknowledges the
goodness of God in bringing the people back to their own land; he next
prays to God to restore them to their ancient prosperity. In the spirit
of prophecy, he waits on God, and hears him promise to do it; and then
exults in the prospect of so great a good. The whole Psalm seems also to
have a reference to the redemption of the world by Jesus Christ.

[Psalms 85:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 85:1</span></span>

Lord, thou hast been favorable - Literally, Thou hast been well pleased
with thy land.

Thou hast brought back the captivity - This seems to fix the time of the
Psalm to be after the return of the Jews from Babylon.

[Psalms 85:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 85:2</span></span>

Thou hast forgiven the iniquity - נשאת עון nasatha avon, Thou hast
borne, or carried away, the iniquity. An allusion to the ceremony of the
scapegoat.

Thou hast covered all their sin - As thou hast freely forgiven it, its
offensiveness and abominable nature no longer appear. The whole is put
out of sight; and, as we are restored from our captivity, the
consequences no longer appear.

Selah - This is true. Our return to our own land is the full proof.

[Psalms 85:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 85:3</span></span>

Thou hast taken away - אספת asaphta, "Thou hast gathered up all thy
wrath." This carries on the metaphor in the second verse: "Thou hast
collected all thy wrath, and carried it away with all our iniquities."

[Psalms 85:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 85:4</span></span>

Turn us, O God of our salvation - Thou hast turned our captivity; now
convert our souls. And they find a reason for their prayer in an
attribute of their God; the God of their salvation. And as his work was
to save, they beg that his anger towards them might cease. The
Israelites were not restored from their captivity all at once. A few
returned with Zerubbabel; some more with Ezra and Nehemiah; but a great
number still remained in Babylonia, Media, Assyria, Egypt, and other
parts. The request of the psalmist is, to have a complete restoration of
all the Israelites from all places of their dispersion.

[Psalms 85:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 85:5</span></span>

Wilt thou draw out thine anger - We have already suffered much and long;
our fathers have suffered, and we have succeeded to their distresses.
Draw not out thy anger against us from generation to generation.

[Psalms 85:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 85:6</span></span>

Wilt thou not revive us - We have long had the sentence of death in
ourselves; and have feared an utter extinction. Shall not our nation yet
live before thee? Shall we not become once more numerous, pious, and
powerful, that

Thy people may rejoice in thee? - As the Source of all our mercies; and
give thee the glory due to thy name?

[Psalms 85:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 85:7</span></span>

Show us thy mercy - Blot out all our sins.

And grant us thy salvation - Give us such a complete deliverance as is
worthy of thy majesty and mercy to bestow!

[Psalms 85:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 85:8</span></span>

I will hear what God the Lord will speak - The psalmist goes as a
prophet to consult the Lord; and, having made his request, waits an
answer from the spirit of prophecy. He is satisfied that the answer will
be gracious; and having received it he relates it to the people.

He will speak peace - He will give prosperity to the people in general;
and to his saints - his followers, in particular.

But let them not turn again to folly - Let them not abuse the mercy of
their God, by sinning any more against him.

[Psalms 85:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 85:9</span></span>

Surely his salvation is nigh - To him who fears God, and trembles at his
word, his salvation is nigh at hand.

That glory may dwell in our land - That thy worship may be restored, the
temple rebuilt, and the Divine shechinah, or symbol of the presence of
God, resume its place. The pure and undefiled religion of God preached,
professed, and experienced in a nation, is the glory of that land. The
Prophet Haggai had said that the glory of the latter house - the temple
built after their return from Babylon, should be greater than the glory
of the former, viz., of that built by Solomon: but, as a building, it
was far inferior to the former; yet it had a superior glory in being
visited by Jesus Christ. This was the glory that excelled.

[Psalms 85:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 85:10</span></span>

Mercy and truth are met together - It would be more simple to translate
the original: -

חסד ואמת נפגשו

צדק ושלום נשקו

Chesed veemeth niphgashu;

Tsedek veshalom nashaku, - "

Mercy and truth have met on the way

Righteousness and peace have embraced."

This is a remarkable text, and much has been said on it: but there is a
beauty in it which, I think, has not been noticed.

Mercy and peace are on one side; truth and righteousness on the other.
Truth requires righteousness; mercy calls for peace.

They meet together on the way; one going to make inquisition for sin,
the other to plead for reconciliation. Having met, their differences on
certain considerations, not here particularly mentioned are adjusted;
and their mutual claims are blended together in one common interest; on
which peace and righteousness immediately embrace. Thus, righteousness
is given to truth, and peace is given to mercy.

Now, Where did these meet? In Christ Jesus.

When were they reconciled? When he poured out his life on Calvary.

[Psalms 85:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 85:11</span></span>

Truth shall spring out of the earth - In consequence of this wonderful
reconciliation, the truth of God shall prevail among men. The seeds of
it shall be so plentifully sown by the preaching of Christ and his
apostles that true religion shall be diffused over the world.

And righteousness shall look down from heaven - And be delighted with
the reformation of the sons of Adam; and shall be so satisfled with the
glorious work which is carried forward, that,

[Psalms 85:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 85:12</span></span>

The Lord shall give - good - הטוב hattob, The Good thing - what is the
supreme good, the summum bonum, for which man has searched in vain
through all his generations. Those who are reconciled to him through the
Son of his love shall enjoy the favor of their God; to have which is the
supreme happiness of man.

Our land shall yield her increase - There shall be neither dearth nor
barrenness; for truth, that springs out of the earth, shall yield an
abundant harvest, in the conversion of all nations to the faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

[Psalms 85:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 85:13</span></span>

Righteousness shall go before him - Perhaps this verse may receive its
best solution from [Rom 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025) : "Whom
God hath set for a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare
his Righteousness for the remission of sins that are past." This term
the apostle uses to point out God's method of justifying or saving
mankind. And this, in the preaching of the pure Gospel, is ever going
before to point out the Lord Jesus, and the redemption that is in his
blood. And thus going before him, the sinner, who feels his need of
salvation, is Set - in the way of his steps; as Bartimeus sat by the
way-side begging, by which way Jesus walked; and when he came where he
was, heard his prayer, and restored him his sight. Or, righteousness -
the pure and holy law of God, must be proclaimed as broken by sinners,
and calling aloud for vengeance, before they can see and feel their need
of Christ crucified. By the preaching of the law they are prepared to
receive the grace of the Gospel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 86](psa086)

</div>
