<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa096)  [Next](psa098) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 97](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 97:0</span></span>

The reign of Jehovah, its nature and blessedness, [Psa
97:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001), [Psa
97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002). He is fearful to the wicked,
[Psa 97:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#003). Idolaters shall be
destroyed, [Psa 97:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#007). The blessedness
of the righteous, [Psa 97:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#008).

This Psalm has no title either in the Hebrew or Chaldee; and in fourteen
of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS. it is written as a part of the
preceding. In the Vulgate it is thus entitled, Psalmus David, quando
terra ejus restituta est. "A Psalm of David when his land was restored;"
the meaning of which I suppose to be, after he had obtained possession
of the kingdom of Israel and Judah, and became king over all the tribes;
or perhaps, after he had gained possession of all those countries which
were originally granted to the Israelites in the Divine promise. See
[Ch1 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#001), [Ch1
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#002). The Septuagint is nearly to the
same purpose, ὁτι ἡ γη αυτου καθισταται, "when his land was
established:" so the Ethiopic and Arabic. The Syriac has, "A Psalm of
David, in which he predicts the advent of Christ, (i.e., in the flesh),
and through it his last appearing, (i.e., to judgment.") The author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews [Ch1 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#006),
quotes a part of the seventh verse of this Psalm, and applies it to
Christ. Who the author was is uncertain: it is much in the spirit of
David's finest compositions; and yet many learned men suppose it was
written to celebrate the Lord's power and goodness in the restoration of
the Jews from the Babylonish captivity.

[Psalms 97:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 97:1</span></span>

The Lord reigneth - Here is a simple proposition, which is a
self-evident axiom, and requires no proof: Jehovah is infinite and
eternal; is possessed of unlimited power and unerring wisdom; as he is
the Maker, so he must be the Governor, of all things. His authority is
absolute, and his government therefore universal. In all places, on all
occasions, and in all times, Jehovah reigns.

But this supreme King is not only called hwhy Yehovah, which signifies
his infinite and eternal being, unlimited power, and unerring wisdom;
and, as Creator, his universal government; but he is also ynd) Adonai,
the Director and Judge. He directs human actions by his word, Spirit,
and Providence. Hence are his laws and revelation in general; for the
governed should know their governor, and should be acquainted with his
laws, and the reasons on which obedience is founded. As Adonai or
Director, he shows them the difference between good and evil; and their
duty to their God, their neighbors, and themselves: and he finally
becomes the Judge of their actions. But as his law is holy, and his
commandment holy, just, and good, and man is in a fallen, sinful state;
hence he reveals himself as; אלהים Elohim, God, entering into a gracious
covenant with mankind, to enlighten his darkness, and help his
infirmities; that he may see what is just, and be able to do it. But as
this will not cancel the sins already committed, hence the necessity of
a Savior, an atonement; and hence the incarnation, passion, death, and
resurrection of our Lord Jesus. This is the provision made by the great
God for the more effectual administration of his kingdom upon earth.
Jehovah, Adonai, Elohim reigneth; et his animadversis, and these points
considered, it is no wonder that the psalmist should add,

Let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of isles be glad - The earth,
the terraqueous globe; especially, here, the vast continents, over every
part of which God's dominion extends. But it is not confined to them; it
takes in the islands of the sea; all the multitude of those islands,
even to the smallest inhabited rock; which are as much the objects of
his care, the number of their inhabitants considered, as the vastest
continents on which are founded the mightiest empires. All this
government springs from his holiness, righteousness, and benignity; and
is exercised in what we call providence, from pro, for, before, and
video, to see, which word is well defined and applied by Cicero:
Providentia est, per quam futurism aliquid videtur, antequam factum sit.
"Providence is that by which any thing future is seen before it takes
place." De Invent. c. 53. And, in reference to a Divine providence, he
took up the general opinion, viz., Esse deos, et eorum providentia
mundum administrari. De Divinat. c. 51, ad finem. "There are gods; and
by their providence the affairs of the world are administered."

This providence is not only general, taking in the earth and its
inhabitants, en masse; giving and establishing laws by which all things
shall be governed; but it is also particular; it takes in the multitudes
of the isles, as well as the vast continents; the different species as
well as the genera; the individual, as well as the family. As every
whole is composed of its parts, without the smallest of which it could
not be a whole; so all generals are composed of particulars. And by the
particular providence of God, the general providence is formed; he takes
care of each individual; and, consequently, he takes care of the whole.
Therefore, on the particular providence of God, the general providence
is built; and the general providence could not exist without the
particular, any more than a whole could subsist independently of its
parts. It is by this particular providence that God governs the
multitude of the isles, notices the fall of a sparrow, bottles; the
tears of the mourner, and numbers the hairs of his followers. Now, as
God is an infinitely wise and good Being, and governs the world in
wisdom and goodness, the earth may well rejoice and the multitude of the
isles be glad.

[Psalms 97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 97:2</span></span>

Clouds and darkness are round about him - It is granted that this is a
subject which cannot be comprehended. And why? Because God is infinite;
he acts from his own counsels, which are infinite; in reference to ends
which are also infinite: therefore, the reasons of his government cannot
be comprehended by the feeble, limited powers of man. There must be
clouds and darkness - an impenetrable obscurity, round about him; and we
can no more comprehend him in what is called aeternitas a parte ante -
the eternity that passed before time commenced, than we can in the
aeternitas a parte post - the eternity that is to come, when time shall
be no more. Yet such a Being cannot but see all things clearly, and do
all things well; therefore the psalmist properly asserts: -

Righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne -
Righteousness, צדק tsedek, the principle that acts according to justice
and equity; that gives to all their due, and ever holds in all things an
even balance. And judgment, משפט mishpat, the principle that discerns,
orders, directs, and determines every thing according to truth and
justice: these form the habitation of his throne; that is, his
government and management of the world are according to these; and
though we cannot see the springs, the secret counsels, and the times,
which this omniscient and almighty

Father must ever have in his own power, yet we may rest assured that all
his administration is wise, just, holy, good, and kind. For, although
his counsels be inscrutable, and the dispensations of his providence be
sometimes apparently unequal, yet righteousness and judgment are the
habitation of his throne.

In this most sublime description,the psalmist, by the figure termed
prosopopoeia, or personification, gives vitality and thought to all the
subjects he employs; here, the very throne of God is animated;
righteousness and judgment are two intellectual beings who support it.
The fire, the lightnings, the earth, the heavens themselves, are all
intellectual beings, which either accompany, go before him, or proclaim
his majesty.

[Psalms 97:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 97:3</span></span>

A fire goeth before him - Literally, this and the following verse may
refer to the electric fluid, or to manifestations of the Divine
displeasure, in which, by means of ethereal fire, God consumed his
enemies. But fire is generally represented as an accompaniment of the
appearances of the Supreme Being. He appeared on Mount Sinai in the
midst of fire, thunder, and lightninys, [Exo
19:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016). Daniel, [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009), [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010), represents the Sovereign Judge
as being on a throne which was a fiery flame, and the wheels of his
chariot like burning fire; and a fiery streamer issuing from it, and
coming forth from before him. St. Paul tells us ([Th2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008)) that the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in faming fire; and St.
Peter, ([Pe2 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007), [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010), [Pe2
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#011)), that when the Lord shall come
to judgment the heavens and the earth shall be destroyed by fire. the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, the elements melt with
fervent heat, and the earth and its works be burnt up. Here then, will
appear: -

"Our God in grandeur, and our world on fire."

Burneth up his enemies round about - The fire is his pioneer which
destroys all the hinderances in his way, and makes him a plain passage.

[Psalms 97:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 97:4</span></span>

His lightnings enlightened the world - Though this be no more than a
majestic description of the coming of the Lord, to confound his enemies
and succor his followers, yet some spiritualize the passage, and say,
the lightnings signify the apostles, who enlightened the world by their
heavenly doctrine.

The earth saw, and trembled - The earth is represented as a sentient
being. It saw the terrible majesty of God; and trembled through terror,
fearing it should be destroyed on account of the wickedness of its
inhabitants.

[Psalms 97:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 97:5</span></span>

The hills melted like wax - The fire of God seized on and liquefied
them, so that they no longer opposed his march; and the mountains before
him became a plain.

The Lord of the whole earth - אדון כל הארץ adon col haarets, the
Director, Stay, and Support of the whole earth. The universal Governor,
whose jurisdiction is not confined to any one place; but who, having
created all, governs all that he has made.

[Psalms 97:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 97:6</span></span>

The heavens declare his righteousness - They also, in this poetic
description, become intelligent beings, and proclaim the majesty and the
mercy of the Most High. Metaphorically, they may be said to declare his
glory. Their magnitude, number, revolutions, order, influence, and
harmony, proclaim the wondrous skill, matchless wisdom, and unlimited
power of the Sovereign of the universe. See the notes on [Psa
19:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001) (note).

And all the people see his glory - Whatsoever God has made proclaims his
eternal power and Godhead; and who, from a contemplation of the work of
his hands, can be ignorant of his being and providence?

[Psalms 97:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 97:7</span></span>

Confounded be fell they - Rather, They shall be confounded that boast
themselves in idols. There is a remarkable play on the letters here,
המתהללים hammithhalelim, who move like madmen; referring to the violent
gestures practiced in idolatrous rites.

Of idols - באלילים baelilim, in vanities, emptinesses; who "make much
ado about nothing," and take a mad and painful pleasure in ridiculous
and unprofitable ceremonies of religion.

Worship him - Who? Jesus: so says the apostle, [Heb
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006). Who will dare to dispute his
authority?

All ye gods - Οἱ αγγελοι αυτου, his angels: so the Septuagint and the
apostle: "Let all the angels of God worship him:" and the words are most
certainly applied to the Savior of the world by the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews; see the note there. The Chaldee says: "All
nations who worship idols shall adore him."

[Psalms 97:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 97:8</span></span>

Zion heard, and was glad - All the land of Israel, long desolated, heard
of the judgments which God had shown among the enemies of his people.

And the daughters of Judah - All the villages of the land - Zion as the
mother, and all the villages in the country as her daughters, rejoice in
the deliverance of God's people.

[Psalms 97:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 97:9</span></span>

For thou, Lord, art high - Thou art infinitely exalted above men and
angels.

[Psalms 97:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 97:10</span></span>

Ye that love the Lord hate evil - Because it is inconsistent with his
love to you, as well as your love to him.

He preserveth the souls of his saints - The saints, חסידיו chasidaiv,
his merciful people: their souls - lives, are precious in his sight. He
preserves them; keeps them from every evil, and every enemy.

Out of the hand of the wicked - From his power and influence.

[Psalms 97:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 97:11</span></span>

Light is sown for the righteous - The Divine light in the soul of man is
a seed which takes root, and springs up and increases thirty, sixty, and
a hundred fold. Gladness is also a seed: it is sown, and, if carefully
improved and cultivated, will also multiply itself into thousands. Every
grace of God is a seed which he intends should produce a thousand fold
in the hearts of genuine believers. We do not so much require more grace
from God, as the cultivation of what we have received. God will not give
more, unless we improve what we have got. Remember the parable of the
talents. Let the light and gladness be faithfully cultivated, and they
will multiply themselves till the whole body shall be full of light, and
the whole soul full of happiness. But it is the righteous only for whom
the light is sown; and the upright in heart alone for whom the gladness
is sown.

The words may also signify that, however distressed or persecuted the
righteous and the upright may be, it shall not be always so. As surely
as the grain that is sown in the earth shall vegetate, and bring forth
its proper fruit in its season, so surely shall light - prosperity, and
gladness - comfort and peace, be communicated to them. They also will
spring up in due time.

[Psalms 97:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 97:12</span></span>

Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous - It is your privilege to be happy.
Exult in him through whom ye have received the atonement. Rejoice; but
let it be in the Lord. All other joy is the mirth of fools, which is as
the crackling of thorns under a pot - it is a luminous blaze for a
moment, and leaves nothing but smoke and ashes behind.

At the remembrance of his holiness - But why should you give thanks at
the remembrance that God is holy? Because he has said, Be ye holy; for I
am holy: and in holiness alone true happiness is to be found. As he,
therefore, who hath called you is holy; so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation. False Christians hate the doctrine of Christian holiness;
they are willing to be holy in another, but not holy in themselves.
There is too much cross-bearing and self-denial in the doctrine of
holiness for them. A perfect heart they neither expect nor wish.

The analysis considers the whole Psalm as relating to Jesus Christ and
the last judgment: so it was understood by several of the ancient
fathers. The reader may take it in either sense.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 98](psa098)

</div>
