<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa068)  [Next](psa070) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 69](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 69:0</span></span>

The psalmist describes his afflicted state, and the wickedness of his
adversaries, vv. 1-21; he declares the miseries that should come upon
his enemies, [Psa 69:22-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022); enlarges
on has afflicted state, and expresses his confidence in God, [Psa
69:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#029); prophesies the restoration
of the Jews to their own land and temple, [Psa
69:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#035), [Psa
69:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#036).

The title is: "To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim, A Psalm of David."
See this title explained on Psalm 45 (note).

The Psalm is supposed to have been written during the captivity, and to
have been the work of some Levite Divinely inspired. It is a very fine
composition, equal to most in the Psalter. Several portions of it seem
to have a reference to our Lord; to his advent passion, resurrection,
the vocation of the Gentiles, the establishment of the Christian Church,
and the reprobation of the Jews. The ninth verse is quoted by St. John,
[Joh 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017). The twenty-first verse is
quoted by St. Matthew, [Mat 27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034),
[Mat 27:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048); by St. Mark, [Mar
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#023); by St. John, [Joh
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029); and applied to the sufferings
of our Lord, in the treatment he received from the Jews. St. Paul quotes
the twenty-second as a prophecy of the wickedness of the Jews, and the
punishment they were to receive. He quotes the twenty-third verse in the
same way. See [Isa 6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009) (note); [Joh
12:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#039) (note); [Rom
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#010) (note); [Co2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014) (note). Those portions which the
writers of the New Testament apply to our Lord, we may apply also; of
others we should be careful.

[Psalms 69:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 69:1</span></span>

The waters are come in unto my soul - I am in the deepest distress. The
waters have broken their dikes, and are just ready to sweep me away!
Save me, Lord! In such circumstances I can have no other help.

In the first, second, third, fourteenth, and fifteenth verses, the
psalmist, speaking in the person of the captives in Babylon, compares
their captivity to an abyss of waters, breaking all bounds, and ready to
swallow them up; to a deep mire, in which there was no solid bottom, and
no standing; and to a pot. in which they were about to be inclosed for
ever. This is strongly figurative, and very expressive.

[Psalms 69:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 69:3</span></span>

I am weary of my crying - A pathetic description of the state of the
poor captives for about seventy years.

[Psalms 69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 69:4</span></span>

Then I restored that which I took not away - I think, with Calmet, that
this is a sort of proverbial expression, like such as these, "Those who
suffered the wrong, pay the costs." Delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi.
"Kings sin, and the people are punished." "The fathers have eaten sour
grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge." Our fathers have
grievously sinned against the Lord, and we their posterity suffer for
it. See on [Psa 69:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#012) (note). Some
have applied it to our Lord. I restored, by my suffering and death, that
image of God and the Divine favor, which I took not away. That is, In my
human nature I expiated the crime that human beings had committed
against God. But such applications are very gratuitous.

[Psalms 69:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 69:5</span></span>

Thou knowest my foolishness - Though we have been brought into captivity
in consequence of the crimes of our fathers, yet we have guilt enough of
our own to merit a continuation of our miseries. How can such words as
are in this verse be attributed to our blessed Lord, however they may be
twisted or turned?

[Psalms 69:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 69:6</span></span>

Be ashamed for my sake - The sins of the Jews were a great
stumbling-block in the way of the conversion of the Gentiles. They had
been the peculiar people of the Lord. "How," say the Gentiles, "can a
pure and holy Being love such people?" They were now punished for their
crimes. "How," say the Gentiles, "can God deal so hardly with those whom
he professes to love?" The pious among the captives felt keenly, because
this reproach seemed to fall upon their gracious and merciful God.

[Psalms 69:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 69:7</span></span>

For thy sake I have borne reproach - The Gentiles have said, "Why such
an obstinate attachment to the worship of a Being who treats you so
rigorously, and who interests not himself in your comfort and
deliverance?" And in these cutting reproaches some of the ungodly Jews
took a part: "I am an alien to my mother's children."

[Psalms 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 69:9</span></span>

The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up - The strong desire to promote
thy glory has absorbed all others. All the desires of my body and soul
are wrapped up in this. This verse is very properly applied to our Lord,
[Joh 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017), who went about doing good;
and gave up his life, not only for the redemption of man, but to
"magnify the law, and make it honorable."

[Psalms 69:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 69:12</span></span>

They that sit in the gate - At the gates were the courts for public
justice; there were complaints lodged, and causes heard. No doubt many
vexatious complaints were made against the poor captives; and false
accusations, through which they grievously suffered; so that, literally,
they were often "obliged to restore that which they had not taken away."
See [Psa 69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004).

The song of the drunkards - These poor miserable people were exposed to
all sorts of indignities. Though the conduct is base, the exultation
over a fallen enemy is frequent. How miserable was this lot! Forsaken by
friends, scorned by enemies, insulted by inferiors; the scoff of
libertines, and the song of drunkards; besides hard travail of body,
miserably lodged and fed; with the burning crown of all, a deep load of
guilt upon the conscience. To such a life any death was preferable.

[Psalms 69:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 69:13</span></span>

My prayer is unto thee, O Lord, in an acceptable time - This seems to
refer to the end of the captivity, which Jeremiah had said should last
seventy years, [Jer 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011), [Jer
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#012) : "The whole land shall be a
desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations shall serve the king
of Babylon seventy years. And it shall come to pass, when seventy years
are accomplished, that I will punish the king of Babylon," etc. The
conclusion of this period was the accepted tome of which the psalmist
speaks. Now, they incessantly pray for the fulfillment of the promise
made by Jeremiah: and to hear them, would be the truth of God's
salvation; it would show the promise to be true, because the salvation -
the deliverance, was granted.

[Psalms 69:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 69:16</span></span>

Thy loving-kindness is good - The word חסד chesed signifies exuberance
of kindness, and the word רחמים rachamim, which we translate tender
mercies, signifies such affection as mothers bear to their young: and in
God, there is רב rob, a multitude, of such tender mercies towards the
children of men!

[Psalms 69:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 69:18</span></span>

Deliver me because of mine enemies - Probably they now began to think
that the redemption of these captives was not an impossible thing; that
it was not far off; and therefore they had great rage, because they
found their time was but short.

[Psalms 69:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 69:19</span></span>

Thou hast known my reproach - This is one of the most forcible appeals
to mercy and compassion that was ever made. The language of these two
verses is inimitable; and the sentiment cannot be mended. I can devise
no comment that would not lessen their effect.

[Psalms 69:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 69:21</span></span>

They gave me also gall for my meat - Even the food, necessary to
preserve us in their slavery, was frequently mingled with what rendered
it unpleasant and disgusting, though not absolutely unwholesome. And
vinegar, sour small wines, was given us for our beverage. This is
applied to our Lord, [Mat 27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034), where
the reader is requested to consult the notes.

[Psalms 69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 69:22</span></span>

Let their table become a snare - The execrations here and in the
following verses should be read in the future tense, because they are
predictive; and not in the imperative mood, as if they were the
offspring of the psalmist's resentment: "Their table Shall become a
snare; - their eyes Shall be darkened; - thou Wilt pour out thine
indignation upon them; - thy wrathful anger Shall take hold of them; -
their habitation Shall be desolate, - and none Shall dwell in their
tents."

The psalmist prophesies that the evils which they had inflicted on the
Israelites should be visited on themselves; that as they had made them
eat, drink, labor, and suffer, so God should in his judgment treat them.

[Psalms 69:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 69:27</span></span>

Add iniquity unto their iniquity - תנה עון על עונם tenah avon al avonam;
give iniquity, that is, the reward of it, upon or for their iniquity.
Or, as the original signifies perverseness, treat their perverseness
with perverseness: act, in thy judgments, as crookedly towards them as
they dealt crookedly towards thee. They shall get, in the way of
punishment, what they have dealt out in the way of oppression.

[Psalms 69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 69:28</span></span>

Let them be blotted out - They shall be blotted out from the land of the
living. They shall be cut off from life, which they have forfeited by
their cruelty and oppression. The psalmist is speaking of retributive
justice; and in this sense all these passages are to be understood.

And not be written with the righteous - They shall have no title to that
long life which God has promised to his followers.

[Psalms 69:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 69:29</span></span>

I am poor and sorrowful - Literally, I an laid low, and full of pain or
grief. Hence the prayer, "Let thy salvation, O God set me on high!" My
oppression has laid me low; thy salvation shall make me high!

[Psalms 69:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 69:31</span></span>

An ox or bullock that hath horns and hoofs - Oxen offered in sacrifice
had their horns and hoofs gilded; and the psalmist might mention these
parts of the victim more particularly, because they were more
conspicuous. Others think that full-grown animals are intended, those
that had perfect horns, in opposition to calves or steers. I think the
first the preferable sense; for the horns, etc., of consecrated animals
are thus ornamented in the east to the present day.

[Psalms 69:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 69:32</span></span>

The humble shall see this, and be glad - Those who are low, pressed down
by misfortune or cruelty, shall see this and take courage; expecting
that thou wilt lift them up also; and thus the heart of those who seek
the Lord shall be revived.

[Psalms 69:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 69:33</span></span>

For the Lord heareth the poor - אביונים ebyonim, of the beggars. He
perhaps refers here to the case of the captives, many of whom were
reduced to the most abject state, so as to be obliged to beg bread from
their heathen oppressors.

His prisoners - The captives, shut up by his judgments in Chaldea,
without any civil liberty, like culprits in a prison.

[Psalms 69:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 69:34</span></span>

Let the heaven and earth praise him - The psalmist has the fullest
confidence that God will turn their captivity, and therefore calls upon
all creatures to magnify him for his mercy.

[Psalms 69:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 69:35</span></span>

God will save Zion - This fixes the Psalm to the time of the captivity.
There was no Zion belonging to the Jews in the time of Saul, when those
suppose the Psalm to be written who make David the author; for David
after he came to the throne, won the stronghold of Zion from the
Jebusites. [Sa2 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#007); [Ch1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#005).

Will build the cities of Judah - This refers to the return from the
captivity, when all the destroyed cities should be rebuilt, and the Jews
repossess their forfeited heritages. Some apply this to the redemption
of the human race; and suppose that Zion is the type of the Christian
Church into which the Gentiles were to be called. What evangelists and
apostles apply to our Lord, we safely may. What others see so clearly in
this Psalm relative to Gospel matters, I cannot discern.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 70](psa070)

</div>
