<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa056)  [Next](psa058) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 57](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 57:0</span></span>

David cries to God for mercy, with the strongest confidence of being
heard, [Psa 57:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001); he describes his
enemies as lions, [Psa 57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004); thanks
God for his deliverance, [Psa 57:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#005);
and purposes to publish the praises of the Lord among his people, [Psa
57:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#006).

The title is, To the chief Musician, Al-taschith, (destroy not), a
golden Psalms of David, (or one to be engraven), where he fed from Saul
in the cave. It is very likely that this Psalm was made to commemorate
his escape from Saul in the cave of En-gedi, where Saul had entered
without knowing that David was there, and David cut off the skirt of his
garment. And it is not improbable that, when he found that Saul was
providentially delivered into his hand, he might have formed the hasty
resolution to take away his life, as his companions counselled him to
do; and in that moment the Divine monition came, אל תשצת al tascheth!
Destroy not! lift not up thy hand against the Lord's anointed! Instead,
therefore, of taking away his life, he contented himself with taking
away his skirt, to show him that he had been in his power. When,
afterwards, he composed the Psalm, he gave it for title the words which
he received as a Divine warning. See the history 1 Samuel 24 (note): See
also my note upon the fourth verse of that chapter, [Sa1
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004) (note).

[Psalms 57:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 57:1</span></span>

Be merciful unto me - To show David's deep earnestness, he repeats this
twice; he was in great danger, surrounded by implacable enemies, and he
knew that God alone could deliver him.

My soul trusteth in thee - I put my life into thy hand; and my immortal
spirit knows no other portion than thyself.

In the shadow of thy wings - A metaphor taken from the brood of a hen
taking shelter under her wings when they see a bird of prey; and there
they continue to hide themselves till their evemy disappears. In a
storm, or tempest of rain, the mother covers them with her wings to
afford them shelter and defense. This the psalmist has particularly in
view, as the following words show: "Until these calamities be overpast."

[Psalms 57:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 57:2</span></span>

I will cry unto God most high - He is the Most High; and therefore far
above all my enemies, though the prince of the power of the air be at
their head.

Unto God, לאל lael, unto the strong Good, one against whom no human or
diabolic might can prevail. David felt his own weakness, and he knew the
strength of his adversaries; and therefore he views God under those
attributes and characters which were suited to his state. This is a
great secret in the Christian life; few pray to God wisely; though they
may do it fervently.

That performeth all things for me - Who works for me; גמר gomer, he who
completes for me, and will bring all to a happy issue.

[Psalms 57:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 57:3</span></span>

He shall send from heaven, and save me - Were there no human agents or
earthly means that he could employ, he would send his angels from heaven
to rescue me from my enemies. Or, He will give his command from heaven
that this may be done on earth.

Selah - I think this word should be at the end of the verse.

God shall send forth his mercy and his truth - Here mercy and truth are
personified. They are the messengers that God will send from heaven to
save me. His mercy ever inclines him to help and save the distressed.
This he has promised to do; and his truth binds him to fulfll the
promises or engagements his mercy has made, both to saints and sinners.

[Psalms 57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 57:4</span></span>

My soul is among lions - בתוך לבאם bethoch lebaim. I agree with Dr.
Kennicott that this should be translated, "My soul dwells in parched
places," from לאב laab, he thirsted. And thus the Chaldee seems to have
understood the place, though it be not explicit.

I lie even among them that are set on fire - I seem to be among coals.
It is no ordinary rage and malice by which I am pursued: each of my
enemies seems determined to have my life.

[Psalms 57:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 57:5</span></span>

Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens - Let the glory of thy mercy
and truth be seen in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath.
Several of the fathers apply what is said above to the passion of our
Lord, and what is said here to his resurrection.

[Psalms 57:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 57:6</span></span>

They have prepared a net for my steps - A gin or springe, such as
huntsmen put in the places which they know the prey they seek frequents:
such, also, as they place in passages in hedges, etc., through which the
game creeps.

They have digged a pit - Another method of catching game and wild
beasts. They dig a pit, cover it over with weak sticks and turf. The
beasts, not suspecting danger where none appears, in attempting to walk
over it, fall tbrough, and are taken. Saul digged a pit, laid snares for
the life of David; and fell into one of them himself, particularly at
the cave of En-gedi; for he entered into the very pit or cave where
David and his men were hidden, and his life lay at the generosity of the
very man whose life he was seeking! The rabbins tell a curious and
instructive tale concerning this: "God sent a spider to weave her web at
the mouth of the cave in which David and his men lay hid. When Saul saw
the spider's web over the cave's mouth, he very naturally conjectured
that it could neither be the haunt of men nor wild beasts; and therefore
went in with confidence to repose." The spider here, a vile and
contemptible animal, became the instrument in the hand of God of saving
David's life and of confounding Saul in his policy and malice. This may
be a fable; but it shows by what apparently insignificant means God, the
universal ruler, can accomplish the greatest and most beneficent ends.
Saul continued to dig pits to entrap David; and at last fell a prey to
his own obstinacy. We have a proverb to the same effect: Harm watch,
harm catch. The Greeks have one also: Ἡ τε κακη βουλη τῳ βουλευσαντι
κακιστη, "An evil advice often becomes most ruinous to the adviser." The
Romans have one to the same effect: -

Neque enim lex justior ulla est

Quam necis artificem arte perire sua.

"There is no law more just than that which condemns a man to suffer
death by the instrument which he has invented to take away the life of
others."

[Psalms 57:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 57:7</span></span>

My heart is fixed - My heart is prepared to do and suffer thy will. It
is fixed - it has made the firmest purpose through his strength by which
I can do all things.

[Psalms 57:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 57:8</span></span>

Awake up, my glory - Instead of כבודי kebodi, "my glory," one MS., and
the Syriac, have כנורי kinnori, "my harp." Dr. Kennicott reads כבורי
kebori, which he supposes to be some instrument of music; and adds that
the instrument used in church-music by the Ethiopians is now called כבר
kaber. I think the Syriac likely to be the true reading: "Awake up, my
harp; awake, psaltery and harp: I will awake early." Such repetitions
are frequent in the Hebrew poets. If we read my glory, it may refer
either to his tongue; or, which is more likely, to his skill in
composition, and in playing on differentt instruments. The five last
verses of this Psalm are nearly the same with the [Psa
108:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001) of [Psa
108:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001). The reason of this may be,
the notes or memoranda from the psalmist's diary were probably, through
mistake, twice copied. The insertion at the beginning of the 108th Psalm
seems to bear no relation to the rest of that ode.

Rabbi Solomon Jarchi tells us that David had a harp at his bed's head,
which played of itself when the north wind blew on it; and then David
arose to give praise to God. This account has been treated as a
ridiculous fable by grave Christian writers. I would however hesitate,
and ask one question: Does not the account itself point out an
instrument then well known, similar to the comparatively lately
discovered Aeolian harp? Was not this the instrument hung at David's
bed's head, which, when the night breeze (which probably blew at a
certain time) began to act upon the cords, sent forth those dulcet,
those heavenly sounds, for which the Aeolian harp is remarkable? "Awake,
my harp, at the due time: I will not wait for thee now, I have the
strongest cause for gratitude; I will awake earlier than usual to sing
the praises of my God."

[Psalms 57:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 57:9</span></span>

Among the people - The Israelites.

Among the nations - The Gentiles at large. A prophecy either relating to
the Gospel times, Christ being considered as the Speaker: or a
prediction that these Divine compositions should be sung, both in
synagogues and in Christian churches, in all the nations of the earth.
And it is so: wherever the name of Christ is known, there is David's
known also.

[Psalms 57:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 57:10</span></span>

Thy mercy is great unto the heavens - It is as far above all human
description and comprehension as the heavens are above the earth. See
the notes on [Psa 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#005), [Psa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006), where nearly the same words
occur.

[Psalms 57:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 57:11</span></span>

Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens - The same sentiments and
words which occur in [Psa 57:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#005) (note).
See the note there.

David was not only in a happy state of mind when he wrote this Psalm,
but in what is called a state of triumph. His confidence in God was
unbounded; though encompassed by the most ferocious enemies, and having
all things against him except God and his innocence. David will seldom
be found in a more blessed state than he here describes. Similar faith
in God will bring the same blessings to every true Christian in similar
circumstances.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 58](psa058)

</div>
