<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa029)  [Next](psa031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 30:0</span></span>

The psalmist returns thanks to God for deliverance from great danger,
[Psa 30:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001). He calls upon the saints
to give thanks to God at the remembrance of his holiness, because of his
readiness to save, [Psa 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004), [Psa
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005). He relates how his mind stood
affected before this great trial and how soon an unexpected change took
place, [Psa 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006), [Psa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007); mentions how, and in what terms,
he prayed for mercy, [Psa 30:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#008);
shows how God heard and delivered him and the effect it had upon his
mind, [Psa 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011), [Psa
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012).

This Psalm or song is said to have been made or used at the dedication
of the house of David, or rather the dedication of a house or temple;
for the word David refers not to הבית habbayith, the house, but to מזמור
mizmor, a Psalm. But what temple or house could this be? Some say, the
temple built by Solomon; others refer it to the dedication of the second
temple under Zerubbabel, and some think it intended for the dedication
of a third temple, which is to be built in the days of the Messiah.
There are others who confine it to the dedication of the house which
David built for himself on Mount Sion, after he had taken Jerusalem from
the Jebusites; or to the purgation and re-dedication of his own house,
that had been defiled by the wicked conduct of his own son Absalom.
Calmet supposes it to have been made by David on the dedication of the
place which he built on the threshing floor of Araunah, after the
grievous plague which had so nearly desolated the kingdom, [Sa2
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#025); [Ch1
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#026). All the parts of the Psalm
agree to this: and they agree to this so well, and to no other
hypothesis, that I feel myself justified in modelling the comment on
this principle alone.

[Psalms 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 30:1</span></span>

I will extol thee - for thou hast lifted me up - I will lift thee up,
for thou hast lifted me up. Thou hast made me blessed, and I will make
thee glorious. Thou hast magnified me in thy mercy; and I will show
forth thy praise, and speak good of thy name.

I have made some remarks on this Psalm in the Introduction.

In this Psalm we find seven different states of mind distinctly marked:
-

1\. It is implied, in the first verse, that David had been in great
distress, and nearly overwhelmed by his enemies.

2\. He extols God for having lifted him up, and having preserved him
from the cruelty of his adversaries, [Psa
30:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001).

3\. He is brought into great prosperity, trusts in what he had received,
and forgets to depend wholly on the Lord, [Psa
30:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004).

4\. The Lord hides his face from him, and he is brought into great
distress, [Psa 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007).

5\. He feels his loss, and makes earnest prayer and supplication, [Psa
30:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#008).

6\. He is restored to the Divine favor, and filled with joy, [Psa
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011).

7\. He purposes to glory in God alone, and to trust in him for ever,
[Psa 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012).

As it is impossible for any man to have passed through all these states
at the same time; it is supposed that the Psalm, like many others of the
same complexion, has been formed out of the memoranda of a diary. See
this point illustrated in the Introduction.

Thou hast lifted me up - Out of the pit into which I had fallen: the
vain curiosity, and want of trust in God, that induced me to number the
people. Bishop Horsley translates, Because thou hast depressed me. I
thank God for my humiliation and afflictions, because they have been the
means of teaching me lessons of great profit and importance.

[Psalms 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 30:2</span></span>

Thou hast healed me - Thou hast removed the plague from my people by
which they were perishing in thousands before my eyes.

[Psalms 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 30:3</span></span>

Thou hast brought up my soul from the grave - I and my people were both
about to be cut off, but thou hast spared us in mercy, and given us a
most glorious respite.

[Psalms 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 30:4</span></span>

Sing unto the Lord, O ye saints of his - Ye priests, who wait upon him
in his sanctuary, and whose business it is to offer prayers and
sacrifices for the people, magnify him for the mercy he has now showed
in staying this most destructive plague.

Give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness - "Be ye holy," saith the
Lord, "for I am holy." He who can give thanks at the remembrance of his
holiness, is one who loves holiness; who hates sin; who longs to be
saved from it; and takes encouragement at the recollection of God's
holiness, as he sees in this the holy nature which he is to share, and
the perfection which he is here to attain. But most who call themselves
Christians hate the doctrine of holiness; never hear it inculcated
without pain; and the principal part of their studies, and those of
their pastors, is to find out with how little holiness they can
rationally expect to enter into the kingdom of God. O fatal and
soul-destroying delusion! How long will a holy God suffer such
abominable doctrines to pollute his Church, and destroy the souls of
men?

[Psalms 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 30:5</span></span>

For his anger endureth but a moment - There is an elegant abruptness in
these words in the Hebrew text. This is the literal translation: "For a
moment in his anger. Lives in his favor. In the evening weeping may
lodge: but in the morning exultation." So good is God, that he cannot
delight in either the depression or ruin of his creatures. When he
afflicts, it is for our advantage, that we may be partakers of his
holiness, and be not condemned with the world. If he be angry with us,
it is but for a moment; but when we have recourse to him, and seek his
face, his favor is soon obtained, and there are lives in that favor -
the life that now is, and the life that is to come. When weeping comes,
it is only to lodge for the evening; but singing will surely come in the
morning. This description of God's slowness to anger, and readiness to
save, is given by a man long and deeply acquainted with God as his Judge
and as his Father.

[Psalms 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 30:6</span></span>

In my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved - Peace and prosperity
had seduced the heart of David, and led him to suppose that his mountain
- his dominion, stood so strong, that adversity could never affect him.
He wished to know the physical and political strength of his kingdom;
and, forgetting to depend upon God, he desired Joab to make a census of
the people; which God punished in the manner related in 2 Samuel 24, and
which he in this place appears to acknowledge.

[Psalms 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 30:7</span></span>

Thou didst hide thy face - Thou didst show thyself displeased with me
for my pride and forgetfulness of thee: and then I found how vainly I
had trusted in an arm of flesh.

[Psalms 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 30:8</span></span>

I cried to thee, O Lord - I found no help but in him against whom I had
sinned. See his confession and prayer, [Sa2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#017) (note).

Made supplication - Continued to urge my suit; was instant in prayer.

[Psalms 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 30:9</span></span>

What profit is there in my blood - My being cut off will not magnify thy
mercy. Let not the sword, therefore, come against me. If spared and
pardoned, I will declare thy truth; I will tell to all men what a
merciful and gracious Lord I have found. Hear, therefore, O Lord; [Psa
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#010).

[Psalms 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 30:11</span></span>

Thou hast turned - my mourning into dancing - Rather into piping. I have
not prayed in vain. Though I deserved to be cut off from the land of the
living, yet thou hast spared me, and the remnant of my people. Thou hast
taken away my sackcloth, the emblem of my distress and misery, and
girded me with gladness, when thou didst say to the destroying angel,
when he stood over Jerusalem ready to destroy it: "It is enough, stay
now thy hand;" [Sa2 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016).

[Psalms 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 30:12</span></span>

To the end that my glory may sing - The word כבוד cabod, which we here
translate glory, is sometimes taken to signify the liver. Here it is
supposed to mean the tongue; why not the heart? But does not David mean,
by his glory, the state of exaltation and honor to which God had raised
him, and in which he had before too much trusted; forgetting that he
held it in a state of dependence on God? Now he was disciplined into a
better sentiment. My glory before had sung praise to myself; in it I had
rested; on it I had presumed; and intoxicated with my success, I sent
Joab to number the people. Now my glory shall be employed for another
purpose; it shall give thanks to God, and never be silent. I shall
confess to all the world that all the good, the greatness, the honor,
the wealth, prosperity, and excellence I possess, came from God alone,
and that I hold them on his mere good pleasure. It is so; therefore, "O
Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever."

The old Psalter translates and paraphrases the last verse thus: - That
my joy syng til the, and I be noght stanged: Lord my God withouten ende
I sal schryf til the. The dede and the sorrow of oure syn God turnes in
til joy of remission; and scheres oway oure sekk-(drives away our
distress) and umgyfs (surrounds) qwen we dye, with gladness. That oure
joy syng til hym, that has gyfen us that joy; for we be "no more
stanged" (stung) with conscience of syn: na drede of dede or of dome;
bot withouten ende we sal loue (praise) him. Na tunge may telle na herte
may thynk the mykelnes of joy that es in louing (praising) of hym in
gast, and in sothfastnes," i.e., spirit and truth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 31](psa031)

</div>
