<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa003)  [Next](psa005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 4:0</span></span>

David prays to be heard, [Psa 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001);
expostulates with the ungodly, [Psa
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#002); exhorts them to turn to God, and
make their peace with him, [Psa 4:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003);
shows the vain pursuits of men in search of happiness, which he asserts
exists only in the approbation of God, [Psa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006), [Psa
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#007); commends himself to the Lord, and
then quietly takes his repose, [Psa
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#008).

This Psalm seems to have been composed on the same occasion with the
preceding, viz., Absalom's rebellion. It appears to have been an evening
hymn, sung by David and his company previously to their going to rest.
It is inscribed to the chief Musician upon Neginoth, למנצח בנגינות
lamnatstseach binginoth. Probably the first word comes from נצח natsach,
to be over, or preside; and may refer to the precentor in the choir.
Some suppose that it refers to the Lord Jesus, who is the Supreme
Governor, or victorious Person; the Giver of victory. Neginoth seems to
come from נגן nagan, to strike; and probably may signify some such
instruments as the cymbal, drum, etc., and stringed instruments in
general. But there is no certainty in these things. What they mean, or
what they were, is known to no man.

[Psalms 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 4:1</span></span>

Hear me when I call - No man has a right to expect God to hear him if he
do not call. Indeed, how shall he be heard if he speak not? There are
multitudes who expect the blessings of God as confidently as if they had
prayed for them most fervently; and yet such people pray not at all!

God of my righteousness - Whatever pardon, peace, holiness, or truth I
possess, has come entirely from thyself. Thou art the God of my
salvation, as thou art the God of my life.

Thou hast enlarged me - I was in prison; and thou hast brought me forth
abroad. Have mercy on me - continue to act in the same way. I shall
always need thy help; I shall never deserve to have it; let me have it
in the way of mere mercy, as thou hast hitherto done.

[Psalms 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 4:2</span></span>

O ye sons of men - בני איש beney ish, ye powerful men - ye who are now
at the head of affairs, or who are leaders of the multitude.

Love vanity - The poor, empty, shallow-brained, pretty-faced Absalom;
whose prospects are all vain, and whose promises are all empty!

Seek after leasing? - This is a Saxon word, from falsehood, from to lie.
Cardmarden has adopted this word in his translation, Rouen, 1566. It is
in none of the Bibles previously to that time, nor in any after, as far
as my own collection affords me evidence; and appears to have been
borrowed by King James's translators from the above.

Selah - Mark this! See what the end will be!

[Psalms 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 4:3</span></span>

The Lord hath set apart him that is godly - חסיד chasid, the pious,
benevolent man. He has marked such, and put them aside as his own
property. "This merciful man, this feeling, tender-hearted man, is my
own property; touch not a hair of his head!"

[Psalms 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 4:4</span></span>

Stand in awe, and sin not - The Septuagint, which is copied by St. Paul,
[Eph 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026), translate this clause,
Οργιζεσθε, και μη ἁμαρτανετε; Be ye angry, and sin not. The Vulgate,
Syriac, Ethiopic, and Arabic, give the same reading; and thus the
original רגזו rigzu might be translated: If ye be angry, and if ye think
ye have cause to be angry; do not let your disaffection carry you to
acts of rebellion against both God and your king. Consider the subject
deeply before you attempt to act. Do nothing rashly; do not justify one
evil act by another: sleep on the business; converse with your oten
heart upon your bed; consult your pillow.

And be still - ודמו vedommu, "and be dumb." Hold your peace; fear lest
ye be found fighting against God. Selah. Mark this!

[Psalms 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 4:5</span></span>

Offer the sacrifices of righteousness - Do not attempt to offer a
sacrifice to God for prosperity in your present rebellious conduct. Such
a sacrifice would be a sin. Turn to God from whom you have revolted; and
offer to him a righteous sacrifice, such as the law prescribes, and such
as he can receive. Let all hear and consider this saying. No sacrifice -
no performance of religious duty, will avail any man, if his heart be
not right with God. And let all know, that under the Gospel dispensation
no sacrifice of any kind will be received but through the all-atoning
sacrifice made by Christ.

Because of sin, justice has stopped every man's mouth; so that none can
have access to God, but through the Mediator. By him only can the mouth
of a sinner be opened to plead with God. Hear this, ye who trust in
yourselves, and hope for heaven without either faith or dependence on
the vicarious sacrifice of Christ.

[Psalms 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 4:6</span></span>

Who will show us any good? - This is not a fair translation. The word
any is not in the text, nor any thing equivalent to it; and not a few
have quoted it, and preached upon the text, placing the principal
emphasis on this illegitimate word.

The place is sufficiently emphatic without this. There are multitudes
who say, Who will show us good? Man wants good; he hates evil as evil,
because he has pain, suffering, and death through it; and he wishes to
find that supreme good which will content his heart, and save him from
evil. But men mistake this good. They look for a good that is to gratify
their passions; they have no notion of any happiness that does not come
to them through the medium of their senses. Therefore they reject
spiritual good, and they reject the Supreme God, by whom alone all the
powers of the soul of man can be gratified.

Lift thou up the light of thy countenance - This alone, the light of thy
countenance - thy peace and approbation, constitute the supreme good.
This is what we want, wish, and pray for. The first is the wish of the
worldling, the latter the wish of the godly.

[Psalms 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 4:7</span></span>

Thou hast put gladness in my heart - Thou hast given my soul what it
wanted and wished for. I find now a happiness which earthly things could
not produce. I have peace of conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost; such
inward happiness as they cannot boast who have got the highest increase
of corn and wine; those Two Things in the abundance of which many
suppose happiness to be found.

To corn and wine all the versions, except the Chaldee, add oil; for
corn, wine, and oil, were considered the highest blessings of a temporal
kind that man could possess.

[Psalms 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 4:8</span></span>

I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep - Most men lie down, and
most sleep, daily, for without rest and steep life could not be
preserved; but alas! how few lie down in peace! peace with their own
consciences, and peace with God! David had then two great blessings,
rest by sleep, and peace in his soul. He had a happy soul; and when he
lay down on his bed, his body soon enjoyed its repose, as the conscience
was in peace. And he had a third blessing, a confidence that he should
sleep in safety. And it was so. No fearful dreams disturbed his repose,
for he had a mind tranquillized by the peace of God. As to his body,
that enjoyed its due rest, for he had not overloaded nature either with
dainties or superfluities. Reader, are not many of thy sleepless hours
to be attributed to thy disordered soul - to a sense of guilt on thy
conscience, or to a fear of death and hell?

Pray incessantly till thou get the light of God's countenance, till his
Spirit bear witness with thine that thou art a child of God. Then thy
repose will do thee good: and even in thy sleep thy happy soul will be
getting forward to heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 5](psa005)

</div>
