<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa043)  [Next](psa045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 44:0</span></span>

The psalmist recounts the mercies of God; shows to his people how God in
ancient times gave them the victory over all their enemies, [Psa
44:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001); points out their present
miserable state, [Psa 44:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#009); asserts
that thy have not apostatized, and appeals to God for the truth of his
assertion, [Psa 44:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017); and calls
upon the Lord for deliverance from their enemies, [Psa
44:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023).

The title here is the same as that in [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001) (note); which see. The Syriac
says it was "A Psalm of the sons of Korah, which the people and Moses
sung at Horeb." Such titles are fancies to which no credit should be
attached. Like the preceding, it appears to belong to the time of the
captivity.

[Psalms 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 44:1</span></span>

We have heard with our ears - The psalmist begins with recounting the
marvellous interpositions of God in behalf of the Jewish people, that he
might the better strengthen his confidence, and form a ground on which
to build his expectation of additional help.

[Psalms 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 44:2</span></span>

Thou didst drove out the heathen - The Canaanites were as a bad tree
planted in a good soil, and bringing forth bad fruit with great
luxuriance. God plucked up this bad tree from the roots, and in its
place planted the Hebrews as a good tree, a good vine, and caused them
to take root, and fill the land.

[Psalms 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 44:3</span></span>

For they got not the land - Neither by their valor, nor cunning, nor for
their merit; yet, they were obliged to fight. But how did they conquer?
By the right hand of the Lord, and by his arm; by his strength alone,
and the light of his countenance - his favor most manifestly shown unto
them.

[Psalms 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 44:4</span></span>

Thou art my king - What thou wert to them, be to us. We believe in thee
as they did; we have sinned and are in captivity, but we repent and turn
unto thee; command, therefore, deliverances to Jacob, for we are the
descendants of him in whose behalf thou hast wrought such wonders.

[Psalms 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 44:5</span></span>

Through thee will we push down - Through thy Word, במימרא bemeimra, "Thy
substantial Word." - Chaldee. If thou be with us, who can be
successfully against us? Literally "We will toss them in the air with
our horn;" a metaphor taken from an ox or bull tossing the dogs into the
air which attack him.

Through thy name - Jehovah; the infinite, the omnipotent, the eternal
Being; whose power none is able to resist.

[Psalms 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 44:6</span></span>

I will not trust in my bow - As he is speaking of what God had already
done for his forefathers, these words should be read in the past tense:
"We have not trusted," etc.

[Psalms 44:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 44:8</span></span>

In God we boast - We have told the heathen how great and powerful our
God is. If thou do not deliver us by thy mighty power, they will not
believe our report, but consider that we are held in bondage by the
superior strength of their gods.

[Psalms 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 44:9</span></span>

But thou hast cast off - Our enemies have dominion over us.

And goest not forth with our armies - Were we to attempt to muster our
several tribes, and form a host, like our fathers when they came out of
Egypt, thou wouldst not accompany us as thou didst them: the horses and
chariots of the Babylonians would soon overtake and destroy us.

[Psalms 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 44:10</span></span>

Thou makest us to turn back - This thou didst: and our enemies,
profiting by the occasion, finding our strength was departed from us,
made us an easy prey, captivated our persons, and spoiled us of our
property.

[Psalms 44:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 44:11</span></span>

And hast scattered us among the heathen - This most evidently alludes to
the captivity. From the successful wars of the kings of Assyria and
Chaldea against the kings of Israel and Judah, and the dispersion of the
tribes under Tiglath-pileser, Shalmaneser, and Nebuchadnezzar, Jews have
been found in every province of the east; there they settled, and there
their successors may be found to the present day.

[Psalms 44:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 44:12</span></span>

Thou sellest thy people for nought - An allusion to the mode of
disposing of slaves by their proprietors or sovereigns. Instead of
seeking profit, thou hast made us a present to our enemies.

[Psalms 44:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 44:14</span></span>

Thou makest us a byword - We are evidently abandoned by thee, and are
become so very miserable in consequence, that we are a proverb among the
people: "See the Hebrews! see their misery and wretchedness! see how low
the wrath of God has brought down an offending people!" And the worst
curse that can be imprecated against a wicked nation is: "Mayest thou
become as wretched as the Jews;" or as the old Psalter: Thou has seet us
reprove til our neghburs: scornyng and hethyng til tha that er in our
umgang. That es, gref, tourment that es of our neghburs, and that
hethyng es noght sone gave or passand, that we suffer of tha, that er al
aboute us. When men sais so byfal ye, als byfel him."

[Psalms 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 44:17</span></span>

Yet have we not forgotten thee - These are bold words; but they must be
understood in a qualified sense. We have not apostatized from thee, we
have not fallen into idolatry. And this was strictly true: the charge of
idolatry could never be brought against the Jewish nation from the time
of the captivity, with sufficient evidence to support it.

[Psalms 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 44:19</span></span>

Thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons - Thou hast delivered
us into the hands of a fierce, cruel, and murderous people. We, as a
people, are in a similar state to one who has strayed into a wilderness,
where there are no human inhabitants; who hears nothing round about him
but the hissing of serpents, the howling of beasts of prey, and the
terrible roaring of the lion; and who expects every moment to be
devoured.

[Psalms 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 44:20</span></span>

If we have forgotten the name of our God - That name, יהוה Jehovah, by
which the true God was particularly distinguished, and which implied the
exclusion of all other objects of adoration.

Or stretched out our hands - Made supplication; offered prayer or
adoration to any strange god - a god that we had not known, nor had been
acknowledged by our fathers. It has already been remarked, that from the
time of the Babylonish captivity the Jews never relapsed into idolatry.
It was customary among the ancients, while praying, to stretch out their
hands towards the heavens, or the image they were worshipping, as if
they expected to receive the favor they were asking.

[Psalms 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 44:21</span></span>

Shall not God search this out? - We confidently appeal to the true Good,
the searcher of hearts, for the truth of this statement.

[Psalms 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 44:22</span></span>

For thy sake are we killed all the day long - Because of our attachment
to thee and to thy religion, we are exposed to continual death; and some
of us fail a daily sacrifice to the persecuting spirit of our enemies,
and we all carry our lives continually in our hands. In the same state
were the primitive Christians; and St. Paul applies these words to their
case, [Rom 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036).

[Psalms 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 44:23</span></span>

A wake, why steepest thou, O Lord? - That is, Why dost thou appear as
one asleep, who is regardless of the safety of his friends. This is a
freedom of speech which can only be allowed to inspired men; and in
their mouths it is always to be figuratively understood.

[Psalms 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 44:24</span></span>

Wherefore hidest thou thy face - Show us the cause why thou withdrawest
from us the testimony of thy approbation.

[Psalms 44:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 44:25</span></span>

Our soul is bowed down - Our life is drawing near to the grave. If thou
delay to help us, we shall become extinct.

[Psalms 44:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 44:26</span></span>

Arise for our help - Show forth thy power in delivering us from the
hands of our enemies.

Redeem us - Ransom us from our thraldom.

For thy mercies' sake - למען חסדך lemaan chasdecha, On account of thy
mercy. That we may have that proper view of thy mercy which we should
have, and that we may magnify it as we ought to do, redeem us. The
Vulgate has, Redime nos, propter nomen tuum, "Redeem us on account of
thy name;" which the old Psalter thus paraphrases: "Help us in
ryghtwysness, and by us (buy), that es, delyver us, that we be withouten
drede; and al this for thi name Jehsu; noght for oure merite."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 45](psa045)

</div>
