<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa026)  [Next](psa028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 27:0</span></span>

The righteous man's confidence in God, [Psa
27:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001); his ardent desire to have the
spiritual privilege of worshipping God in his temple, because of the
spiritual blessings which he expects to enjoy there, [Psa
27:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004); his prayer to God for
continual light and salvation, [Psa
27:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#007); has confidence that, though
even has ohm parents might forsake him, yet God would not, [Psa
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#010). Therefore he begs to be taught
the right way to be delivered from all his enemies, and to see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, [Psa
27:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#011); he exhorts others to trust
in God; to be of good courage; and to expect strength for their hearts,
[Psa 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#014).

In the Hebrew and Chaldee this Psalm has no other title than simply לדוד
ledavid: To or For David. In the Syriac: "For David; on account of an
infirmity which fell upon him." In the Vulgate, Septuagint, Arabic, and
Ethiopic, it has this title: "A Psalm of David, before he was anointed."
The Anglo-Saxon omits all the titles. For this title there is no
authority in fact. However, it may be just necessary to state that David
appears to have received the royal unction three times:

1\. In Bethlehem from the hand of Samuel, in the house of his father
Jesse; [Sa1 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013).

2\. At Hebron after the death of Saul, by the men of Judah, [Sa2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#004).

3\. By the elders of Israel, at Hebron, after the death of Ishbosheth,
when he was acknowledged king over all the tribes; [Sa2
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#003).

At which of these anointings the Psalm was written, or whether before
any of them, we know not; nor is the question to be decided. Some
commentators say that it is a Psalm belonging to the captivity, and upon
that system it may be well interpreted. And lastly, it has been
contended that it was written by David after he had been in danger of
losing his life by the hand of a gigantic Philistine, and must have
perished had he not been succoured by Abishai; see the account [Sa2
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#017) (note); and was counselled by
his subjects not to go out to battle any more, lest he should extinguish
the light of Israel. To these advisers he is supposed to make the
following reply: -

[Psalms 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 27:1</span></span>

The Lord is my light and my salvation - This light can never be
extinguished by man; the Lord is my salvation, my safeguard, my shield,
and my defense; of whom then should I be afraid?

[Psalms 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 27:2</span></span>

When the wicked - came upon me - Near as I appeared to you to be in
danger of losing my life, I was safe enough in the hands of the Lord;
and those who thought to have eaten me up, stumbled, failed of their
purpose and fell; the Philistine lost his own life.

[Psalms 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 27:3</span></span>

Though a host should encamp against me - I am so confident of the
Almighty's protection, that were I alone, and encompassed by a host, I
would not fear. I am in the hand of God; and while in that hand, I am
safe.

[Psalms 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 27:4</span></span>

One thing have I desired - If I am grown too old, and from that
circumstance unable to serve my country, I shall then prefer a
retirement to the tabernacle, there to serve God the rest of my days.
There I shall behold his glory, and there I may inquire and get
important answers respecting Israel.

But though these words may be thus interpreted, on the above
supposition, that David penned the Psalm on the occasion of his escape
from the Philistine, and the desire expressed by his subjects that he
should go no more out to war; yet it appears that they more naturally
belong to the captivity, and that this verse especially shows the
earnest longing of the captives to return to their own land, that they
might enjoy the benefit of Divine worship.

[Psalms 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 27:5</span></span>

He shall hide me in his pavilion - בסכה besuccoh, in his tabernacle. I
would make his temple my residence; I would dwell with God, and be in
continual safety. Pavilion comes from papilio and παπιλιων, a butterfly.
It signifies a tent made of cloth stretched out on poles, which in form
resembles in some measure the insect above named.

In the secret of his tabernacle - Were there no other place, he would
put me in the holy of holies, so that an enemy would not dare to
approach me.

He shall set me upon a rock - He shall so strengthen and establish me,
that my enemies shall not be able to prevail against me. He shall hide
me where they cannot find me, or put me out of the reach of the fiery
darts of the wicked. He who lives nearest to God suffers least from
temptation. "Draw nigh to God and he will draw nigh to thee: resist the
devil and he will flee from thee."

[Psalms 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 27:6</span></span>

Now shall mine head be lifted up - We shall most assuredly be redeemed
from this captivity, and restored to our own land, and to the worship of
our God in his own temple. There shall we offer sacrifices of joy; we
will sing praises unto the Lord, and acknowledge that it is by his might
and mercy alone that we have been delivered.

[Psalms 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 27:7</span></span>

Hear, O Lord, when I cry - This is the utmost that any man of common
sense can expect - to be heard when he cries. But there are multitudes
who suppose God will bless them whether they cry or not; and there are
others and not a few, who although they listlessly pray and cry not, yet
imagine God must and will hear them! God will answer them that pray and
cry; those who do not are most likely to be without the blessings which
they so much need.

[Psalms 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 27:8</span></span>

When thou saidst, Seek ye my face - How much labor and skill have been
employed to make sense of this verse as it stands in our translation!
The original words are the following, from which our Version has been
forcibly extracted: -

לך אמר לבי בקשו פני את פניך יהוה אבקש lecha amar libbi bakkeshu panai;
eth paneycha, Yehovah, abakkesh; of which I believe the true rendering
to be as follows: "Unto thee, my heart, he hath said, Seek ye my face.
Thy face, O Jehovah, I will seek. O my heart, God hath commanded thee to
seek his face." Then, his face I will seek. Which may be paraphrased
thus: Unto thee, his Church, God hath said Seek ye, all who compose it,
my face. To which I, his Church, have answered, Thy face, O Jehovah, I
will seek. On referring to Archbishop Secker, I find that he, and indeed
Bishop Horsley, are of the same mind.

I had formerly proposed another method of reading this difficult verse.
Suspecting that some error had got into the text, for בקשו פני bakkeshu
panay, "seek ye my face," I had substituted אבקש פניך abakkesh paneycha,
"I will seek thy face;" or with the Vulgate and Septuagint, בקשתי פניך
bakkesti paneycha, "I have sought thy face," exquisivit te facies mea,
Εξεζητησα το προσωπον σου. And this small alteration seemed to make a
good sense: "My heart said unto thee, I have sought thy face, (or, I
will seek thy face), and thy face, O Lord, I will seek." I have not only
done what it was my duty and interest to do, but I will continue to do
it. Some have proposed to mend the text thus: לך לך אמר לבי lech lecha,
amar libbi, "Go to, saith my heart," נבקש פני יהוה nebakkesh peney
Jehovah, "Let us seek the face of Jehovah." This is rather a violent
emendation, and is supported by neither MSS. nor Versions. The whole
verse is wanting in one of Dr. Kennicott's MSS. On the whole I prefer
what is first proposed, and which requires no alteration in the text;
next, that of the Vulgate and Septuagint.

The old Psalter paraphrases thus: Til yhe saide my hert, the my face
soght: thy face, lord, I sal seke. "The gernyng of my hert that spekes
til god, and he anely heres: saide til the my face, that es my presence
soght the and na nother thyng. And fra now I sal seke thy face
lastandly, til my dede; and that I fynd my sekyng:" i.e., To thee, said
my heart; thee my face sought: thy face, O Lord, I shall seek. The
gerning of my hert, that spekes til God, and he anely heres, "til the my
face"; that es, my presence soght the and no nother thyng: and fra now I
sal seke thy face lastandly, til my dede, and that I fynd my sekyng:"
i.e., The yearning strong desire of my heart, which speaks to God, and
he alone hears; my face is to thee; that is, myself sought thee, and
none other thing, and from now I shall seek thee lastingly till my
death, and till that I find what I seek.

[Psalms 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 27:9</span></span>

Hide not thy face - from me - As my face is towards thee wheresoever I
am, so let thy face be turned towards me. In a Persian MS. poem entitled
Shah we Gudda, "The King and the Beggar," I have found a remarkable
couplet, most strangely and artificially involved, which expresses
exactly the same sentiment one meaning of which is: -

Our face is towards Thee in all our ways;

Thy face is towards us in all our intentions.

Something similar, though not the same sentiment is in Hafiz, lib. i.,
gaz. v., cap. 2: -

How can we with the disciples turn our face towards the kaaba,

When our spiritual instructer turns his face to wards the wine-cellar?

I shall subjoin a higher authority than either: -

Ὁτι οφθαλμοι Κυριου επι δικαιους,

Και ωτα αυτου εις δεησις αυτων·

Προσωπον δε Κυριου επι ποιουντας κακα.

[Pe1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#012).

For the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous; And his ears to their
supplication: And the face of the Lord is upon the workers of evil.

[Psalms 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 27:10</span></span>

When my father and my mother forsake me - Or, more literally, "For my
father and my mother have forsaken me; but the Lord hath gathered me
up." My parents were my protectors for a time; but the Lord has been my
Protector always. There is no time in which I do not fall under his
merciful regards.

[Psalms 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 27:11</span></span>

Teach me thy way - Let me know the gracious designs of thy providence
towards me, that my heart may submit to thy will.

And lead me in a plain path - In the path of righteousness, because of
mine enemies, who watch for my halting.

[Psalms 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 27:12</span></span>

Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies - To their soul בנפש
benephesh; their whole soul thirsts for my destruction. Let them not be
gratified. They have suborned witnesses against me, but they are false
witnesses: unmask their wickedness, and confound their counsels.

[Psalms 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 27:13</span></span>

I had fainted, unless I had believed - The words in italics are supplied
by our translators; but, far from being necessary, they injure the
sense. Throw out the words I had fainted, and leave a break after the
verse, and the elegant figure of the psalmist will be preserved: "Unless
I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living" - What! what, alas! should have become of me!

Dr. Hammond has observed that there is a remarkable elegance in the
original, which, by the use of the beautiful figure aposiopesis, makes
an abrupt breaking off in the midst of a speech. He compares it to the
speech of Neptune to the winds that had raised the tempest to drown the
fleet of Aeneas - Aeneid. lib. i., ver. 131.

Eurum ad se zephyrumque vocat: dehinc talia fatur;

Tantane vos generis tenuit fiducia vestri?

Jam coelum terramque, meo sine numine, venti,

Miscere, et tantas audetis tollere moles?

Quos ego-sed motos praestat componere fluctus.

To Eurus and the western blast he cried,

Does your high birth inspire this boundless pride?

Audacious winds! without a power from me,

To raise at will such mountains on the sea?

Thus to confound heaven, earth, the air, and main;

Whom I - but, first, I'll calm the waves again.

Pitts.

[Psalms 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 27:14</span></span>

Wait on the Lord - All ye who are in distress, wait on the Lord. Take me
for an example. I waited on him, and he strengthened my heart; wait ye
on him, and he will strengthen your heart. You cannot be unsuccessful;
fear not. Wait, I say, on the Lord; wait for his succor in doing his
will. Age viriliter, says the Vulgate; act like a man, hope, believe,
work, and fear not.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 28](psa028)

</div>
