<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa019)  [Next](psa021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 20:0</span></span>

A prayer for the king in his enterprises, that his prayers may be heard,
his offerings accepted, and his wishes fulfilled, [Psa
20:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001). Confidence of victory
expressed, [Psa 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005), [Psa
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006). Vain hopes exposed; and
supplication made for the king, [Psa
20:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007).

It is most likely that this Psalm was penned on the occasion of David's
going to war, and most probably with the Ammonites and Syrians, who came
with great numbers of horses and chariots to fight with him. See [Sa2
10:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006); [Ch1
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#007). It is one of the Dialogue
Psalms, and appears to be thus divided: Previously to his undertaking
the war, David comes to the tabernacle to offer sacrifice. This being
done, the people, in the king's behalf, offer up their prayers; these
are included in the three first verses: the fourth was probably spoken
by the high priest; the fifth, by David and his attendants; the last
clause, by the high priest; the sixth, by the high priest, after the
victim was consumed; the seventh and eighth, by David and his men; and
the ninth, as a chorus by all the congregation.

[Psalms 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 20:1</span></span>

The Lord hear thee - David had already offered the sacrifice and prayed.
The people implore God to succor him in the day of trouble; of both
personal and national danger.

The name of the God of Jacob - This refers to Jacob's wrestling with the
Angel; [Gen 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024) (note), etc. And who
was this Angel? Evidently none other than the Angel of the Covenant, the
Lord Jesus, in whom was the name of God, the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. He was the God of Jacob, who blessed Jacob, and gave him a new
name and a new nature. See the notes on the above place in Genesis.

[Psalms 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 20:2</span></span>

Send thee help from the sanctuary - This was the place where God
recorded his name; the place where he was to be sought, and the place
where he manifested himself. He dwelt between the cherubim over the
mercyseat. He is now in Christ, reconciling the world to himself. This
is the true sanctuary where God must be sought.

Strengthen thee out of Zion - The temple or tabernacle where his prayers
and sacrifices were to be offered.

[Psalms 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 20:3</span></span>

Remember all thy offerings - The minchah, which is here mentioned, was a
gratitude-offering. It is rarely used to signify a bloody sacrifice.

Burnt sacrifice - The olah here mentioned was a bloody sacrifice. The
blood of the victim was spilt at the altar, and the flesh consumed. One
of these offerings implied a consciousness of sin in the offerer; and
this sacrifice he brought as an atonement: the other implied a sense of
mercies already received, and was offered in the way of gratitude.

David presents himself before the Lord with offerings of both kinds.

This prayer of the people is concluded with Selah, which we have taken
up in the general sense of so be it. Hear and answer. It will and must
be so, etc.

[Psalms 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 20:4</span></span>

Grant thee according to thine own heart - May God give thee whatsoever
thou art setting thy heart upon, and accomplish all thy desires! This
was probably the prayer of the high priest.

[Psalms 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 20:5</span></span>

We will rejoice in thy salvation - We expect help from thee alone; it is
in thy cause we engage; and to thee, as our war is a just one, we
consecrate our banners, inscribed with thy name. It is said that the
Maccabees had their name from the inscription on their banners; which
was taken from [Exo 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011), מי כמכה
באלם יהוה mi camochah baelim Yehovah, "Who is like unto thee, O Lord,
among the gods?" The word being formed from the initial letters מ M, כ
C, ב B, י I, מכבי Ma Ca B I, whence Maccabeus and Maccabees.

The words of this verse were spoken by David and his officers;
immediately after which I suppose the high priest to have added, The
Lord fulfill all thy petitions!

[Psalms 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 20:6</span></span>

Now know I that the Lord saveth his anointed - These are probably the
words of the priest after the victim had been consumed; and those signs
had accompanied the offering, which were proofs of God's acceptance of
the sacrifice; and, consequently, that the campaign would have a
successful issue. David is God's anointed; therefore, he is under his
especial care. He will hear him. David must continue to pray, and to
depend on God; else he cannot expect continual salvation. David has vast
multitudes of enemies against him; he, therefore, requires supernatural
help. Because of this, God will hear him with the saving strength of his
right hand.

The Hand of God is his power, the Right hand, his almighty power; the
Strength of his right hand, his almighty power in action; the Saving
strength of his right hand, the miraculous effects wrought by his
almighty power brought into action. This is what David was to expect;
and it was the prospect of this that caused him and his officers to
exult as they do in the following verse.

[Psalms 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 20:7</span></span>

Some trust in chariots - The words of the original are short and
emphatic: These in chariots; and these in horses; but we will record in
the name of Jehovah our God. Or, as the Septuagint, μεγαλυνθησομεθα, "we
shall be magnified." Or, as the Vulgate, invocabimus, "we shall invoke
the name of the Lord." This and the following verse I suppose to be the
words of David and his officers. And the mention of chariots and horses
makes it likely that the war with the Ammonites and Syrians is that to
which reference is made here; for they came against him with vast
multitudes of horsemen and chariots. See [Sa2
10:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006). According to the law, David
could neither have chariots nor horses; and those who came against him
with cavalry must have a very great advantage; but he saw that Jehovah
his God was more than a match for all his foes, and in him he trusts
with implicit confidence.

[Psalms 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 20:8</span></span>

They are brought down and fallen - They were so confident of victory
that they looked upon it as already gained. They who trusted in their
horses and chariots are bowed down, and prostrated on the earth: they
are all overthrown.

But we are risen - We who have trusted in the name of Jehovah are raised
up from all despondency; and we stand upright - we shall conquer, and go
on to conquer.

[Psalms 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 20:9</span></span>

Save, Lord - This verse was spoken by all the congregation, and was the
chorus and conclusion of the piece.

The verse may be read, Lord, save the king! He will hear as in the day
of our calling. The Vulgate, Septuagint, Ethiopic, Arabic, Anglo-Saxon,
read the verse thus: Lord, save the king! and hear us whensoever we
shall call upon thee. The Syriac reads differently: The Lord will save
us: and our king will hear us in the day in which we shall call upon
him. This refers all to God: while the others refer the latter clause to
David. Lord, save David; and David will save us. "If thou preservest
him, he will be thy minister for good to us." This appears to be the
easiest sense of the place, and harmonizes with all the rest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 21](psa021)

</div>
