<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa067)  [Next](psa069) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 68](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 68:0</span></span>

The psalmist calls upon God to arise, bless his people, and scatter his
enemies, [Psa 68:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001); exhorts them to
praise him for has greatness, tenderness, compassion, and judgments,
[Psa 68:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004); describes the grandeur of
his march when he went forth in the redemption of his people, [Psa
68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007), [Psa
68:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008); how he dispensed his blessings,
[Psa 68:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009), [Psa
68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010); what he will still continue to
do in their behalf, [Psa 68:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011); the
ejects produced by the manifestation of God's majesty, [Psa
68:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#014); he is praised for has
goodness, [Psa 68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019), [Psa
68:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020); for his judgments, [Psa
68:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#021); he tells in what manner the
Divine worship was conducted, [Psa
68:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#024); how God is to be honored,
[Psa 68:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028); all are invited to sing
his praises, and extol his greatness, [Psa
68:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#032).

In the title of this Psalm there is nothing particular to be remarked.
It is probable that this Psalm, or a part of it at least, might have
been composed by Moses, to be recited when the Israelites journeyed. See
[Num 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035); and that David, on the
same model, constructed this Psalm. It might have been sung also in the
ceremony of transporting the ark from Kirjath-jearim, to Jerusalem; or
from the house of Obed-edom to the tabernacle erected at Sion.

I know not how to undertake a comment on this Psalm: it is the most
difficult in the whole Psalter; and I cannot help adopting the opinion
of Simon De Muis: In hoc Psalmo tot ferme scopuli, tot labyrinthi, quot
versus, quot verba. Non immerito crux ingeniorum, et interpretum
opprobrium dici potest. "In this Psalm there are as many precipices and
labyrinths as there are verses or words. It may not be improperly
termed, the torture of critics, and the reproach of commentators." To
attempt any thing new on it would be dangerous; and to say what has been
so often said would be unsatisfactory. I am truly afraid to fall over
one of those precipices, or be endlessly entangled and lost in one of
these labyrinths. There are customs here referred to which I do not
fully understand; there are words whose meaning I cannot, to my own
satisfaction, ascertain; and allusions which are to me inexplicable. Yet
of the composition itself I have the highest opinion: it is sublime
beyond all comparison; it is constructed with an art truly admirable; it
possesses all the dignity of the sacred language; none but David could
have composed it; and, at this lapse of time, it would require no small
influence of the Spirit that was upon him, to give its true
interpretation. I shall subjoin a few notes, chiefly philological; and
beg leave to refer the reader to those who have written profusely and
laboriously on this sublime Psalm, particularly Venema, Calmet, Dr.
Chandler, and the writers in the Critici Sacri.

[Psalms 68:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 68:1</span></span>

Let God arise - This was sung when the Levites took up the ark upon
their shoulders; see [Num 10:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035)
(note), and the notes there.

[Psalms 68:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 68:4</span></span>

Extol him that rideth upon the heavens by his name Jah - "Extol him who
sitteth on the throne of glory, in the ninth heaven; Yah is his name;
and rejoice before him." - Targum.

בערבות baaraboth, which we render in the high heavens, is here of
doubtful signification. As it comes from the root ערב arab, to mingle,
(hence ereb the evening or twilight, because it appears to be formed of
an equal mixture of light and darkness; the Septuagint translate it
dusmwn, the west, or setting of the sun; so does the Vulgate and
others); probably it may mean the gloomy desert, through which God, in
the chariot of his glory, led the Israelites. If this interpretation do
not please, then let it be referred to the darkness in which God is said
to dwell, through which the rays of his power and love, in the various
dispensations of his power and mercy, shine forth for the comfort and
instruction of mankind.

By his name Jah - יה Yah, probably a contraction of the word יהוה
Yehovah; at least so the ancient Versions understood it. It is used but
in a few places in the sacred writings. It might be translated The Self
existent.

[Psalms 68:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 68:6</span></span>

The solitary in families - יחדים yechidim, the single persons.

Is not the meaning, God is the Author of marriage; and children, the
legal fruit of it, are an inheritance from him?

[Psalms 68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 68:7</span></span>

O God, when thou wentest forth - This and the following verse most
manifestly refer to the passage of the Israelites through the
wilderness.

[Psalms 68:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 68:9</span></span>

Didst send a plentiful rain - גשם נדבות geshem nedaboth, a shower of
liberality. I believe this to refer to the manna by which God refreshed
and preserved alive the weary and hungry Israelites.

[Psalms 68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 68:10</span></span>

Thy congregation hath dwelt therein - חיתך chaiyathecha, thy living
creature; τα ζωα, Septuagint; animalia, Vulgate; so all the Versions.
Does not this refer to the quails that were brought to the camp of the
Israelites, and dwelt, as it were, round about it? And was not this,
with the manna and the refreshing rock, that goodness which God had
provided for the poor - the needy Israelites?

[Psalms 68:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 68:11</span></span>

Great was the company of those that published it - המבשרות צבא רב
hammebasseroth tsaba rab; "Of the female preachers there was a great
host." Such is the literal translation of this passage; the reader may
make of it what he pleases. Some think it refers to the women who, with
music, songs, and dances, celebrated the victories of the Israelites
over their enemies. But the publication of good news, or of any joyful
event, belonged to the women. It was they who announced it to the people
at large; and to this universal custom, which prevails to the present
day, the psalmist alludes. See this established in the note on [Isa
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009) (note).

[Psalms 68:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 68:12</span></span>

Kings of armies did flee - Rabin and the kings of the Canaanites, who
united their forces to overwhelm the Israelites.

And she - Deborah the prophetess, a woman accustomed to tarry at home,
and take care of the family; she divided the spoils, and vanquished
their kings.

[Psalms 68:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 68:13</span></span>

Though ye have lien among the pots - The prophet is supposed here to
address the tribes of Reuben and Gad, who remained in their
inheritances, occupied with agricultural, maritime, and domestic
affairs, when the other tribes were obliged to go against Jabin, and the
other Canaanitish kings. Ye have been thus occupied, while your brethren
sustained a desperate campaign; but while you are inglorious, they
obtained the most splendid victory, and dwell under those rich tents
which they have taken from the enemy; coverings of the most beautiful
colors, adorned with gold and silver. The words בירקרק חרוץ birakrak
charuts, native gold, so exceedingly and splendidly yellow as to
approach to greenness - from ירק yarak, to be green; and the doubling of
the last syllable denotes an exeess in the denomination - excessively
green - blistering green. The Targum gives us a curious paraphrase of
this and the following verse: "If ye, O ye kings, slept among your
halls, the congregation of Israel, which is like a dove covered with the
clouds of glory, divided the prey of the Egyptians, purified silver, and
coffers full of the finest gold. And when it stretched out its hands in
prayer over the sea, the Almighty cast down kingdoms; and for its sake
cooled hell like snow, and snatched it from the shadow of death."
Perhaps the Romanists got some idea of purgatory here. For the sake of
the righteous, the flames of hell are extinguished!

[Psalms 68:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 68:15</span></span>

The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan - This and the following verse
should be read thus: "Is Mount Bashan the craggy mount, Mount Bashan,
the mount of God? Why envy ye, ye craggy mounts? This is the mount of
God in which he has desired to dwell." The Targum countenances this
translation: Mount Moriah, the place where our fathers of old worshipped
God, is chosen to build on it the house of the sanctuary, and Mount
Sinai for the giving of the law. Mount Bashan, Mount Tabor, and Carmel
are rejected; they are made as Mount Bashan."

[Psalms 68:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 68:16</span></span>

Why leap ye, ye high hills? - "God said, Why leap ye, ye high hills? It
is not pleasing to me to give my law upon high and towering hills.
Behold, Mount Sinai is low; and the Word of the Lord has desired to
place on it the Divine majesty. Moreover, the Lord dwells for ever in
the heaven of heavens." - Targum.

The psalmist is speaking particularly of the mountains of Judea, and
those of Gilead; the former were occupied by the Canaanites, and the
others by Og, king of Bashan, and Sihon, king of the Amorites, whom
Moses defeated.

[Psalms 68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 68:17</span></span>

The chariots of God are twenty thousand - רבתים אלפי שנאן ribbothayim
alpey shinan, "two myriads of thousands doubled." Does not this mean
simply forty thousand? A myriad is 10,000; two myriads, 20,000; these
doubled, 40,000. Or thus: 10,000 + 10,000 + 20,000 = 40,000. The Targum
says, "The chariots of God are two myriads; two thousand angels draw
them; the majesty of God rests upon them in holiness on Mount Sinai."
But what does this mean? We must die to know.

[Psalms 68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 68:18</span></span>

Thou hast ascended on high - When the ark had reached the top of Sion,
and was deposited in the place assigned for it, the singers joined in
the following chorus. This seems to be an allusion to a military
triumph. The conqueror was placed on a very elevated chariot.

Led captivity captive - The conquered kings and generals were usually
tied behind the chariot of the conqueror - bound to it, bound together,
and walked after it, to grace the triumph of the victor.

Thou hast received gifts for men - "And gave gifts unto men;" [Eph
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008). At such times the conqueror threw
money among the crowd. Thou hast received gifts among men, באדם baadam,
In Man, in human nature; and God manifest in the flesh dwells among
mortals! Thanks be to God for his unspeakable Gift! By establishing his
abode among the rebellious the prophet may refer to the conquest of the
land of Canaan, and the country beyond Jordan.

Yea, for the rebellious also - Even to the rebellious. Those who were
his enemies, who traduced his character and operations, and those who
fought against him now submit to him, and share his munificence; for it
is the property of a hero to be generous.

That the Lord God might dwell among them - יה אלהים yah Elohim, the
self-existing God; see on [Psa 68:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004)
(note). The conqueror now coming to fix his abode among the conquered
people to organize them under his laws, to govern and dispense justice
among them. The whole of this is very properly applied by St. Paul, [Eph
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005), to the resurrection and glory of
Christ; where the reader is requested to consult the note.

[Psalms 68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 68:19</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us - With benefits is not in the
text. Perhaps it would be better to translate the clause thus: "Blessed
be Adonai, our Prop day by day, who supports us." Or, "Blessed be the
Lord, who supports us day by day." Or as the Vulgate, Septuagint, and
Arabic: "Blessed be the Lord daily, our God who makes our journey
prosperous; even the God of our salvation." The Syriac, "Blessed be the
Lord daily, who hath chosen our inheritance." The word עמס amas, which
we translate to load, signifies to lift, bear up, support, or to bear a
burden for another. Hence it would not be going far from the ideal
meaning to translate: "Blessed be the Lord day by day, who bears our
burdens for us." But loadeth us with benefits is neither a translation
nor meaning.

[Psalms 68:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 68:20</span></span>

The issues from death - The going out or exodus from death - from the
land of Egypt and house of bondage. Or the expression may mean, Life and
death are in the hand of God. "He can create, and he destroy."

[Psalms 68:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 68:21</span></span>

The hairy scalp - קדקד שער kodkod sear. Does this mean any thing like
the Indian scalping? Or does it refer to a crest on a helmet or headcap?
I suppose the latter.

[Psalms 68:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 68:22</span></span>

From the depths of the sea - All this seems to speak of the defeat of
the Egypttians, and the miraculous passage of the Red Sea.

[Psalms 68:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 68:23</span></span>

That thy foot may be dipped in the blood - God will make such a
slaughter among his enemies, the Amorites, that thou shalt walk over
their dead bodies; and beasts of prey shall feed upon them.

[Psalms 68:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 68:24</span></span>

They have seen thy goings - These kings of the Amorites have seen thy
terrible majesty in their discomfiture, and the slaughter of their
subjects.

[Psalms 68:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 68:25</span></span>

The singers went before - This verse appears to be a description of the
procession.

[Psalms 68:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 68:26</span></span>

Bless ye God - This is what they sung.

[Psalms 68:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 68:27</span></span>

There is little Benjamin - This is a description of another part of the
procession.

[Psalms 68:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 68:28</span></span>

Thy God hath commanded - This and the following verses is what they
sung.

[Psalms 68:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 68:30</span></span>

Rebuke the company of spearmen - חית קנה chaiyath kaneh, the wild beast
of the reed - the crocodile or hippopotamus, the emblem of Pharaoh and
the Egyptians; thus all the Versions. Our translators have mistaken the
meaning; but they have put the true sense in the margin.

[Psalms 68:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 68:31</span></span>

Aethiopta shall soon stretch out her hands unto God - This verse had its
literal fulfillment under Solomon, when Egypt formed an alliance with
that king by his marriage with Pharaoh's daughter; and when the queen of
Sheba came to Jerusalem to hear the wisdom of Solomon. But as this may
be a prophetic declaration of the spread of Christianity, it was
literally fulfilled after the resurrection of our Lord. There were
Egyptians at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost, who, St. Hilary tells
us, on their return to their own country proclaimed what they had seen,
and became in that country the ambassadors of Christ. The Ethiopian
eunuch was one of the first among the Gentiles who received the Gospel.
Thus princes or chief men came out of Egypt, and Ethiopia stretched out
her hands to God. The words themselves refer to the sending ambassadors,
and making alliances. The Hebrew is very emphatic: כוש תריץ ידיו לאלהים
cush tarits yadiav lelohim; Cush will cause her hands to run out to God.
She will, with great alacrity and delight, surrender her power and
influence unto God. The Chaldee paraphrases well: "The sons of Cush will
run, that they may spread out their hands in prayer before God."

[Psalms 68:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 68:32</span></span>

Sing unto God - All the inhabitants of the earth are invited to sing
unto God, to acknowledge him as their God, and give him the praise due
to his name.

[Psalms 68:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 68:33</span></span>

Rideth upon the heavens - He who manages the heavens, directing their
course and influence, he formed every orb, ascertained its motion,
proportioned its solid contents to the orbit in which it was to revolve,
and the other bodies which belong to the same system. As an able and
skillful rider manages his horse, so does God the sun, moon, planets,
and all the hosts of heaven.

He doth send out his voice - At his word of command they run, shed, or
reflect their light; and without the smallest deviations obey his will.

Mighty voice - He thunders in the heavens, and men tremble before him.

[Psalms 68:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 68:34</span></span>

His strength is in the clouds - This refers to the bursting, rattling,
and pounding of thunder and lightning; for all nations have observed
that this is an irresistible agent; and even the most enlightened have
looked on it as an especial manifestation of the power and sovereignty
of God.

[Psalms 68:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 68:35</span></span>

O God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places - The sanctuary and
heaven. Out of the former he had often shone forth with consuming
splendor; see the case of Korah and his company: out of the latter he
had often appeared in terrible majesty in storms, thunder, lightning,
etc.

He that giveth strength and power unto his people - Therefore that
people must be invincible who have this strong and irresistible God for
their support.

Blessed be God - He alone is worthy to be worshipped. Without him
nothing is wise, nothing holy, nothing strong; and from him, as the
inexhaustible Fountain, all good must be derived. His mercy over his
creatures is equal to his majesty in the universe, and as he has all
good in his possession, so is he willing to deal it out, to supply the
utmost necessities of his creatures. Blessed be God! The Arabic adds,
Alleluiah!

The best analysis I find of this Psalm is that by Bishop Nicholson. I
shall give it at large, begging the reader to refer particularly to
those passages on which the preceding notes are written, as in some of
them the analysis gives a different view of the subject. The old Psalter
gives the whole Psalm a spiritual and mystical interpretation. And this
is commonly the ease in the commentaries of the fathers.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 69](psa069)

</div>
