<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa091)  [Next](psa093) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 92](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 92:0</span></span>

The psalmist shows the duty and advantage of praising God, [Psa
92:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#001); speaks of the grandeur of
God's works, [Psa 92:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#004); the fall of
the wicked, [Psa 92:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#007); the happiness
of the righteous, [Psa 92:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#010); and
all this founded on the perfections of God.

The title, A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath, gives no information
concerning the time, oecasion, or author. The Chaldee, has "Praise, and
a song which the first man spoke concerning the Sabbath:" but this is an
idle conceit; and, though entertained by some rabbins, has been followed
by none of the Versions. Calmet supposes the Psalm to have been composed
by some of the Levites during or near the close of the Babylonish
captivity, acknowledging the mercy of God, and foreseeing the desolation
of their enemies, and their own return to Jerusalem, and their temple
service.

[Psalms 92:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 92:1</span></span>

It is a good thing to give thanks - This Psalm begins very abruptly.
Good to confess unto the Lord. He had been acknowledging God's goodness,
and praising him for his mercy; and now he breaks out and tells how good
he felt this employment to be.

[Psalms 92:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 92:2</span></span>

To show forth thy loving-kindness - חסדך chasdecha, thy abundant mercy,
in the morning - that has preserved me throughout the night, and brought
me to the beginning of a new day: and thy faithfulness in the night,
that has so amply fulfilled the promise of preservation during the
course of the day. This verse contains a general plan for morning and
evening prayer.

[Psalms 92:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 92:3</span></span>

Upon an instrument of ten strings - Eusebius, in his comment on this
Psalm, says: Ψαλτηριον δε δεκαχορδον, ἡ του Ἁγιου Πνευματος δια των
αισθητηριων πεντε μεν του σωματος, ισαριθμων δε της ψυχης δυναμεων,
επιτελουμενη λατρεια· "The Psaltery of ten strings is the worship of the
Holy Spirit, performed by means of the five senses of the body, and by
the five powers of the soul." And, to confirm this interpretation, he
quotes the apostle, [Co1 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015) : "I
will pray with the spirit, and with the understanding also; I will sing
with the spirit, and with the understanding also." "As the mind has its
influence by which it moves the body, so the spirit has its own
influence by which it moves the soul." Whatever may be thought of this
gloss, one thing is pretty evident from it, that instrumental music was
not in use in the Church of Christ in the time of Eusebius. which was
near the middle of the fourth century. Had any such thing then existed
in the Christian Church, he would have doubtless alluded to or
spiritualized it; or, as he quoted the words of the apostle above, would
have shown that carnal usages were substituted for spiritual exercises.
I believe the whole verse should be translated thus: Upon the asur, upon
the nebel, upon the higgayon, with the kinnor. Thus it stands in the
Hebrew.

[Psalms 92:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 92:4</span></span>

For thou, Lord, hast made me glad through thy work - I am delighted with
thy conduct towards me; with the work of thy providence, the works of
thy grace, and thy works of creation.

[Psalms 92:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 92:5</span></span>

Hour great are thy works! - They are multitudinous, stupendous, and
splendid: and thy thoughts - thy designs and counsels, from which, by
which, and in reference to which, they have been formed; are very deep -
so profound as not to be fathomed by the comprehension of man.

[Psalms 92:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 92:6</span></span>

A brutish man knoweth not - איש בער ish baar, the human hog - the stupid
bear - the boor; the man who is all flesh; in whom spirit or intellect
neither seems to work nor exist. The brutish man, who never attempts to
see God in his works.

Neither doth a fool understand this - כסיל kesil, the fool, is different
from בער baar, the brutish man; the latter has mind, but it is buried in
flesh; the former has no mind, and his stupidity is unavoidable.

[Psalms 92:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 92:7</span></span>

When the wicked spring as the grass - This is a lesson which is
frequently inculcated in the sacred writings. The favor of God towards
man is not to be known by outward prosperity; nor is his disapprobation
to be known by the adverse circumstances in which any person may be
found. When, however, we see the wicked flourish, we may take for
granted that their abuse of God's mercies will cause him to cut them off
as cumberers of the ground; and, dying in their sins, they are destroyed
for ever.

[Psalms 92:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 92:8</span></span>

High for evermore - They are brought down and destroyed; but the Lord is
exalted eternally, both for his judgments and his mercies.

[Psalms 92:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 92:10</span></span>

Like the horn of a unicorn - ראים reeym, perhaps here, the oryx or
buffalo. But the rhinoceros seems to be the real monoceros of the
Scriptures.

I shall be anointed unth fresh oil - Perhaps the allusion is here not to
any sacramental anointing, but to such anointings as were frequent among
the Asiatics, especially after bathing, for the purpose of health and
activity.

[Psalms 92:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 92:11</span></span>

Mine eye also shall see, - and mine ears shall hear - Even in my own
times my enemies shall be destroyed; and of this destruction I shall
either be an eye-witness or have authentic information.

[Psalms 92:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 92:12</span></span>

The righteous shall flourish like the palm-tree - Very different from
the wicked, [Psa 92:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#007), who are likened
to grass. These shall have a short duration; but those shall have a long
and useful life. They are compared also to the cedar of Lebanon, an
incorruptible wood, and extremely long-lived. Mr. Maundrell, who visited
those trees in 1697, describes them thus: "These noble trees grow among
the snow, near the highest part of Lebanon. Some are very old, and of
prodigious bulk. I measured one of the largest, and found it twelve
yards six inches in girt, and yet sound; and thirty-seven yards in the
spread of its boughs. At about five or six yards from the ground, it was
divided into live limbs, each of which was equal to a large tree." Some
of these trees are supposed to have lived upwards of one thousand years!
The figure of the palm-tree gives us the idea of grandeur and
usefulness. The fruit of the palm-tree makes a great part of the diet of
the people of Arabia, part of Persia, and Upper Egypt. The stones are
ground down for the camels; the leaves are made into baskets; the hard
boughs, or rather strong leaves, some being six or eight feet in length,
make fences; the juice makes arrack, the threads of the web-like
integument between the leaves make ropes, and the rigging of small
vessels; and the wood serves for slighter buildings and fire-wood. In
short, the palm or date tree, and the olive, are two of the most
excellent and useful productions of the forest or the field.

The cedar gives us the idea of majesty, stability. durableness, and
incorruptibility. To these two trees, for the most obvious reasons, are
the righteous compared. William Lithgow, who traveled through the holy
land about a.d. 1600, describes the cedars of Mount Lebanon as "being in
number twenty-four, growing after the manner of oaks, but a great deal
taller straighter, and thicker, and the branches growing so straight,
and interlocking, as though they were kept by art: and yet from the root
to the top they bear no boughs, but grow straight and upwards like to a
palm-tree. Their circle-spread tops do kiss or embrace the lower clouds,
making their grandeur overlook the highest bodies of all other aspiring
trees. The nature of this tree is, that it is always green, yielding an
odoriferous smell, and an excellent kind of fruit, like unto apples, but
of a sweeter taste, and more wholesome. The roots of some of these
cedars are almost destroyed by the shepherds, who have made fires
thereat, and holes where they sleep; yet nevertheless they flourish
green above, in the tops and branches." - Lithgow's 17 years' Travels,
4th., London, 1640.

[Psalms 92:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 92:13</span></span>

Those that be planted in the house of the Lord - I believe the Chaldee
has the true meaning here: "His children shall be planted in the house
of the sanctuary of the Lord, and shall flourish in the courts of our
God." As these trees flourish in their respective soils and climates, so
shall the righteous in the ordinances of God. I do not think there is
any allusion to either palm-trees or cedars, planted near the tabernacle
or temple.

[Psalms 92:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 92:14</span></span>

They shall still bring forth fruit in old age - They shall continue to
grow in grace, and be fruitful to the end of their lives. It is a rare
case to find a man in old age full of faith, love, and spiritual
activity.

[Psalms 92:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 92:15</span></span>

To show that the Lord is upright - Such persons show how faithful God is
to his promises, how true to his word, how kind to them who trust in
him. He is the Rock, the Fountain, whence all good comes.

There is no unrighteousness in him - He does nothing evil, nothing
unwise, nothing unkind. He is both just and merciful.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 93](psa093)

</div>
