<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa044)  [Next](psa046) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 45:0</span></span>

The contents of this Psalm are generally summed up thus: The majesty and
grace of Christ's kingdom; or an epithalamium of Jesus Christ and the
Christian Church; the duty of this Church, and its privileges. The Psalm
contains a magnificent description of the beauty, ornaments, valor,
justice, and truth of the Divine Bridegroom; the beauty, magnificence,
and riches of the bride, who was to become mother of a numerous and
powerful posterity. The preamble is found in the title and [Psa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001). The description and character of
the Bridegroom, [Psa 45:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002). The
address to the bride by her companions, [Psa
45:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010). A prediction of her numerous
and glorious descendants, [Psa 45:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016),
[Psa 45:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#017).

The title is nearly the same with that of Psalm 69: and 80: "To the
chief musician, or master of the band of those who played on the
six-stringed instruments, giving instruction for the sons of Korah; a
song of loves, or amatory ode; or a song of the beloved maids." The
Vulgate and Septuagint have, For those who shall be changed, or brought
into another state, which some have interpreted as relating to the
resurrection of the just, but if I could persuade myself that the title
came by Divine inspiration, I would say it more properly belonged to the
calling and conversion of the Gentiles, and bringing them over from
idolatry to the worship of the true God. By some the word ששנים
shoshannim, is translated lilies; and a world of labor has been spent to
prove that these lilies mean the saints, Jesus Christ himself, and the
Divine light which is a banner to them that fear him. I cannot believe
that any such meaning is intended, and, consequently, I cannot attempt
to interpret the Psalm after this model. I believe it to be an
epithalamium, or nuptial song, which primarily respected Solomon's
marriage with the daughter of Pharaoh; and that it probably has a
prophetic reference to the conversion of the Gentiles, and the final
aggrandizement of the Christian Church.

[Psalms 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 45:1</span></span>

My heart is inditing a good matter - רחש rachash, boileth or bubbleth
up, as in the margin. It is a metaphor taken from a fountain that sends
up its waters from the earth in this way. The Vulgate has eructavit,
which is most literally translated by the old Psalter: Mi hert ryfted
gude word. My heart belcheth - Anglo-Saxon.

I speak of the things which I have made touching the king - אמר אני מעשי
למלך, literally, "I dedicate my work unto the king." Or, as the Psalter,
I say my werkes til the kyng. This was the general custom of the Asiatic
poets. They repeated their works before princes and honorable men; and
especially those parts in which there was either a direct or
constructive compliment to the great man. Virgil is reported to have a
part of his Aeneid before Augustus, who was so pleased with it that he
ordered ten sestertia to be given him for every line. And the famous
Persian poet Ferdusi read a part of his Shah Nameh before Sultan
Mahmoud, who promised him thirty thousand denars for the poem.

My tongue is the pen of a ready writer - I shall compose and speak as
fluently the Divine matter which is now in my heart, as the most expert
scribe can write from my recitation. My tung of maister swiftly wrytand.
"That es, my tung is pen of the Haly Gast; and nout but als his
instrument, wham he ledis als he wil. For I speke noght bot that he
settis on my tung; als the pen dos noght withouten the writer. Swyftly
wrytand, for the vertu of goddes inspiracioun is noght for to thynk with
mons study, that he schewes til other of the purete of heven; that es
some for to com that he wrytes." - Old Psalter.

[Psalms 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 45:2</span></span>

Thou art fairer than the children of men - By whom are these words
spoken? As this is a regular epithalamium, we are to consider that the
bride and bridegroom have compliments paid them by those called the
friends of the bridegroom, and the companions or maids of the bride. But
it seems that the whole Psalm, except the first verse, was spoken by
those who are called in the title ידידת yedidoth, the beloved maids, or
female companions, who begin with his perfections, and then describe
hers. And afterwards there is a prophetical declaration concerning his
issue. We may, therefore, consider that what is spoken here is spoken by
companions of the bride, or what are called yedidoth in the title. It
would be unauthenticated to say Solomon was the most beautiful man in
the universe; but to the perfections of the Lord Jesus they may be
safely applied.

Grace is poured into thy lips - This probably refers to his speech, or
the gracious words which he spoke. Solomon was renowned for wisdom, and
especially the wisdom of his conversation. The queen of Sheba came from
the uttermost parts of the land to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and so
far did she find him exceeding all his fame, that she said one half had
not been told her: but behold, a greater than Solomon is here. No man
ever spoke like this man, his enemies themselves being judges.

God hath blessed thee for ever - This, I am afraid, could in no sense be
ever spoken of Solomon; but of the man Christ Jesus it is strictly true.

[Psalms 45:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 45:3</span></span>

Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty - This clause should be
translated, O hero, gird thy sword upon thy thigh! This, I think, cannot
be spoken of Solomon. He was not a warlike prince: he never did any
feats of arms. It has been said he would have been a warrior, if he had
had enemies; it might have been so: but the words more properly apply to
Christ, who is King of kings, and Lord of lords; whose sword with two
edges, proceeding from his mouth, cuts all his adversaries to pieces.

With thy glory and thy majesty - Be as war-like as thou art glorious and
majestic. Solomon's court was splendid, and his person was majestic.
These words may be well said of him. But the majesty and glory of Christ
are above all: he is higher than all the kings of the earth; and has a
name above every name; and at it every knee shall bend, and every tongue
confess.

[Psalms 45:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 45:4</span></span>

In thy majesty ride prosperously - These words cannot be spoken of
Solomon; they are true only of Christ. His riding is the prosperous
progress of his Gospel over the earth. He uses no sword but the sword of
the Spirit; and what religion, system of truth, pretended or real, ever
made such progress as the religion of Christ has done, without one sword
being ever drawn to propagate it from the first introduction of
Christianity to the present time? His Gospel is Truth, proclaiming
Humility, ענוה anvah, and Righteousness. This, indeed, is the sum of the
Gospel; and an epitome of its operations in the hearts of men.

1\. The Gospel is a revelation of eternal Truth, in opposition to all
false systems of religion, and to all flgurative and ceremonial
representations of the true religion. It is truth concerning God, his
Nature, and his Works. It is truth concerning Man, his Origin, his
Intents, his Duties, and his End. It is truth in what it says concerning
the natural, the moral, and the invisible world.

2\. It teaches the doctrine of meekness or Humility; opposes pride and
vain glory; strips man of his assumed merits; proclaims and enforces the
necessity of humiliation or repentance because of sin, humiliation under
the providential hand of God, and humility in imitation of the character
of the Lord Jesus Christ throughout life.

3\. The Gospel teaches Righteousness: shows the nature of sin, wrong,
injustice, transgression, etc.; works righteousness in the heart; and
directs and influences to the practice of it in all the actions of life.
The Gospel leads him who is under its influences to give to all their
due; to God, to his neighbor, to himself. And it is by the propagation
of truth, humility, and righteousness, that the earth has become so far
blessed, and the kingdom of Christ become extended among men.

And thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things - The Chaldee is
different: "And the Lord will teach thee to perform terrible things by
thy right hand." The Arabic: "And with admiration shall thy right hand
direct thee." The Septuagint: "And thy right hand shall lead thee
wonderfully." To the same purpose are the Vulgate, Anglo-Saxon, and the
old Psalter. The meaning is, Nothing shall be able to resist thee, and
the judgments which thou shalt inflict on thine enemies shall be
terrible.

[Psalms 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 45:5</span></span>

Thine arrows are sharp - The arrows here may mean the convictions
produced in the hearts of men by the preaching of the Gospel. The King
is God himself; his enemies are sinners of all sorts. The people, the
Jews, thousands of whom were pricked in their hearts under the preaching
of Peter and others. All fall before Christ; those who received the word
rose again by repentance and faith; those who did not, fell down-all
down!

[Psalms 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 45:6</span></span>

Thy throne, O God, is for ever - כסאך אלהים עולם ועד kisacha Elohim olam
vaed. "O God, thy throne is for ever, and eternal!" The word Elohim here
is the very first term or name by which the Supreme God has made himself
known to the children of men. See [Gen
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001); and this very verse the apostle,
[Heb 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008), has applied to Jesus Christ.
On this I shall make a very short remark, but it shall be conclusive: If
the apostle did not believe Jesus Christ to be the true and eternal God,
he has utterly misapplied this Scripture.

The translation in the old Psalter, and the paraphrase will, on this
controverted text, be considered of some importance: Thi settil God in
werld of werlde: wande of ryghtyng wande of thi kyngedome. Here he loues
\[celebrates\] God Crist - of dome. Thi settil of demyng and of kynges
pouste. God es werld of werld for al that he demes es noght chaunged and
that byfalles the, for the wande that es ceptre and the governyng of thi
kyngdom es wande of ryghtyng, that ryghtes croked men this es the wand
of goddes evenes that ay es ryght and never croked that reules ryghtwis
men ard smytes wiked men. The reader will observe a blank space between
the word Crist and of dome: it is the same in the original. A word has
been so carefully erased with the scalpel in the above place, that not a
vestige of a letter is left. From the following words I should suspect
it to have been kynge or lard. Here he praises God, Christ, king of
judgment. However this may be, it is evident that this ancient
commentator understood the word God to be applied to Christ. I have
given the sentence as it is pointed in the original.

[Psalms 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 45:7</span></span>

Oil of gladness - As an evidence that all causes of mourning, sorrow,
and death, were at an end; as in the state of mourning the ancients did
not anoint themselves.

I have mentioned above that the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
[Heb 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008), [Heb
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#009), quotes [Psa
45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006), [Psa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007), of this Psalm. I shall subjoin
the substance of what I have written on these verses in that place: -

[Heb 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008)

Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever - If this be said of the Son of
God, i.e., Jesus Christ, then Jesus Christ must be God; and indeed the
design of the apostle is to prove this. The words here quoted are taken
from [Psa 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006), [Psa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007), which the ancient Chaldee
paraphrast, and the most intelligent rabbins, refer to the Messiah. On
the third verse of this Psalm, 'Thou art fairer than the children of
men,' the Targum says: 'Thy beauty, מלכא משיחא malca Meshicha, O King
Messiah, is greater than the children of men.' Aben Ezra says: 'This
Psalm speaks of David, or rather of his Son the Messiah, for this is his
name, [Eze 34:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#024) : And David my
servant shall be a prince over them for ever.' Other rabbins confirm
this opinion.

"This verse is very properly considered a proof, and indeed a strong
one, of the divinity of Christ; but some late versions of the New
Testament have endeavored to avoid the evidence of this proof by
translating the word thus: 'God is thy throne for ever and ever;' and if
this version be correct, it is certain that the text can be no proof of
the doctrine. Mr. Wakefield vindicates this translation at large in his
History of Opinions; and ὁ Θεος being the nominative case is supposed to
be sufficient justification of this version. In answer to this it may be
stated that the nominative case is often used for the vocative,
particularly by the Attics, and the whole scope of the place requires it
should be so used here; and with due deference to all of a contrary
opinion, the original Hebrew cannot be consistently translated any other
way; כסאך אלהים עולם ועד kisacha Elohim olam vaed, 'Thy throne, O God,
is for ever and to eternity.' It is in both worlds, and extends over all
time, and will exist through all endless duration. To this our Lord
seems to refer, [Mat 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018) : 'All
power is given unto me, both in Heaven and Earth.' My throne, i.e., my
dominion, extends from the creation to the consummation of all things.
These I have made, and these I uphold; and from the end of the world,
throughout eternity, I shall have the same glory - sovereign unlimited
power and authority, which I had with the Father before the world began;
[Joh 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005). I may add that none of the
ancient Versions has understood it in the way contended for by those who
deny the Godhead of Christ, either in the Psalm from which it is taken,
or in this place where it is quoted. Aquila translates אלהים Elohim, by
Θεε, O God, in the vocative case; and the Arabic adds the sign of the
vocative ya, reading the place thus: korsee yallaho ila abadilabada, the
same as in our Version. And even allowing that ὁ Θεος here is to be used
as the nominative case, it will not make the sense contended for without
adding εστι to it, a reading which is not countenanced by any Version,
nor by any MS. yet discovered. Wiclif, Coverdale, and others, understood
it as the nominative, and translated it so; and yet it is evident that
this nominative has the power of the vocative: Forsothe to the sone God
thi troone into the world of worlde: a gerde of equite the gerde of thi
reume. I give this, pointing and all, as it stands in my old MS. Bible.
Wiclif is nearly the same, but is evidently of a more modern cast: But
to the sone he seith, God thy trone is unto the world of world, a gherd
of equyte is the gherd of thi rewme. Coverdale translates it thus: 'But
unto the sonne he sayeth: God, thi seate endureth for ever and ever: the
cepter of thy kyngdome is a right cepter.' Tindal and others follow in
the same way, all reading it in the nominative case, with the force of
the vocative; for none of them has inserted the word εστι is, because
not authorized by the original; a word which the opposers of the
Divinity of our Lord are obliged to beg, in order to support their
interpretation.

A scepter of righteousness - The scepter, which was a sort of staff or
instrument of various forms, was the ensign of government, and is here
used for government itself. This the ancient Jewish writers understand
also of the Messiah.

[Heb 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#009)

Thou hast loved righteousness - This is the characteristic of a just
governor; he abhors and suppresses iniquity; he countenances and
supports righteousness and truth.

Therefore God, even thy God - The original, δια τουτου εχρισε δε, ὁ
Θεος, ὁ Θεος σου, may be thus translated: 'Therefore, O God, thy God
hath anointed thee.' The form of speech is nearly the same with that in
the preceding verse; but the sense is sufficiently clear if we read:
'Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee,' etc.

With the oil of gladness - We have often had occasion to remark that
anciently kings, priests, and prophets, were consecrated to their
several offices by anointing, and that this signified the gifts and
influences of the Divine Spirit. Christ, ὁ χριστος, signifies The
anointed One, the same as the Hebrew Messiah; and he is here said to be
'anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows.' None was ever
constituted prophet, priest, and king, but himself: some were kings
only, prophets only, and priests only; others were kings and priests, or
priests and prophets, or kings and prophets; but none had ever the three
offices in his own person but Jesus Christ; and none but himself can be
a King over the universe, a Prophet to all intelligent beings, and a
Priest to the whole human race. Thus he is infinitely exalted beyond his
fellows - all that had ever borne the regal, prophetic, or sacerdotal
offices.

"Some think that the word μετοχους, fellows, refers to believers who are
made partakers of the same Spirit, but cannot have its infinite
plenitude. The first sense seems the best. Gladness is used to express
the festivities which took place on the inauguration of kings," etc.

[Psalms 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 45:8</span></span>

All thy garments smell of myrrh - The Asiatics are very partial to
perfumes; every thing with them is perfumed, and especially their
garments. And the ivory palaces mentioned are the wardrobes inlaid with
ivory, in which their numerous changes of raiment were deposited. Myrrh
and aloes are well known; cassia is probably the bark or wood of the
cinnamon tree. These with frankincense, galbanum and other odoriferous
drugs, were and are frequently used in the perfumes of the Asiatic
nations.

Whereby they have made thee glad - Referring to the effect of strong
perfumes refreshing and exhilarating the spirits.

[Psalms 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 45:9</span></span>

Kings' daughters were among - Applied to Solomon, these words have no
difficulty. We know he had seven hundred wives, princesses; and the
mention of those here may be intended only to show how highly respected
he was among the neighboring sovereigns, when they cheerfully gave him
their daughters to constitute his harem. If we apply it to Solomon's
marriage with the daughter of the king of Egypt, it may signify no more
than the princesses and ladies of honor who accompanied her to the
Israelitish court. Applied to Christ, it may signify that the Gospel,
though preached particularly to the poor, became also the means of
salvation to many of the kings, queens, and nobles, of the earth. The
Chaldee interprets the queen standing at his right hand, by the law; and
the honorable women, by the different regions and countries coming to
receive that law from his right hand. Perhaps by kings' daughters may be
meant different regions and countries, which are represented as
constituting the families of potentates. Whole nations shall be
converted to the Christian faith; and the queen - the Christian Church,
shall be most elegantly adorned with all the graces and good works which
at once constitute and adorn the Christian character.

[Psalms 45:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 45:10</span></span>

Hearken. O daughter, and consider - This is the beginning of the address
by the companions of the bride to their mistress; after having, in the
preceding verses, addressed the bridegroom; or, rather, given a
description of his person, qualities, and magnificence. Suppose the
daughter of Pharaoh to be intended, the words import: Thou art now
become the spouse of the most magnificent monarch in the universe. To
thee he must be all in all. Forget therefore thy own people - the
Egyptians, and take the Israelites in their place. Forget also thy
father's house; thou art now united to a new family. So shall the king -
Solomon, greatly desire thy beauty - thou wilt be, in all respects,
pleasing to him. And it is right thou shouldst act so; for he is now
become thy lord - thy supreme governor. And worship thou him - submit
thyself reverently and affectionately to all his commands.

Taken in reference to Christ and the Gospel, this is an address to the
Gentiles to forsake their idolatrous customs and connexions, to embrace
Christ and his Gospel in the spirit of reverence and obedience, with the
promise that, if beautified with the graces of his Spirit, Christ will
delight in them, and take them for his peculiar people; which has been
done.

[Psalms 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 45:12</span></span>

The daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift - The Tyrians shall pay
tribute to thy spouse, and assist him in all his grand and magnificent
operations.

As, at this time, Tyre was the greatest maritime and commercial city in
the world, it may be here taken as representing those places which lay
on the coasts of the sea, and carried on much traffic such as parts of
Syria, Egypt, Asia Minor, Greece, Italy, France, the British Isles,
etc., which first received the Gospel of Christ and were the instruments
of sending it to all the other nations of the earth.

Rich among the people - The most powerful and opulent empires, kingdoms,
and states, shall embrace Christianity, and entreat the favor of its
Author.

[Psalms 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 45:13</span></span>

The king's daughter is all glorious within - This, in some sense, may be
spoken of Solomon's bride, the daughter of the king of Egypt; and then
the expression may refer either to the cultivation of her mind, or the
ornaments and splendor of her palace. The Asiatic queens, sultanas, and
begums, scarcely ever appear in public. They abide in the harem in the
greatest luxury and splendor; and to this, as its literal meaning, the
text may possibly refer.

Her clothing is of wrought gold - Of the most costly embroidery: her
palace, and her person, are decorated in the very highest state of
elegance and magnificence.

Spiritually the king's daughter may mean the Christian Church filled
with the mind that was in Christ, and adorned with the graces of the
Holy Spirit; while the whole of its outward conduct is pure and holy,
ornamented with the works of faith and love, and always bringing forth
the fruits of the Spirit.

[Psalms 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 45:14</span></span>

She shall be brought unto the king - When an Asiatic princess is brought
to her spouse, she is inclosed in a palakee, and no part of her person
is visible. She is attended by her principal friends and companions, who
follow the palakee, and the ceremony is accompanied with great
rejoicing; and thus they enter into the palace of the king.

This part of this parabolical Psalm may refer to the glories of a future
state. The Christian Church shall be brought to the King eternal in the
great day, adorned with the graces of the Divine Spirit; and thus shall
all the redeemed of the Lord enter Into the king's palace - into the
everlasting joy of their Lord.

[Psalms 45:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 45:16</span></span>

Instead of thy fathers shalt be thy children - This is the third part,
or prophetic declaration relative to the numerous and powerful issue of
this marriage. Instead of the kindred, which thou hast left behind in
Egypt, thou shalt have numerous children. This cannot refer either to
Solomon, or to the daughter of Pharaoh; for there is no evidence that he
ever had a child by Pharaoh's daughter; and it is very certain that
Rehoboam, Solomon's successor, was not son to the daughter of Pharaoh;
nor did any princes of that line ever occupy a foreign throne; nor by
successive generations ever continue the remembrance of Solomon and his
Egyptian queen. The children mentioned here are generally supposed to
mean the apostles and their successors in the Christian ministry;
founding Churches all over the world, by whom the Christian name becomes
a memorial through all the earth.

[Psalms 45:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 45:17</span></span>

Therefore shall the people praise thee - They shall magnify the heavenly
Bridegroom, and sing the wonderful displays of his love to the

Church, his spouse. And the constant use of this Psalm in the Christian
Church is a literal fulfillment of the prophecy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 46](psa046)

</div>
