<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa060)  [Next](psa062) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 61](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 61:0</span></span>

The psalmist's prayer for those who mere banished from their own land,
and from the ordinances of God, [Psa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001), [Psa
61:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#002). He praises God for his past
mercies, [Psa 61:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#003); purposes to devote
himself entirely to his service, [Psa
61:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#004), [Psa
61:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#005). He prays for the king, [Psa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#006), [Psa
61:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#007); and promises to perform his vow
to the Lord daily, [Psa 61:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#008).

The title, To the chief Musician upon Neginath, נגינת. The verb נגן
nagan signifies to strike or play on a musical instrument, especially
one of the stringed kind; but the נגינות neginoth, as it is written in
about thirty MSS., may signify either the players on the instruments or
the instruments themselves. The Psalm appears to have been written about
the close of the captivity, and the most judicious interpreters refer it
to that period. On this supposition the notes are formed.

[Psalms 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 61:1</span></span>

Hear my cry, O God - In the midst of a long and painful captivity,
oppressed with suffering, encompassed with cruel enemies and isolent
masters, I address my humble prayer to Thee, O my God.

[Psalms 61:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 61:2</span></span>

From the end of the earth - ארץ arets should be here translated land,
not earth, and so it should be in numerous places besides. But here it
seems to mean the country beyond the Euphrates; as it is thought to do,
[Psa 65:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#005), [Psa
65:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#008), called there also the ends of
the earth or land. It may be remarked that the Jews were always more
pious and devoted to God in their afflictions and captivities, than when
in their own land, in ease and affluence. But who can bear prosperity?
How many hearts filled with heavenly ardor in affliction and persecution
have grown cold under the beams of the sun of prosperity!

Lead me to the rock that is higher than I - Direct me to a place of
refuge and safety. It is a metaphorical expression; and Calmet
interprets it of the liberty granted to the Jews by Cyrus to return to
their own land. This was a privilege far higher than any thing they
could expect. The fathers think Jesus Christ is meant by this high rock.

[Psalms 61:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 61:3</span></span>

Those hast been a shelter for me - During the whole duration of the
captivity God marvellously dealt with the poor Jews; so that, although
they were cast down, they were not utterly forsaken.

[Psalms 61:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 61:4</span></span>

I will abide in thy tabernacle - The greater portion of those Psalms
which were composed during and after the captivity, says Calmet, had
Levites and priests for their authors. Hence we find the ardent desire
so frequently expressed of seeing the temple; of praising God there; of
spending their lives in that place, performing the functions of their
sacred office. There I shall sojourn; - there I shall dwell, - be at
rest, - be in safety, - be covered with thy wings, as a bird in its nest
is covered with the wings of its mother. These simple comparisons, drawn
from rural affairs and ordinary occurrences, are more pleasing and
consolatory in the circumstances in question, than allegories derived
from subjects the most noble and sublime.

[Psalms 61:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 61:5</span></span>

Hast heard my vows - Often have I purposed to be wholly thine, - to
serve thee alone, - to give up my whole life to thy service: and thou
hast heard me, and taken me at my word; and given me that heritage, the
privilege of enjoying thee in thy ordinances, which is the lot of them
that fear thy name. The Psalm seems to have been composed either after
the captivity, or at the time that Cyrus published his decree in their
favor, as has been remarked before.

[Psalms 61:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 61:6</span></span>

Thou wilt prolong the king's life - The words are very emphatic, and can
refer to no ordinary person. Literally, "Days upon days thou wilt add to
the king; and his years shall be like the generations of this world, and
the generations of the world to come." This is precisely the paraphrase
I had given to this text before I had looked into the Chaldee Version;
and to which I need add nothing, as I am persuaded no earthly king is
intended: and it is Christ, as Mediator, that "shall abide before God
for ever," [Psa 61:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#007). Neither to
David, nor to any earthly sovereign, can these words be applied.

[Psalms 61:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 61:7</span></span>

He shall abide before God for ever - Literally, "He shall sit for ever
before the faces of God." He shall ever appear in the presence of God
for us. And he ever sits at the right hand of the Majesty on high; for
he undertook this office after having, by his sacrificial offering, made
atonement for our sins.

Prepare mercy and truth, which may preserve him - As Mediator, his
attendants will ever be mercy and truth. He will dispense the mercy of
God, and thus fulfill the truth of the various promises and predictions
which had preceded his incarnation. There is an obscurity in this
clause, חסד ואמת מן ינצרהו chesed veemeth man yintseruhu, owing to the
particle מן man, which some translate who or what; and others, number
thou, from מנה manah, to count. Houbigant, and he is followed by Bishop
Lowth, would read מיהוה miyehovah, Mercy and truth from Jehovah shall
preserve him. The AngloSaxon has, Mildheartedness, and soothfastness
his, who seeketh? which is nearly the rendering of the old Psalter:
Mercy and sothfastnes of him, wha sall seke? Dr. Kennicott says, מן man
is a Syriasm; and should be translated quaesoutinam, I beseech thee, - I
wish, - O that! On this very ground Coverdale appears to have
translated, O let thy lovynge mercy and faithfulnes preserve him! The
sense I have given above I conceive to be the true one.

[Psalms 61:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 61:8</span></span>

So will I sing praise unto thy name for evher - For the benefits which I
have received, and hope to receive endlessly from thee, I will to all
perpetuity praise thee.

That I may daily perform my vows - While I live, I shall יום יום yom,
yom, "day by day," each day as it succeeds, render to thee my vows - act
according to what I have often purposed, and as often promised. The
Chaldee ends remarkably: "Thus I will praise thy name for ever, when I
shall perform my vows in the day of the rederaption of Israel; and in
the day in which the King Messiah shall be anointed, that he may reign."

The ancient Jews were full of the expectation of the Messiah; the Jews
of the present day have given up their hope.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 62](psa062)

</div>
