<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa093)  [Next](psa095) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 94](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 94:0</span></span>

An appeal to God against oppressors, [Psa
94:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001). Expostulations with the
workers of iniquity, [Psa 94:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#008).
God's merciful dealings with his followers, [Psa
94:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#012); and their confidence in him,
[Psa 94:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#016). The punishment of the
wicked foretold, [Psa 94:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#020).

This Psalm has no title either in the Hebrew or Chaldee. The Vulgate,
Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Arabic, have "A Psalm of David, for the fourth
day of the week;" but this gives us no information on which we can rely.
In three of Kennicott's MSS. it is written as a part of the preceding.
It is probably a prayer of the captives in Babylon for deliverance; and
was written by the descendants of Moses, to whom some of the preceding
Psalms have been attributed. It contains a description of an iniquitous
and oppressive government, such as that under which the Israelites lived
in Babylon.

[Psalms 94:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 94:1</span></span>

O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth - God is the author of
retributive justice, as well as of mercy. This retributive justice is
what we often term vengeance, but perhaps improperly; for vengeance with
us signifies an excitement of angry passions, in order to gratify a
vindictive spirit, which supposes itself to have received some real
injury; whereas what is here referred to is that simple act of justice
which gives to all their due.

[Psalms 94:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 94:2</span></span>

Lift up thyself - Exert thy power.

Render a reward to the proud - To the Babylonians, who oppress and
insult us.

[Psalms 94:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 94:3</span></span>

How long shall the wicked triumph? - The wicked are often in prosperity;
and this only shows us of how little worth riches are in the sight of
God, when he bestows them on the most contemptible of mortals. But their
time and prosperity have their bounds.

[Psalms 94:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 94:4</span></span>

They utter and speak - יביאו yabbiu, their hearts get full of pride and
insolence; and then, from the abundance of such vile hearts, the mouth
speaks; and the speech is of hard things, threatening which they are
determined to execute, boastings of their power, authority, etc.

[Psalms 94:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 94:5</span></span>

They break in pieces thy people - This was true af the Babylonians.
Nehuchadnezzar slew many; carried the rest into captivity; ruined
Jerusalem; overturned the temple; sacked, pillaged, and destroyed all
the country.

[Psalms 94:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 94:6</span></span>

They slay the widow - Nebuchadnezzar carried on his wars with great
cruelty. He carried fire and sword every where; spared neither age, sex,
nor condition. The widow, the orphan, and the stranger, persons in the
most desolate condition of life, were not distinguished from others by
his ruthless sword.

[Psalms 94:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 94:7</span></span>

The Lord shall not see - This was either the language of infidelity or
insult. Indeed, what could the Babylonians know of the true God? They
might consider him as the God of a district or province, who knew
nothing and did nothing out of his own territories.

[Psalms 94:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 94:8</span></span>

Understand, ye brutish - These are the same expressions as in [Psa
92:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#006) (note), on which see the note.

[Psalms 94:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 94:9</span></span>

He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? - This is allowed to be an
unanswerable mode of argumentation. Whatever is found of excellence in
the creature, must be derived from the Creator, and exist in him in the
plenitude of infinite excellence. God, says St. Jerome, is all eye,
because he sees all; he is all hand, because he does all things; he is
all foot, for he is every where present. The psalmist does not say, He
that planted the ear, hath he not an ear? He that formed the eye, hath
he not eyes? No; but, Shall he not hear? Shall he not see! And why does
he say so? To prevent the error of humanizing God, of attributing
members or corporeal parts to the infinite Spirit. See Calmet.

[Psalms 94:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 94:10</span></span>

He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? - You, who are
heathens, and heathens of the most abandoned kind.

He that teacheth man knowledge - We here supply shall not he know? But
this is not acknowledged by the original, nor by any of the Versions.

Indeed it is not necessary; for either the words contain a simple
proposition, "It is he who teacheth man knowledge," or this clause
should be read in connection with [Psa
94:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011) : "Jehovah, who teacheth man
knowledge, knoweth the devices of man, that they are vanity." As he
teaches knowledge to man, must he not know all the reasonings and
devices of the human heart?

[Psalms 94:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 94:12</span></span>

Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest - תיסרנו teyasserennu, whom thou
instructest; and teachest him out of thy law. Two points here are worthy
of our most serious regard:

1\. God gives knowledge to man: gives him understanding and reason.

2\. He gives him a revelation of himself; he places before that reason
and understanding his Divine law.

This is God's system of teaching; and the human intellect is his gift,
which enables man to understand this teaching. We perhaps may add a
third thing here; that as by sin the understanding is darkened, he gives
the Holy Spirit to dispel this darkness from the intellect, in order
that his word may be properly apprehended and understood. But he gives
no new faculty; he removes the impediments from the old, and invigorates
it by his Divine energy.

[Psalms 94:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 94:13</span></span>

That thou mayest give him rest - He whom God instructs is made wise unto
salvation; and he who is thus taught has rest in his soul, and peace and
confidence in adversity.

[Psalms 94:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 94:14</span></span>

The Lord will not cast off his people - Though they are now suffering
under a grievous and oppressive captivity, yet the Lord hath not utterly
cast them off. They are his inheritance, and he will again restore them
to their own land.

[Psalms 94:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 94:15</span></span>

But judgment shall return unto righteousness - If we read יושב yosheb,
shalt sit, for ישוב yashub, shall return, which is only placing the ו
vau before the ש shin instead of after it, we have the following sense:
Until the just one shall sit in judgment, and after him all the upright
in heart. Cyrus has the epithet צדק tsedek, the just one, in different
places in the Prophet Isaiah. See [Isa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002), [Isa
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010); [Isa
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#008); [Isa
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#005). It was Cyrus who gave liberty to
the Jews, who appeared as their deliverer and conductor to their own
land, and they are all represented as following in his train.

[Psalms 94:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 94:16</span></span>

Who will rise up for me - Who is he that shall be the deliverer of thy
people? Who will come to our assistance against these wicked
Babylonians?

[Psalms 94:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 94:17</span></span>

Unless the Lord had been my help - Had not God in a strange manner
supported us while under his chastising hand, we had been utterly cut
off.

My soul had almost dwelt in silence - The Vulgate has in inferno, in
hell or the infernal world; the Septuagint, τῳ ᾁδῃ, in the invisible
world.

[Psalms 94:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 94:18</span></span>

When I said, My foot slippeth - When I found myself so weak and my enemy
so strong, that I got first off my guard, and then off my center of
gravity, and my fall appeared inevitable: -

Thy mercy, O Lord, held me up - יסעדני yisadeni, propped me. It is a
metaphor taken from any thing falling, that is propped, shored up, or
buttressed. How often does the mercy of God thus prevent the ruin of
weak believers, and of those who have been unfaithful!

[Psalms 94:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 94:19</span></span>

In the multitude of my thoughts - Of my griefs, (dolorum, Vulgate); my
sorrows, (οδυνων, Septuagint). According to the multitude of my trials
and distresses, have been the consolations which thou hast afforded me.
Or, While I have been deeply meditating on thy wondrous grace and mercy,
Divine light has broken in upon my soul, and I have been filled with
delight.

[Psalms 94:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 94:20</span></span>

Shall the throne of iniquity - No wicked king, judge, or magistrate
shall ever stand in thy presence. No countenance shall such have from
thy grace or providence.

Which frameth mischief - Devise, plan, and execute, as if they acted by
a positive law, and were strictly enjoined to do what they so much
delighted in.

[Psalms 94:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 94:21</span></span>

They gather themselves together - In every thing that is evil, they are
in unity. The devil, his angels, and his children, all join and draw
together when they have for their object the destruction of the works of
the Lord. But this was particularly the case with respect to the poor
Jews among the Babylonians: they were objects of their continual hatred,
and they labored for their destruction.

This and the following verses have been applied to our Lord, and the
treatment he met with both from his own countrymen and from the Romans.
They pretended to "judge him according to the law, and framed mischief
against him;" they "assembled together against the life of the righteous
one," and "condemned innocent blood;" but God evidently interposed, and
"brought upon them their own iniquity," according to their horrible
imprecation: "His blood be upon us and upon our children!" God "cut them
off in their own iniquity." All this had, in reference to him, a most
literal fulfillment.

[Psalms 94:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 94:22</span></span>

The rock of my refuge - Alluding to those natural fortifications among
rocks, which are frequent in the land of Judea.

[Psalms 94:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 94:23</span></span>

Shall cut them off - This is repeated, to show that the destruction of
the Babylonians was fixed and indubitable: and in reference to the Jews,
the persecutors and murderers of our Lord and his apostles, it was not
less so. Babylon is totally destroyed; not even a vestige of it remains.
The Jews are no longer a nation; they are scattered throughout the
world, and have no certain place of abode. They do not possess even one
village on the face of the earth.

The last verse is thus translated and paraphrased in the old Psalter: -

Trans. And he sal yelde to thaim thair wickednes, and in thair malice he
sall skater thaim: skater thaim sal Lorde oure God.

Par - Alswa say efter thair il entent, that thai wil do gude men harme;
he sall yelde thaim pyne, and in thair malice thai sal be sundred fra
the hali courte of hevene, and skatred emang the wiked fendes of hell.

For different views of several parts of this Psalm, see the Analysis.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 95](psa095)

</div>
