<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa076)  [Next](psa078) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 77](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 77:0</span></span>

The psalmist's ardent prayer to God in the tine of distress, [Psa
77:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001). The means he used to excite
his confidence, [Psa 77:5-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#005). God's
wonderful works in behalf of his people, [Psa
77:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#013).

The title, "To the chief Musician, (or conqueror), to Jeduthun, A Psalm
of Asaph." On this title we may observe that both Asaph and Jeduthun
were celebrated singers in the time of David, and no doubt were masters
or leaders of bands which long after their times were called by their
names. Hence Psalms composed during and after the captivity have these
names prefixed to them. But there is reason to believe also, that there
was a person of the name of Asaph in the captivity at Babylon. The
author must be considered as speaking in the persons of the captive
Israelites, It may however be adapted to the case of any individual in
spiritual distress through strong temptation, or from a sense of the
Divine displeasure in consequence of backsliding.

[Psalms 77:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 77:1</span></span>

I cried unto God - The repetition here marks the earnestness of the
psalmist's soul; and the word voice shows that the Psalm was not the
issue of private meditation, but of deep mental trouble, which forced
him to speak his griefs aloud.

[Psalms 77:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 77:2</span></span>

My sore ran in the night, and ceased not - This is a most unaccountable
translation; the literal meaning of ידי נגרה yadi niggerah, which we
translate my sore ran, is, my hand was stretched out, i.e., in prayer.
He continued during the whole night with his voice and hands lifted up
to God, and ceased not, even in the midst of great discouragements.

[Psalms 77:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 77:3</span></span>

My spirit was overwhelmed - As the verb is in the hithpaeI conjugation,
the word must mean my spirit was overpowered in itself. It purposed to
involve itself in this calamity. I felt exquisitely for my poor
suffering countrymen.

"The generous mind is not confined at home;

It spreads itself abroad through all the public,

And feels for every member of the land."

[Psalms 77:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 77:4</span></span>

Thou holdest mine eyes waking - Literally, thou keepest the watches of
mine eyes - my grief is so great that I cannot sleep.

I am so troubled that I cannot speak - This shows an increase of sorrow
and anguish. At first he felt his misery, and called aloud. He receives
more light, sees and feels his deep wretchedness, and then his words are
swallowed by excessive distress. His woes are too big for utterance.
"Small troubles are loquacious; the great are dumb." Curae leves
loquuntur; ingentes stupent.

[Psalms 77:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 77:5</span></span>

I have considered the days of old - חשבתי chishshabti, I have counted
up; I have reckoned up the various dispensations of thy mercy in behalf
of the distressed, marked down in the history of our fathers.

[Psalms 77:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 77:6</span></span>

I call to remembrance my song in the night - I do not think that נגינתי
neginathi means my song. We know that נגינת neginath signifies some
stringed musical instrument that was struck with a plectrum, but here it
possibly might be applied to the Psalm that was played on it. But it
appears to me rather that the psalmist here speaks of the circumstances
of composing the short ode contained in the seventh, eighth, and ninth
verses; which it is probable he sung to his harp as a kind of dirge, if
indeed he had a harp in that distressful captivity.

My spirit made diligent search - The verb חפש chaphas signifies such an
investigation as a man makes who is obliged to strip himself in order to
do it; or, to lift up coverings, to search fold by fold, or in our
phrase, to leave no stone unturned. The Vulgate translates: "Et scopebam
spiritum meum." As scopebam is no pure Latin word, it may probably be
taken from the Greek σκοπεω scopeo, "to look about, to consider
attentively." It is however used by no author but St. Jerome; and by him
only here and in [Isa 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#023) : And I
will sweep it with the besom of destruction; scopabo eam in scopa
terens. Hence we see that he has formed a verb from a noun scope, a
sweeping brush or besom; and this sense my old Psalter follows in this
place, translating the passage thus: And I sweped my gast: which is thus
paraphrased: "And swa I sweped my gaste, (I swept my soul), that is, I
purged it of all fylth."

[Psalms 77:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 77:7</span></span>

Will the Lord cast off for ever? - Will there be no end to this
captivity? Has he not said, "Turn, ye backsliders; for I am married unto
you: I will heal your backsliding, and love you freely." Will he then be
favorable no more? Thus the psalmist pleads and reasons with his Maker.

[Psalms 77:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 77:8</span></span>

For evermore? - לדר ודר ledor vador, "to generation and generation."
From race to race. Shall no mercy be shown even to the remotest
generation of the children of the offenders?

[Psalms 77:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 77:9</span></span>

Hath God - in anger shut up his tender mercies? - The tender mercies of
God are the source whence all his kindness to the children of men flows.
The metaphor here is taken from a spring, the mouth of which is closed,
so that its waters can no longer run in the same channel; but, being
confined, break out, and take some other course. Wilt thou take thy
mercy from the Israelites, and give it to some other people? This he
most certainly did. He took it from the Jews, and gave it to the
Gentiles.

[Psalms 77:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 77:10</span></span>

And I said, This is my infirmity - The Hebrew is very obscure, and has
been differently translated: ואמר חלותי היא שנות ימימן עליון vaomar
challothi hi shenoth yemin elyon; "And I said, Is this my weakness?
Years the right hand of the Most High." If חלותי challothi comes from
חלה chalah, and signifies to pray, as De Dieu has thought, then his
translation may be proper: Precari hoc meum est; mutare dextram
Altissimi. "To pray, this my business; to change the right hand of the
Most High." I can do nothing else than pray; God is the Ruler of events.
Mr. N. M. Berlin translates, "Dolere meum hoc est; mutare est dextra
Altissimi." To grieve is my portion; to change (my condition) belongs to
the right hand of the Most High. Here שנות shenoth, which we translate
years, is derived from שנה shanah, to change. This latter appears to me
the better translation; the sum of the meaning is, "I am in deep
distress; the Most High alone can change my condition." The old Psalter,
following the Vulgate, - Et dixi, Nunc coepi: haec mutatio dexterae
Excelsi, - translates: And I said, Now I began this chaunchyng of ryght
hand of hihegh (highest) Alswa say, God sal noght kast al man kynde fra
his sigt with outen ende: for nowe I began to understand the syker; (the
truth); that man sal be brogt to endles; and thar fore, now I said, that
this chaunchyng fra wreth to mercy, is thrugh Ihu Criste that chaunges
me fra ill to gude, fra noy to gladnes.

Once more, Coverdale, who is followed by Matthews and Becke, takes the
passage by storm: "At last I came to this poynte, that I thought; O why
art thou so foolish? The right hande of the Most Hyest can chaunge all."

[Psalms 77:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 77:11</span></span>

I will remember the works of the Lord - I endeavor to recollect what
thou hast done in behalf of our fathers in past times; in no case hast
thou cast them off, when, with humbled hearts, they sought thy mercy.

[Psalms 77:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 77:13</span></span>

Thy way - is in the sanctuary - See [Psa
73:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017). I must go to the sanctuary now
to get comfort, as I went before to get instruction. What a mercy to
have the privilege of drawing near to God in his ordinances! How many
doubts have been solved, fears dissipated, hearts comforted, darknesses
dispelled, and snares broken, while waiting on God in the means of
grace!

Some understand the words, Thy way is in holiness - all thy
dispensations, words, and works are holy, just and true. And as is thy
majesty, so is thy mercy! O, who is so great a God as our God?

[Psalms 77:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 77:14</span></span>

Thou - doest wonders - Every act of God, whether in nature or grace, in
creation or providence, is wondrous; surpasses all power but his own;
and can be comprehended only by his own wisdom. To the general observer,
his strength is most apparent; to the investigator of nature, his
wisdom; and to the genuine Christian, his mercy and love.

[Psalms 77:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 77:15</span></span>

The son. of Jacob and Joseph - "The sons which Jacob begat and Joseph
nourished." says the Chaldee. The Israelites are properly called the
sons of Joseph as well as of Jacob, seeing Ephraim and Manasseh, his
sons, were taken into the number of the tribes. All the latter part of
this Psalm refers to the deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt; and
the psalmist uses this as an argument to excite the expectation of the
captives. As God delivered our fathers from Egypt, so we may expect him
to deliver us from Chaldea. It required his arm to do the former, and
that arm is not shortened that it cannot save.

[Psalms 77:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 77:16</span></span>

The waters saw thee - What a fine image! He represents God approaching
the Red Sea; and the waters, seeing him, took fright, and ran off before
him, dividing to the right and left to let him pass. I have not found
any thing more majestic than this.

The depths also were troubled - Every thing appears here to have life
and perception. The waters see the Almighty, do not wait his coming, but
in terror flee away! The deeps, uncovered, are astonished at the
circumstance; and as they cannot fly, they are filled with trouble and
dismay. Under the hand of such a poet, inanimate nature springs into
life; all thinks, speaks, acts; all is in motion, and the dismay is
general.

[Psalms 77:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 77:17</span></span>

The clouds poured out water - It appears from this that there was a
violent tempest at the time of the passage of the Red Sea. There was a
violent storm of thunder, lightning, and rain. These three things are
distinctly marked here.

1\. "The skies sent out a sound:" the Thunder.

2\. "Thine arrows went abroad:" the Lightning.

3\. "The clouds poured out water:" the Rain. In the next verse we have,

4\. An Earthquake: "The earth trembled and shook," [Psa
77:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#018).

[Psalms 77:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 77:19</span></span>

Thy way is in the sea - Thou didst walk through the sea, thy path was
through a multitude of waters.

Thy footsteps are not known - It was evident from the effects that God
was there: but his track could not be discovered; still he is the
Infinite Spirit, without parts, limits, or passions. No object of sense.

[Psalms 77:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 77:20</span></span>

Thou leddest thy people like a flock - This may refer to the pillar of
cloud and fire. It went before them, and they followed it. So, in the
eastern countries, the shepherd does not drape, but leads, his flock. He
goes before them to find them pasture, and they regularly follow him.

By the hand of Moses and Aaron - They were God's agents; and acted, in
civil and sacred things, just as directed by the Most High.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 78](psa078)

</div>
