<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa137)  [Next](psa139) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 138](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 138:0</span></span>

The psalmist praises the Lord for his mercies to himself, [Psa
138:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001). He foretells that the kings
of the earth shall worship him, [Psa
138:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#004), [Psa
138:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#005). God's condescension to the
humble, [Psa 138:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006). The psalmist's
confidence, [Psa 138:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#007), [Psa
138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008).

The Hebrew and all the Versions attribute this Psalm to David, and it is
supposed to have been made by him when, delivered from all his enemies,
he was firmly seated on the throne of Israel. As the Septuagint and
Arabic prefix also the names of Haggai and Zechariah, it is probable
that it was used by the Jews as a form of thanksgiving for their
deliverance from all their enemies, and their ultimate settlement in
their own land, after Ahasuerus, supposed by Calmet to be Darius
Hystaspes, had married Esther, before which time they were not peaceably
settled in their own country.

[Psalms 138:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 138:1</span></span>

I will praise thee with my whole heart - I have received the highest
favors from thee, and my whole soul should acknowledge my obligation to
thy mercy. The Versions and several MSS. add יהוה Yehovah, "I will
praise thee, O Lord," etc.

Before the gods will I sing - נגד אלהים neged Elohim, "in the presence
of Elohim;" most probably meaning before the ark, where were the sacred
symbols of the Supreme Being. The Chaldee has, before the judges. The
Vulgate, before the angels. So the Septuagint, Ethiopic, Arabic, and
Anglo-Saxon. The Syriac, Before kings will I sing unto thee. This place
has been alleged by the Roman Catholics as a proof that the holy angels,
who are present in the assemblies of God's people, take their prayers
and praises, and present them before God. There is nothing like this in
the text; for supposing, which is not granted, that the word elohim here
signifies angels, the praises are not presented to them, nor are they
requested to present them before God; it is simply said, Before elohim
will I sing praise unto Thee. Nor could there be need of any
intermediate agents, when it was well known that God himself was present
in the sanctuary, sitting between the cherubim. Therefore this opinion
is wholly without support from this place.

[Psalms 138:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 138:2</span></span>

For thy loving-kindness - Thy tender mercy shown to me; and for the
fulfillment of thy truth - the promises thou hast made.

Thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name - All the Versions read
this sentence thus: "For thou hast magnified above all the name of thy
holiness," or, "thy holy name." Thou hast proved that thou hast all
power in heaven and in earth, and that thou art true in all thy words.
And by giving the word of prophecy, and fulfilling those words, thou
hast magnified thy holy name above all things - thou hast proved thyself
to be ineffably great. The original is the following: כי הגדלת על כל שמך
אמרתך ki higdalta al col shimcha, imrathecha, which I think might be
thus translated: "For thou hast magnified thy name and thy word over
all," or, "on every occasion." Kennicott reads, "He preferred
faithfulness to his promise to the attribute of his power." I believe my
own translation to be nearest the truth. There may be some corruption in
this clause.

[Psalms 138:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 138:3</span></span>

With strength in my soul - Thou hast endued my soul with many graces,
blessings, and heavenly qualities.

[Psalms 138:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 138:4</span></span>

All the kings of the earth - Of the land: all the neighboring nations,
seeing what is done for us, and looking in vain to find that any human
agency was employed in the work, will immediately see that it was thy
hand; and consequently, by confessing that it was thou, will give praise
to thy name.

[Psalms 138:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 138:5</span></span>

They shall sing in the ways of the Lord - They shall admire thy conduct,
and the wondrous workings of thy providence, if they should not even
unite with thy people.

[Psalms 138:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 138:6</span></span>

Though the Lord be high - Infinitely great as God is, he regards even
the lowest and most inconsiderable part of his creation; but the humble
and afflicted man attracts his notice particularly.

But the proud he knoweth afar off - He beholds them at a distance, and
has them in utter derision.

[Psalms 138:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 138:7</span></span>

Though I walk in the midst of trouble - I have had such experience of
thy mercy, that let me fall into whatsoever trouble I may, yet I will
trust in thee. Thou wilt quicken me, though I were ready to die; and
thou wilt deliver me from the wrath of my enemies.

[Psalms 138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 138:8</span></span>

The Lord will perfect - Whatever is farther necessary to be done, he
will do it.

Forsake not the works of thine own hands - My body - my soul; thy work
begun in my soul; thy work in behalf of Israel; thy work in the
evangelization of the world; thy work in the salvation of mankind. Thou
wilt not forsake these.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 139](psa139)

</div>
