<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa099)  [Next](psa101) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 100](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 100:0</span></span>

All nations are exhorted to praise the Lord, [Psa
100:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001), [Psa
100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002); to acknowledge him to be the
Sovereign God and their Creator and that they are his people and the
flock of his pasture, [Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003); to
worship him publicly, and be grateful for his mercies, [Psa
100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004). The reasons on which this is
founded; his own goodness, his everlasting mercy, and his ever-during
truth, [Psa 100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005).

This Psalm is entitled in the Hebrew מזמור לתודה mizmor lethodah, not "A
Psalm of Praise," as we have it, but "A Psalm for the confession, or for
the confession-offering," very properly translated by the Chaldee: שבחא
על קורבן תודתא shibcha al kurban todetha, "Praise for the sacrifice (or
offering) of confession." The Vulgate, Septuagint, and Ethiopic have
followed this sense. The Arabic attributes it to David. The Syriac has
the following prefixed: "Without a name. Concerning Joshua the son of
Nun, when he had ended the war with the Ammonites: but in the new
covenant it relates to the conversion of the Gentiles to the faith." It
is likely that it was composed after the captivity, as a form of
thanksgiving to God for that great deliverance, as well as an inducement
to the people to consecrate themselves to him, and to be exact in the
performance of the acts of public worship.

[Psalms 100:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 100:1</span></span>

Make a joyful noise - הריעו hariu, exult, triumph, leap for joy.

All ye lands - Not only Jews, but Gentiles, for the Lord bestows his
benefits on all with a liberal hand.

[Psalms 100:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 100:2</span></span>

Serve the Lord with gladness - It is your privilege and duty to be happy
in your religious worship. The religion of the true God is intended to
remove human misery, and to make mankind happy. He whom the religion of
Christ has not made happy does not understand that religion, or does not
make a proper use of it.

[Psalms 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 100:3</span></span>

Know ye that the Lord he is God - Acknowledge in every possible way,
both in public and private, that Jehovah, the uncreated self-existent,
and eternal Being, is Elohim, the God who is in covenant with man, to
instruct, redeem, love, and make him finally happy.

It is he that hath made us - He is our Creator and has consequently the
only right in and over us.

And not we ourselves - ולא אנחנו velo anachnu. I can never think that
this is the true reading, though found in the present Hebrew text, in
the Vulgate, Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Syriac. Was there ever a people
on earth, however grossly heathenish, that did believe, or could
believe, that they had made themselves? In twenty-six of Kennicott's and
De Rossi's MSS. we have ולו אנחנו velo anachnu, "and His we are;" לו lo,
the pronoun, being put for לא lo, the negative particle. This is the
reading of the Targum, or Chaldee paraphrase ודיליה אנחנא vedileyh
anachna, "and his we are," and is the reading of the text in the
Complutensian Polyglot, of both the Psalters which were printed in 1477,
and is the keri, or marginal reading in most Masoretic Bibles. Every
person must see, from the nature of the subject that it is the genuine
reading. The position is founded on the maxim that what a man invents,
constructs out of his own matterials, without assistance in genius,
materials or execution from any other person, is His Own and to it, its
use, and produce, he has the only right. God made us, therefore we are
His: we are his people, and should acknowledge him for our God; we are
the sheep of his pasture, and should devote the lives to him constantly
which he continually supports.

[Psalms 100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 100:4</span></span>

Enter into his gates with thanksgiving - Publicly worship God; and when
ye come to the house of prayer, be thankful that you have such a
privilege; and when you enter his courts, praise him for the permission.

The word בתודה bethodah, which we render with thanksgiving, is properly
with the confession-offering or sacrifice. See on [Psa
100:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001) (note).

Bless his name - Bless Jehovah, that he is your Elohim; see [Psa
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003). In our liturgic service we say,
"Speak good of his name;" we cannot do otherwise; we have nothing but
good to speak of our God.

[Psalms 100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 100:5</span></span>

For the Lord is good - Goodness the perfect, eternal opposition to all
badness and evil, is essential to God. Mercy and compassion are
modifications of his goodness; and as his nature is eternal, so his
mercy, springing from his goodness, must be everlasting. And as Truth is
an essential characteristic of an infinitely intelligent and perfect
nature; therefore God's truth must endure from generation to generation.
Whatsoever he has promised must be fulfilled, through all the successive
generations of men, as long as sun and moon shall last.

As this is a very important Psalm, and has long made a part of our
public worship, I shall lay it before the reader in the oldest
vernacular Versions I have hitherto met with, - the Anglo-Saxon and the
Anglo-Scottish, with a literal interlineary translation of the former.

The Anglo-Saxon Hundredth Psalm

Rhyme ye the Lord all earth, serve the Lord in bliss;

Infare in sight his in blithness;

Wit ye, for that Lord he is God, he did us & not self we;

Folk his & sheep leeseway his; fare into gates his in confession, into
courts is in hymns confess him.

Praise name his, for that winsom is; Lord thro' eternity mildheartedness
his, & unto on kindred & kindred sothfastnes his

The reader will see that, in order to make this translation as literal
as possible, I have preserved some old English words which we had from
the Anglo-Saxon, and which have nearly become obsolete: e.g., Infare,
"to go in;" blithness, "joy, exultation;" twit ye, "know ye;" did, the
preterite of to do, "made, created," the literal translation of the
Hebrew, עשה asah, he made; leeseway, "pasturage on a common;" winsom,
"cheerful, merry;" mildheartedness, "tenderness of heart, compassion;"
sothfastness, "steady to the sooth or truth, fast to truth." I might
have noticed some various readings in Anglo-Saxon MSS.; e.g., [Psa
100:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001) for idrymeth, "rhyme ye;"
winsumiath, "be winsom, be joyful." And [Psa
100:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#005), for winsom, "cheerful;" swete,
"sweet."

Anglo-Scottish Version of the Hundredth Psalm

1\. Joyes to God al the erth; serves to Lord in gladnes.

2\. Enters in his sight with joying.

3\. Wittes for Lorde he is God; he made us and noght we;

4\. Folke of hym, and schepe of his pasture; enters the gates of hym in
schrift; hys Halles in ympnys; schryves to hym.

5\. Loues his name, for soft is Lorde; withouten end in his mercy; and
in generation and generation the sothfastnes of hym.

Thus our forefathers said and sung in heart and mouth and with their
tongues made confession to salvation. There are but few words here which
require explanation: [Psa 100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003),
Wittes, "wot ye, know ye." [Psa 100:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#004),
Schrift, "confession;" schryves, "confess ye." Verse 6, Loues, "praise
ye, laud ye." Sothfastness, as above, steadfastness in the truth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 101](psa101)

</div>
