<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa124)  [Next](psa126) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 125](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 125:0</span></span>

The safety of those who trust in God, [Psa
125:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001), [Psa
125:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002). God's protecting providence in
behalf of his followers, [Psa 125:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#003). A
prayer for the godly, [Psa 125:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#004). The
evil lot of the wicked, [Psa 125:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#005).

This Psalm is without a title: it belongs most probably to the times
after the captivity; and has been applied, with apparent propriety, to
the opposition which Sanballat the Horonite, Geshem the Arabian, and
Tobiah the Ammonite, gave to the Jews while employed in rebuilding the
walls of Jerusalem, and restoring the temple.

[Psalms 125:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 125:1</span></span>

They that trust in the Lord - Every faithful Jew who confides in Jehovah
shall stand, in those open and secret attacks of the enemies of God and
truth, as unshaken as Mount Zion; and shall not be moved by the power of
any adversary.

[Psalms 125:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 125:2</span></span>

As the mountains are round about Jerusalem - Jerusalem, according to
Sandys, was situated on a rocky mountain every way to be ascended,
except a little on the north, with steep ascents and deep valleys,
naturally fortified. It is surrounded with other mountains, at no great
distance, as if placed in the midst of an amphitheatre; for on the east
is Mount Olivet, separated from the city by the valley of Jehoshaphat,
which also encompasses a part of the north; on the south, the mountain
of Offiner interposed with the valley of Gehinnom; and on the west it
was formerly fenced with the valley of Gihon, and the mountains
adjoining. The situation was such as to be easily rendered impregnable.

The Lord is round about his people - He is above, beneath, around them;
and while they keep within it, their fortress is impregnable, and they
can suffer no evil.

[Psalms 125:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 125:3</span></span>

For the rod of the worked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous -
Rod, here. may be taken for persecution, or for rule; and then it may be
thus interpreted: "The wicked shall not be permitted to persecute
always, nor to have a permanent rule." In our liturgic version this
clause is thus rendered: "The rod of the ungodly cometh not into the lot
of the righteous." "This," said one of our forefathers, "is neither
truth nor scripture. First, it is not truth; for the rod of the wicked
doth come into the inheritance of the righteous, and that often.
Secondly, it is not scripture, for the text saith, 'The rod of the
wicked shall not rest there.' It may come, and stay for a time; but it
shall not be permitted to abide." This is only one, and not the worst,
of the many sad blemishes which deform the Version in our national
Prayer-book. In short, the Version of the Psalms in that book is wholly
unworthy of regard; and should be thrown aside, and that in the
authorized Version in the Bible substituted for it. The people of God
are misled by it; and they are confounded with the great and glaring
differences they find between it and what they findd in their Bibles,
where they have a version of a much better character, delivered to them
by the authority of Church and state. Why do not our present excellent
and learned prelates lay this to heart, and take away this sore
stumbling-block out of the way of the people? I have referred to this
subject in the introduction to the Book of Psalms.

Lest the righteous put forth - Were the wicked to bear rule in the
Lord's vineyard, religion would soon become extinct; for the great mass
of the people would conform to their rulers. Fear not your enemies,
while ye fear God. Neither Sanballat, nor Tobiah, nor Geshem, nor any of
God's foes, shall be able to set up their rod, their power and
authority, here. While you are faithful, the Lord will laugh them to
scorn.

[Psalms 125:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 125:4</span></span>

Do good, O Lord, unto those that be good - Let the upright ever find
thee his sure defense! Increase the goodness which thou hast already
bestowed upon them; and let all who are upright in heart find thee to be
their stay and their support!

[Psalms 125:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 125:5</span></span>

As for such as turn aside - Who are not faithful; who give way to sin;
who backslide, and walk in a crooked way, widely different from the
straight way of the upright, ישרים yesharim, the straight in heart; they
shall be led forth to punishment with the common workers of iniquity.
Thus thy Church will be purified, and thy peace rest upon thy true
Israel. Let him that readeth understand.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 126](psa126)

</div>
