<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa125)  [Next](psa127) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 126](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 126:0</span></span>

The joy of the Israelites on their return from captivity, and the effect
their deliverance had upon the heathen, [Psa
126:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001). The prayer which they had
offered up, [Psa 126:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#004). The inference
they draw from the whole, [Psa 126:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#005),
[Psa 126:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#006).

This Psalm is not of David, has no title in the Hebrew or any of the
Versions, and certainly belongs to the close of the captivity. It might
have been composed by Haggai and Zechariah, as the Syriac supposes; or
by Ezra, according to others. It is beautiful, and highly descriptive of
the circumstances which it represents.

[Psalms 126:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 126:1</span></span>

When the Lord turned again the captivity - When Cyrus published his
decree in favor of the Jews, giving them liberty to return to their own
land, and rebuild their city and temple.

We were like them that dream - The news was so unexpected that we
doubted for a time the truth of it. We believed it was too good news to
be true, and thought ourselves in a dream or illusion. When the Romans
had vanquished Philip, king of Macedon, they restored liberty to the
Grecian cities by proclamation. It was done at the time of the Isthmian
games, and by the crier, who went into the circus to proclaim them; none
but the Roman general T. Quintius knowing what was to be done.
Multitudes from all Greece were there assembled; and the tidings
produced nearly the same effect upon them, according to Livy, that the
publication of the decree of Cyrus did on the Jews, according to what is
here related by the psalmist. I shall give the substance of this account
from the Roman historian. When the Romans had sat down to behold the
games, the herald with his trumpet went into the arena according to
custom, to proclaim the several games. Silence being obtained, he
solemnly pronounced the following words: -

Senatus romanus et t. Quincius imperator, philippo rege macedonibusque
devictis; liberos, immunes, suis legibus esse jubet corinthios,
phocenses, locrensesque omnes, et insulam euboeam, et magnetas,
thessalos, perrhaebos, achaeos, phthiotas.

"The Roman Senate, and T. Quintius the general, having vanquished king
Philip and the Macedonians, do ordain that the Corinthians, Phocensians,
all the Locrensians, the island of EubOea, the Magnesians, Thessalians,
Perrhaebians, Acheans, and Phthiotians, shall be free, be delivered from
all taxes, and live according to their own laws."

The effect that this produced on the astonished Grecians who were
present, is related by this able historian in a very natural and
affecting manner; and some parts of it nearly in the words of the
psalmist.

Audita voce praeconis, majus gaudium fuit, quam quod universum homines
caperent. Vix satis se credere se quisque audisse: alii alios intueri
mirabundi velut somnii vanam speciem: guod ad guemque pertineret, suarum
aurium fidei minimum credentes, proximos interrogabant. Revocatur
praeco, cum unusquisque non audire, sed videre libertatis suae nuncium
averit, iterum pronunciaret eadem. Tum ab certo jam gaudio tantus cum
clamore plausus est ortus, totiesque repetitus, ut facile appareret,
nihil omnium bonorum multitudini gratius quam Libertatem esse.

T. 54: Hist., lib. xxiii., c. 32.

This proclamation of the herald being heard, there was such joy, that
the people in general could not comprehend it. Scarcely could any person
believe what he had heard. They gazed on each other, wondering as if it
had been some illusion, similar to a dream; and although all were
interested in what was spoken, none could trust his own ears, but
inquired each from him who stood next to him what it was that was
proclaimed. The herald was again called, as each expressed the strongest
desire not only to hear, but see the messenger of his own liberty: the
herald, therefore, repeated the proclamation. When by this repetition
the glad tidings were confirmed, there arose such a shout, accompanied
with repeated clapping of hands, as plainly showed that of all good
things none is so dear to the multitude as Liberty.

O that God may raise up some other deliverer to save these same cities
with their inhabitants, from a worse yoke than ever was imposed upon
them by the king of Macedon; and from a servitude which has now lasted
three hundred years longer than the captivity of the Israelites in the
empire of Babylon!

Constantinople was taken by the Turks in 1453; and since that time till
the present, (October, 1822), three hundred and sixty-nine years have
elapsed. Why do the Christian powers of Europe stand by, and see the ark
of their God in captivity; the holy name by which they are called
despised and execrated; the vilest indignities offered to those who are
called Christians, by barbarians the most cruel, ferocious, and
abominable that ever disgraced the name of man? Great God, vindicate the
cause of the distressed Greeks as summarily, as effectually, as
permanently, as thou once didst that of thy oppressed people the Jews!
Let the crescent never more fill its horns with a victory, nor with the
spoils of any who are called by the sacred name of Jesus: but let it
wane back into total darkness; and know no change for the better, till
illuminated by the orient splendor of the Sun of righteousness! Amen!
Amen!

How signally has this prayer been thus far answered! Three great
Christian powers, the British, the French, and the Russian, have taken
up the cause of the oppressed Greeks. The Turkish fleet has been
attacked in the Bay of Navarino by the combined fleets of the above
powers in October, 1827, under the command of the British Admiral, Sir
Edward Codrington, and totally annihilated. After which, the Mohammedan
troops were driven out of Greece and the Morea; so that the whole of
Greece is cleared of its oppressors, and is now under its own
government, protected by the above powers - March, 1829.

[Psalms 126:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 126:2</span></span>

Then upas our mouth filled with laughter - The same effect as was
produced on the poor liberated Grecians mentioned above.

Then said they among the heathen - The liberty now granted was brought
about in so extraordinary a way, that the very heathens saw that the
hand of the great Jehovah must have been in it.

[Psalms 126:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 126:3</span></span>

The Lord hath done great things for us - We acknowledge the hand of our
God. Deus nobis haec otia fecit, "God alone has given us this
enlargement."

We are glad - This is a mere burst of ecstatic joy. O how happy are we!

[Psalms 126:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 126:4</span></span>

Turn again our captivity - This is either a recital of the prayer they
had used before their deliverance; or it is a prayer for those who still
remained in the provinces beyond the Euphrates. The Jewish captives did
not all return at once; they came back at different times, and under
different leaders, Ezra, Nehemiah, Zerubbabel, etc.

As the streams in the south - Probably the Nile is meant. It is now
pretty well known that the Nile has its origin in the kingdom of Damot;
and runs from south to north through different countries, till, passing
through Egypt, it empties itself into the Mediterranean Sea. It it
possible, however, that they might have had in view some rapid rivers
that either rose in the south, or had a southern direction; and they
desired that their return might be as rapid and as abundant as the
waters of those rivers. But we know that the Nile proceeds from the
south, divides itself into several streams as it passes through Egypt,
and falls by seven mouths into the Mediterranean.

[Psalms 126:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 126:5</span></span>

They that sow in tears shall reap in joy - This is either a maxim which
they gather from their own history, or it is a fact which they are now
witnessing. We see the benefit of humbling ourselves under the mighty
hand of God; we have now a sweet return for our bitter tears. Or, We
have sown in tears; now we reap in joy. We are restored after a long and
afflicting captivity to our own country, to peace, and to happiness.

[Psalms 126:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 126:6</span></span>

He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed - The metaphor
seems to be this: A poor farmer has had a very bad harvest: a very
scanty portion of grain and food has been gathered from the earth. The
seed time is now come, and is very unpromising. Out of the famine a
little seed has been saved to be sown, in hopes of another crop; but the
badness of the present season almost precludes the entertainment of
hope. But he must sow, or else despair and perish. He carries his all,
his precious seed, with him in his seed basket; and with a sorrowful
heart commits it to the furrow, watering it in effect with his tears,
and earnestly imploring the blessing of God upon it. God hears; the
season becomes mild; he beholds successively the blade, the ear, and the
full corn in the ear. The appointed weeks of harvest come, and the grain
is very productive. He fills his arms, his carriages, with the sheaves
and shocks; and returns to his large expecting family in triumph,
praising God for the wonders he has wrought. So shall it be with this
handful of returning Israelites. They also are to be sown - scattered
all over the land; the blessing of God shall be upon them, and their
faith and numbers shall be abundantly increased. The return here
referred to, Isaiah describes in very natural language: "And they shall
bring all your brethren for an offering to the Lord out of all nations,
upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, upon mules, and upon swift
beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as the children
of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the
Lord," [Isa 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 127](psa127)

</div>
