<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa136)  [Next](psa138) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 137](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 137:0</span></span>

The desolate and afflicted state of the captives in Babylon, [Psa
137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001), [Psa
137:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002). How they were insulted by their
enemies, [Psa 137:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#003), [Psa
137:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#004). Their attachment to their
country, [Psa 137:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005), [Psa
137:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006). Judgments denounced against
their enemies, [Psa 137:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007).

The Vulgate, Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Arabic, say, ridiculously enough,
a Psalm of David for Jeremiah. Anachronisms with those who wrote the
titles to the Psalms were matters of no importance. Jeremiah never was
at Babylon; and therefore could have no part in a Psalm that was sung on
the banks of its rivers by the Israelitish captives. Neither the Hebrew
nor Chaldee has any title; the Syriac attributes it to David. Some think
it was sung when they returned from Babylon; others, while they were
there. It is a matter of little importance. It was evidently composed
during or at the close of the captivity.

[Psalms 137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 137:1</span></span>

By the rivers of Babylon - These might have been the Tigris and
Euphrates, or their branches, or streams that flowed into them. In their
captivity and dispersion, it was customary for the Jews to hold their
religious meetings on the banks of rivers. Mention is made of this [Act
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013), where we find the Jews of
Philippi resorting to a river side, where prayer was wont to be made.
And sometimes they built their synagogues here, when they were expelled
from the cities.

[Psalms 137:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 137:2</span></span>

We hanged our harps upon the willows - The ערבים arabim or willows were
very plentiful in Babylon. The great quantity of them that were on the
banks of the Euphrates caused Isaiah, [Isa
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#007), to call it the brook or river of
willows. This is a most affecting picture. Perhaps resting themselves
after toil, and wishing to spend their time religiously, they took their
harps, and were about to sing one of the songs of Zion; but, reflecting
on their own country, they became so filled with distress, that they
unstrung their harps with one consent, and hung them on the willow
bushes, and gave a general loose to their grief. Some of the
Babylonians, who probably attended such meetings for the sake of the
music, being present at the time here specified, desired them to sing
one of Zion's songs: this is affectingly told.

[Psalms 137:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 137:3</span></span>

They that carried us away captive required of us a song - This was as
unreasonable as it was insulting. How could they who had reduced us to
slavery, and dragged us in chains from our own beautiful land and
privileges, expect us to sing a sacred ode to please them, who were
enemies both to us and to our God? And how could those who wasted us
expect mirth from people in captivity, deprived of all their
possessions, and in the most abject state of poverty and oppression?

[Psalms 137:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 137:4</span></span>

How shall we sing the Lord's song - איך נשיר eich! nashir; O, we sing!
Who does not hear the deep sigh in the strongly guttural sound of the
original איך eich! wrung, as it were, from the bottom of the heart? Can
We, in this state of slavery, - We, exiles, from our country, We,
stripped of all our property, - We, reduced to contempt by our strong
enemy, - We, deprived of our religious privileges, - We, insulted by our
oppressors, - We, in the land of heathens, - We sing, or be mirthful in
these circumstances? No: God does not expect it; man should not wish it;
and it is base in our enemies to require it.

[Psalms 137:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 137:5</span></span>

If I forget thee, O Jerusalem - Such conduct would be, in effect, a
renunciation of our land a tacit acknowledgment that we were reconciled
to our bondage; a concession that we were pleased with our captivity,
and could profane holy ordinances by using them as means of sport or
pastime to the heathen. No: Jerusalem! we remember thee and thy Divine
ordinances: and especially thy King and our God, whose indignation we
must bear, because we have sinned against him.

Let my right hand forget - Let me forget the use of my right hand. Let
me forget that which is dearest and most profitable to me; and let me
lose my skill in the management of my harp, if I ever prostitute it to
please the ungodly multitude or the enemies of my Creator!

[Psalms 137:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 137:6</span></span>

Let my tongue cleave - Let me lose my voice, and all its powers of
melody; my tongue, and all its faculty of speech; my ear, and its
discernment of sounds; if I do not prefer my country, my people, and the
ordinances of my God, beyond all these, and whatever may constitute the
chiefest joy I can possess in aught else beside. This is truly
patriotic, truly noble and dignified. Such sentiments can only be found
in the hearts and mouths of those slaves whom the grace of God has made
free.

[Psalms 137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 137:7</span></span>

Remember - the children of Edom - It appears from [Jer
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006); [Jer
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#014); [Lam
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021), [Lam
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#022); [Eze
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#012); [Oba
1:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011); that the Idumeans joined the
army of Nebuchadnezzar against their brethren the Jews; and that they
were main instruments in rasing the walls of Jerusalem even to the
ground.

[Psalms 137:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 137:8</span></span>

O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed - Or, O thou daughter of
Babylon the destroyer, or, who art to be ruined. In being reduced under
the empire of the Persians, Babylon was already greatly humbled and
brought low from what it was in the days of Nebuchadnezzar; but it was
afterwards so totally ruined that not a vestige of it remains. After its
capture by Cyrus, A.M. 3468, it could never be considered a capital
city; but it appeared to follow the fortunes of its various conquerors
till it was, as a city, finally destroyed.

Rewardeth thee as thou hast served us - This was Cyrus, who was chosen
of God to do this work, and is therefore called happy, as being God's
agent in its destruction. Greater desolations were afterwards brought
upon it by Darius Hystaspes, who took this city after it had revolted,
and slaughtered the inhabitants, men and women, in a barbarous manner.
Herod. lib. iii.

[Psalms 137:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 137:9</span></span>

Happy - that taketh and dasheth thy little ones - That is, So oppressive
hast thou been to all under thy domination, as to become universally
hated and detested; so that those who may have the last hand in thy
destruction, and the total extermination of thy inhabitants, shall be
reputed happy - shall be celebrated and extolled as those who have rid
the world of a curse so grievous. These prophetic declarations contain
no excitement to any person or persons to commit acts of cruelty and
barbarity; but are simply declarative of what would take place in the
order of the retributive providence and justice of God, and the general
opinion that should in consequence be expressed on the subject;
therefore praying for the destruction of our enemies is totally out of
the question. It should not be omitted that the Chaldee considers this
Psalm a dialogue, which it thus divides: - The three first verses are
supposed to have been spoken by the psalmist, By the rivers, etc. The
Levites answer from the porch of the temple, in [Psa
137:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#004), How shall we sing, etc. The
voice of the Holy Spirit responds in [Psa
137:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#005), [Psa
137:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006), If I forget thee, etc. Michael,
the prince of Jerusalem, answers in [Psa
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007), Remember, O Lord, etc. Gabriel,
the prince of Zion, then addresses the destroyer of the Babylonish
nation, in [Psa 137:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008), [Psa
137:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#009), Happy shall be he that
rewardeth thee, etc. To slay all when a city was sacked, both male and
female, old and young, was a common practice in ancient times. Homer
describes this in words almost similar to those of the psalmist: -

Υἱας τ' ολλυμενους, ἑλκυσθεισας τε θυγατρας,

Και θαλαμους κεραΐζομενους, και νηπια τεκνα

Βαλλομενα προτι γαιῃ εν αινῃ δηΐοτητι,

Ἑλκομενας τε νυους ολοης ὑπο χερσιν Αχαιων.

Il. lib. xxii., ver. 62.

My heroes slain, my bridal bed o'erturned;

My daughters ravished, and my city burned:

My bleeding infants dashed against the floor;

These I have yet to see; perhaps yet more.

Pope.

These excesses were common in all barbarous nations, and are only
prophetically declared here. He shall be reputed happy, prosperous, and
highly commendable, who shall destroy Babylon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 138](psa138)

</div>
