<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa111)  [Next](psa113) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 112](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 112:0</span></span>

The blessedness of the man that fears the Lord, both as it regards
himself and his family, [Psa 112:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001);
his conduct to his family, his neighbors, and the poor, [Psa
112:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#004); the envy of the wicked at his
prosperity, [Psa 112:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#010).

This is another of the acrostic or alphabetical Psalms, under the title
Hallelujah. It is formed exactly as the preceding in the division of its
verses. It has ten verses in the whole: the first eight contain each two
hemistichs, beginning with a consecutive letter of the alphabet; the
ninth and tenth verses, three each, making twenty-two in the whole. It
is understood to have been written after the captivity, and probably by
Zechariah and Haggai: to them it is ascribed by the Vulgate.

[Psalms 112:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 112:1</span></span>

Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord - This seems to be the
continuation of the preceding Psalm: there it was asserted that the
beginning of wisdom was the fear of the Lord; and here the blessedness
of the man who thus fears is stated.

That delighteth greatly - It is not enough to fear God, we must also
love him: fear will deter us from evil; love will lead us to obedience.
And the more a man fears and loves God, the more obedient will he be;
till at last he will delight greatly in the commandments of his Maker.

[Psalms 112:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 112:2</span></span>

His seed shall be mighty - זרעו zaro, his posterity. So the word should
always be understood in this connection.

[Psalms 112:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 112:3</span></span>

Wealth and riches shall be in his house - This is often the case: a
godly man must save both time and money. Before he was converted he lost
much time, and squandered his money. All this he now saves, and
therefore wealth and riches must be in his house; and if he do not
distribute to the necessities of the poor, they will continue to
accumulate till they be his curse; or God will, by his providence, sweep
them away. Both צדקה tsedakah and δικαιοσυνη are often used to signify,
not only justice and righteousness, but also beneficence and almsgiving;
and this is most probably the meaning here. See [Psa
112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009).

[Psalms 112:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 112:4</span></span>

There ariseth light in the darkness - The upright are always happy; and
when tribulations come, God lifts up the light of his countenance upon
him, and causes all occurences to work together for his good.

He is gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous - He enjoys the
favor of God; that grace makes him compassionate; and in the general
tenor of his conduct he is righteous. From these principles he shows
favor ([Psa 112:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#005)) to him that needs
it; that is, to the real poor he gives of his substance; and others he
obliges by lending, they not being utterly in want, but standing in need
only of a little present help. But he takes heed to whom he gives and to
whom he lends; that in the first case his bounty may be well applied,
and in the second he may not oblige the person who only seeks, under the
notion of a loan, to appropriate the money borrowed. To prevent evils of
this kind he acts prudently, and guides his affairs with discretion,
[Psa 112:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#005).

[Psalms 112:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 112:7</span></span>

He shall not be afraid of evil tidings - He knows that God governs the
world, therefore he fears not for futurity. And as to the calumnies of
men, he fears them not, because his heart is fixed - determined to walk
in the path of duty, whatever persecutions he may suffer, for he trusts
in the Lord.

[Psalms 112:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 112:8</span></span>

His heart is established - סמוך לבו samuch libbo, "his heart is propped
up;" he is buttressed up by the strength of his Maker.

[Psalms 112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 112:9</span></span>

He hath dispersed - He has scattered abroad his munificence; he has
given particularly to the poor; his righteousness - his almsgiving, his
charity, remaineth for ever. See on [Psa
112:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#003) (note).

His horn - His power and authority shall be exalted with honor. He shall
rise to influence only through his own worth, and not by extortion or
flattery.

[Psalms 112:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 112:10</span></span>

The wicked shall see it - רשע rasha, the wicked one. Some think Satan is
meant. It is distinguished from רשעים reshaim, wicked men, in the
conclusion of the verse.

Shall gnash with his teeth - Through spite and ill will.

And melt away - Through envy and hopeless expectation of similar good;
for his desire in reference to himself and in reference to him who is
the object of his envy, shall perish - shall come to nothing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 113](psa113)

</div>
