<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa145)  [Next](psa147) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 146](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 146:0</span></span>

The psalmist, full of gratitude, purposes to praise God for ever, [Psa
146:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#001), [Psa
146:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#002); and exhorts not to trust in
man, not even the most powerful; for which he gives his reasons, [Psa
146:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#003), [Psa
146:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#004). The great advantage of trusting
in God, [Psa 146:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#005). The mercies which
they who trust in God may expect, [Psa
146:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#006). The Divine government is
everlasting, [Psa 146:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#010).

This is the first of the Psalms called Hallelujah Psalms, of which there
are five, and which conclude the book. No author's name is prefixed to
this, either in the Hebrew or Chaldee. But the Syriac, Vulgate,
Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Arabic, attribute it to Haggai and Zechariah.
It was probably written after the captivity, and may refer to the time
when Cyrus, prejudiced by the enemies of the Jews, withdrew his order
for the rebuilding of the walls of Jerusalem, to which revocation of the
royal edict the third verse may refer: Put not your trust in princes
etc.

[Psalms 146:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 146:2</span></span>

While I live will I praise - The true feeling of a heart overpowered
with a sense of God's goodness.

While I have any being - בעודי beodi, in my continuance, in my
progression, my eternal existence. This is very expressive.

[Psalms 146:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 146:3</span></span>

Put not your trust in princes - This may refer, as has been stated
above, to Cyrus, who had revoked his edict for the rebuilding of
Jerusalem. Perhaps they had begun to suppose that they were about to owe
their deliverance to the Persian king. God permitted this change in the
disposition of the king, to teach them the vanity of confidence in men,
and the necessity of trusting in himself.

[Psalms 146:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 146:4</span></span>

His breath goeth forth - His existence depends merely, under God, on the
air he breathes. When he ceases to respire he ceases to live; his body
from that moment begins to claim its affinity to the earth; and all his
thoughts, purposes, and projects, whether good or evil, come to nought
and perish. He, then, who has no other dependence, must necessarily be
miserable.

[Psalms 146:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 146:5</span></span>

Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help - While he that
trusts in man is miserable, he that trusts in God is happy. In the son
of man, בן אדם ben Adam, there is no help, תשועה teshuah, no saving
principle. Every son of Adam naturally comes into the world without
this, and must continue so till the Lord open the eyes of the blind,
[Psa 146:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#008); but a measure of light is
given from that true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the
world. This son of Adam returns to his earth, לאדמתו leadmatho, to the
ground, from which he was taken; this refers directly to [Gen
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007); [Gen
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019). But he that has the God for his
help who helped Jacob in his distress, and was with him, and sustained
him in and through all adversities, can never be destitute; for this God
changes not; he lives for ever, and his projects cannot perish. He has
purposed that Israel shall be delivered from this captivity. Cyrus may
change, but God will not; trust therefore in Him. He has all power; he
made heaven and earth; he has them under his government and at his
disposal; and should earth itself fail, heaven endures. And he keeps his
truth for ever; and therefore his promises must be fulfilled to them
that trust in him. Fear not.

[Psalms 146:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 146:7</span></span>

Which ewecuteth judgment for the oppressed - For those who suffer by
violence or calumny. This may refer to the Israelites, who suffered much
by oppression from the Babylonians, and by calumny from the Samaritans,
etc., who had prejudiced the king of Persia against them.

Giving food to the hungry - No doubt he fed the poor captives by many
displays of his peculiar providence.

The Lord looseth the prisoners - And as he has sustained you so long
under your captivity, so will he bring you out of it.

[Psalms 146:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 146:8</span></span>

Openeth the eyes of the blind - He brings us out of our prison-house,
from the shadow of death, and opens our eyes that we may behold the free
light of the day. And it is the Lord only that can open the eyes of any
son of Adam, and give him to see his wretchedness, and where help and
salvation may be found.

Raiseth them that are bowed down - Through a sense of their guilt and
sinfulness.

The Lord loveth the righteous - These he makes partakers of a Divine
nature; and he loves those who bear his own image.

[Psalms 146:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 146:9</span></span>

Preserveth the strangers - He has preserved you strangers in a strange
land, where you have been in captivity for seventy years; and though in
an enemy's country, he has provided for the widows and orphans as amply
as if he had been in the promised land.

The way of the wicked he turneth upside down - He subverts, turns aside.
They shall not do all the wickedness they wish; they shall not do all
that is in their power. In their career he will either stop them, turn
them aside, or overturn them.

[Psalms 146:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 146:10</span></span>

The Lord shall reign for ever - Therefore he can never fail; and he is
thy God, O Zion. Hitherto he has helped you and your fathers; and has
extended that help from generation to generation. Therefore trust in him
and bless the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 147](psa147)

</div>
