<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev007)  [Next](rev009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 8:0</span></span>

The opening of the seventh seal, [Rev
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001). The seven angels with the seven
trumpets, [Rev 8:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002). The first
sounds, and there is a shower of hail, fire, and blood, [Rev
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007). The second sounds, and the
burning mountain is cast into the sea, [Rev
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008), [Rev
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#009). The third sounds, and the great
star Wormwood falls from heaven, [Rev
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#010), [Rev
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#011). The fourth sounds, and the sun,
moon, and stars are smitten; and a threefold wo is denounced against the
inhabitants of the earth, because of the three angels who are yet to
sound, [Rev 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#012), [Rev
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013).

[Revelation 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 8:1</span></span>

The seventh seal - This is ushered in and opened only by the Lamb.

Silence in heaven - This must be a mere metaphor, silence being put here
for the deep and solemn expectation of the stupendous things about to
take place, which the opening of this seal had produced. When any thing
prodigious or surprising is expected, all is silence, and even the
breath is scarcely heard to be drawn.

Half an hour - As heaven may signify the place in which all these
representations were made to St. John, the half hour may be considered
as the time during which no representation was made to him, the time in
which God was preparing the august exhibition which follows.

There is here, and in the following verses, a strong allusion to
different parts of the temple worship; a presumption that the temple was
still standing, and the regular service of God carried on. The silence
here refers to this fact - while the priest went in to burn incense in
the holy place, all the people continued in silent mental prayer without
till the priest returned. See [Luk
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#010). The angel mentioned here appears
to execute the office of priest, as we shall by and by see.

[Revelation 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 8:2</span></span>

The seven angels which stood before God - Probably the same as those
called the seven Spirits which are before his throne, [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004) (note). There is still an allusion
here to the seven ministers of the Persian monarchs. See Tobit 12:15.

[Revelation 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 8:3</span></span>

Another angel - About to perform the office of priest.

Having a golden censer - This was a preparation peculiar to the day of
expiation. "On other days it was the custom of the priest to take fire
from the great altar in a silver censer, but on the day of expiation the
high priest took the fire from the great altar in a golden censer; and
when he was come down from the great altar, he took incense from one of
the priests, who brought it to him, and went with it to the golden
altar; and while he offered the incense the people prayed without in
silence, which is the silence in heaven for half an hour." See Sir Isaac
Newton.

Much incense, that he should offer it - Judgments of God are now about
to be executed; the saints - the genuine Christians, pray much to God
for protection. The angelic priest comes with much incense, standing
between the living and those consigned to death, and offers his incense
to God With the prayers of the saints.

[Revelation 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 8:4</span></span>

The smoke of the incense - with the prayers - Though incense itself be
an emblem of the prayers of the saints, [Psa
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002); yet here they are said to
ascend before God, as well as the incense. It is not said that the angel
presents these prayers. He presents the incense, and the prayers ascend
With it. The ascending of the incense shows that the prayers and
offering were accepted.

[Revelation 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 8:5</span></span>

Cast it into the earth - That is, upon the land of Judea; intimating the
judgments and desolations which were now coming upon it, and which
appear to be farther opened in the sounding of the seven trumpets.

There were voices - All these seem to point out the confusion,
commotions, distresses, and miseries, which were coming upon these
people in the wars which were at hand.

[Revelation 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 8:6</span></span>

Prepared themselves to sound - Each took up his trumpet, and stood
prepared to blow his blast. Wars are here indicated; the trumpet was the
emblem of war.

[Revelation 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 8:7</span></span>

Hail and fire mingled with blood - This was something like the ninth
plague of Egypt. See [Exo 9:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#018) :
"The Lord sent thunder and hail - and fire mingled with the hail - and
the fire ran along upon the ground." In the hail and fire mingled with
blood, some fruitful imaginations might find gunpowder and cannon balls,
and canister shot and bombs.

They were cast upon the earth - Εις την γην· Into that land; viz.,
Judea, thus often designated.

And the third part of trees - Before this clause the Codex Alexandrinus,
thirty-five others, the Syriac, Arabic, Ethiopic, Armenian, Slavonic,
Vulgate, Andreas, Arethas, and some others, have και το τριτον της γης
κατεκαη· And the third part of the land was burnt up. This reading,
which is undoubtedly genuine, is found also in the Complutensian
Polyglot. Griesbach has received it into the text.

The land was wasted; the trees - the chiefs of the nation, were
destroyed; and the grass - the common people, slain, or carried into
captivity. High and low, rich and poor, were overwhelmed with one
general destruction. This seems to be the meaning of these figures.

Many eminent men suppose that the irruption of the barbarous nations on
the Roman empire is here intended. It is easy to find coincidences when
fancy runs riot. Later writers might find here the irruption of the
Austrians and British, and Prussians, Russians, and Cossacks, on the
French empire!

[Revelation 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 8:8</span></span>

A great mountain burning with fire - Supposed to signify the powerful
nations which invaded the Roman empire. Mountain, in prophetic language,
signifies a kingdom; [Jer 51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025), [Jer
51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027), [Jer
51:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#030), [Jer
51:58](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#058). Great disorders, especially
when kingdoms are moved by hostile invasions, are represented by
mountains being cast into the midst of the sea, [Psa
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002). Seas and collections of waters
mean peoples, as is shown in this book, [Rev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015). Therefore, great commotions in
kingdoms and among their inhabitants may be here intended, but to whom,
where, and when these happened, or are to happen, we know not.

The third part of the sea became blood - Another allusion to the
Egyptian plagues, [Exo 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#020), [Exo
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#021). Third part is a rabbinism,
expressing a considerable number. "When Rabbi Akiba prayed, wept, rent
his garments, put of his shoes, and sat in the dust, the world was
struck with a curse; and then the third part of the olives, the third
part of the wheat, and the third part of the barley, was smitten "Rab.
Mardochaeus, in Notitia Karaeorum, p. 102.

[Revelation 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 8:9</span></span>

The third part of the ships were destroyed - These judgments seem to be
poured out upon some maritime nation, destroying much of its population,
and much of its traffic.

[Revelation 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 8:10</span></span>

There fell a great star from heaven - This has given rise to various
conjectures. Some say the star means Attila and his Huns, others,
Genseric with his Vandals falling on the city of Rome; others, Eleazer,
the son of Annus, spurning the emperor's victims, and exciting the fury
of the Zealots; others, Arius; infecting the pure Christian doctrine
with his heresy, etc., etc. It certainly cannot mean all these; and
probably none of them. Let the reader judge.

[Revelation 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 8:11</span></span>

The star is called Wormwood - So called from the bitter or distressing
effects produced by its influence.

[Revelation 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 8:12</span></span>

The third part of the sun - moon - stars, was smitten - Supposed to mean
Rome, with her senates, consuls, etc., eclipsed by Odoacer, king of the
Heruli, and Theodoric, king of the Ostrogoths, in the fifth century. But
all this is uncertain.

[Revelation 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 8:13</span></span>

I - heard an angel flying - Instead of αγγελου πετωμενου, an angel
flying, almost every MS. and version of note has αετου πετωμενον, an
eagle flying. The eagle was the symbol of the Romans, and was always on
their ensigns. The three woes which are here expressed were probably to
be executed by this people, and upon the Jews and their commonwealth.
Taken in this sense the symbols appear consistent and appropriate; and
the reading eagle instead of angel is undoubtedly genuine, and Griesbach
has received it into the text.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 9](rev009)

</div>
