<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev013)  [Next](rev015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 14:0</span></span>

The Lamb on mount Sion, and his company and their character, [Rev
14:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001). The angel flying in the midst
of heaven, with the everlasting Gospel, [Rev
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006), [Rev
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007). Another angel proclaims the fall
of Babylon, [Rev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008). A third angel
denounces God's judgments against those who worship the beast or his
image, [Rev 14:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#009). The patience of
the saints, and the blessedness of them who die in the Lord, [Rev
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#012), [Rev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013). The man on the white cloud,
with a sickle, reaping the earth, [Rev
14:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014). The angel with the sickle
commanded by another angel, who had power over fire, to gather the
clusters of the vines of the earth, [Rev
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#017), [Rev
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#018). They are gathered and thrown
into the great winepress of God's wrath, which is trodden without the
city, and the blood comes out 1600 furlongs, [Rev
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#019), [Rev
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#020).

[Revelation 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 14:1</span></span>

A Lamb stood on the mount Sion - This represents Jesus Christ in his
sacrificial office; mount Sion was a type of the Christian Church.

And with him a hundred forty and four thousand - Representing those who
were converted to Christianity from among the Jews. See [Rev
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#004).

His Father's name written in their foreheads - They were professedly,
openly, and practically, the children of God, by faith in Christ Jesus.
Different sects of idolaters have the peculiar mark of their god on
their foreheads. This is practised in the east to the present day, and
the mark is called the sectarial mark. Between eighty and ninety
different figures are found on the foreheads of different Hindoo deities
and their followers.

Almost every MS. of importance, as well as most of the versions and many
of the fathers, read this clause thus: Having His Name and his Father's
name written upon their foreheads. This is undoubtedly the true reading,
and is properly received by Griesbach into the text.

[Revelation 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 14:2</span></span>

The voice of many waters - That is, of multitudes of various nations.

The voice of harpers - Though the sounds were many and apparently
confused, yet both harmony and melody were preserved.

[Revelation 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 14:3</span></span>

They sung - a new song - See on [Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009) (note).

No man could learn that song - As none but genuine Christians can
worship God acceptably, because they approach him through the only
Mediator, so none can understand the deep things of God but such; nor
can others know the cause why true believers exult so much in God
through Christ, because they know not the communion which such hold with
the Father and the Son through the Holy Ghost.

[Revelation 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 14:4</span></span>

These are they which were not defiled with women - They are pure from
idolatry, and are presented as unspotted virgins to their Lord and
Savior Christ. See [Co2 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002). There
may be an allusion here to the Israelites committing idolatry, through
the means of their criminal connection with the Midianitish women. See
[Num 25:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001); [Num
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#016).

Follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth - They go through good and
through evil report, bear his reproach, and love not their lives even to
the death.

The first fruits unto God - The reference appears to be to those Jews
who were the first converts to Christianity.

[Revelation 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 14:5</span></span>

In their mouth was found no guile - When brought before kings and rulers
they did not dissemble, but boldly confessed the Lord Jesus.

[Revelation 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 14:6</span></span>

Another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel
- Whether this angel mean any more than a particular dispensation of
providence and grace, by which the Gospel shall be rapidly sent
throughout the whole world; or whether it mean any especial messenger,
order of preachers, people, or society of Christians, whose professed
object it is to send the Gospel of the kingdom throughout the earth, we
know not. But the vision seems truly descriptive of a late institution,
entitled The British and Foreign Bible Society, whose object it is to
print and circulate the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments,
through all the habitable world, and in all the languages spoken on the
face of the earth. Already they have been the instruments, by actually
printing (or by affording the means to different nations to print for
themselves) the Bible in a vast number of languages and dialects, so
that it has been sent in hundreds of thousands of copies, in whole or in
part, to almost every part of the globe: viz., in their native language
to the Welsh; in Erse to the Irish; in Gaelic to the Highlands of
Scotland; in Manks to the Isle of Man; in French, Italian, Portuguese,
and Spanish, to those countries and Switzerland; in Low Dutch to
Holland, etc.; in High Dutch to Germany, Prussia, etc. Through them a
similar society has been established at St. Petersburgh, by which the
Bible has been sent in Slavonic to the Russians; and in different
dialects to the people of that vast empire; besides the Turkish,
Tartaric, and Calmuck. They have also sent the Holy Scriptures in
ancient and modern Greek to Asia Minor and the different isles of the
Mediterranean Sea; in Arabic and Ethiopic to Egypt and Abyssinia; in
Syriac to the Holy Land, and to the Christians at Travancore. They have
also greatly and effectually assisted a very worthy society in the East
Indies, whose indefatigable and incomparable missionaries, the Rev.
Messrs. Carey, Marshman, and Ward, have translated the Scriptures into
the principal languages of India; and they have furnished the means of
printing a complete translation of the New Testament in the Chinese
language at Canton, by the Rev. Mr. Morrison. In short, almost every
nation in the universe has, through this society, directly or indirectly
received, or is receiving, the words of eternal life; so that it appears
to answer the description of the Apocalyptic "angel, flying in the midst
of heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell
on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people."

[Revelation 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 14:7</span></span>

Fear God, and give glory to him - This is the general language of the
sacred writings. Worship the true God, the creator and governor of all
things; and give him glory, for to him alone, not to idols or men, all
glory and honor belong.

[Revelation 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 14:8</span></span>

Babylon is fallen, is fallen - This is generally understood to be a
prediction concerning Rome; and it is certain that Rome, in the
rabbinical writings, is termed Babylon.

That great city - Among the same writers this city is styled קרתא רבתא
karta rabbetha, the great city; and רומי רבתא Romi rabbetha, the great
Rome. But which Rome is meant? Pagan or Papal Rome? Some parts of the
description apply best to the former.

The wine of the wrath of her fornication - There is an allusion here to
a custom of impure women, who give philtres or love potions to those
whom they wish to seduce and bind to their will; and these potions are
generally of an intoxicating nature, greatly inflaming the blood, and
disturbing the intellect.

Fornication and adultery are frequently used in Scripture as emblems of
idolatry and false worship.

The wine of the wrath is another expression for the envenomed or
poisoned cup given by such women.

No nation of the earth spread their idolatries so far as the ancient
Romans; they were as extensive as their conquests. And papal Rome has
been not less active in disseminating her superstitions. She has given
her rituals, but not the everlasting Gospel, to most nations of the
earth.

[Revelation 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 14:9</span></span>

And the third angel followed - Bishop Bale considers these three angels
as three descriptions of preachers, who should bear their testimony
against the corruptions of the papal Church.

The beast and his image - See the notes on Revelation 13:1-18 (note).

Mark in his forehead - Such as the sectarial marks of the idolatrous
Hindoos, as has been observed before.

[Revelation 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 14:10</span></span>

The wine of the wrath of God - As they have drunk the intoxicating wine
of idolatry or spiritual fornication, they shall now drink the wine of
God's wrath, which is poured out into the cup of his indignation. This
is an allusion to the poisoned cup, which certain criminals were obliged
to drink, on which ensued speedy death. See on [Heb
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009) (note).

Shall be tormented with fire and brimstone - An allusion to the
punishment of Sodom and Gomorrha for their unnatural crimes.

Presence of the holy angels, and - of the Lamb - These being the
instruments employed in their destruction; the Lamb - the Lord Jesus
Christ, acting as judge.

[Revelation 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 14:11</span></span>

The smoke of their torment - Still an allusion to the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrha.

[Revelation 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 14:12</span></span>

Here is the patience of the saints - Here the faith of the true
Christians shall be proved; they will follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goeth, they keep the commandments of God, and are steadfast in the faith
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Sometimes ἡ ὑπομονη, patience or perseverance,
is taken for the reward of these virtues; the text therefore may be thus
understood: Here is the reward of the perseverance of the true
Christians; for although they die for the testimony of Jesus, yet they
shall be unutterably blessed. See the next verse.

[Revelation 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 14:13</span></span>

I heard a voice from heaven - As the information now to be given was of
the utmost importance, it is solemnly communicated by a voice from
heaven; and the apostle is commanded to write or record what is said.

Blessed are the dead - Happy are they. They are happy in two respects:

1\. They do not see the evil that shall come upon the world, and are
exempted from any farther sufferings.

2\. They actually and conscientiously enjoy happiness in a state of
blessedness.

In the first sense, Happy are the dead! is a proverb frequently to be
met in the Greek and Roman poets. Ex. gr.

Τρις μακαρες Δαναοι και τετρακις, οἱ τοτ' ολοντο

Τροιῃ εν ευρειη, χαριν Ατρειδῃσι φεροντες.

Ὡς δη εγωγ' οφελον θανεειν και ποτμον επισπειν

Ηματι τῳ, ὁτε μοι πλειστοι χαλκηρεα δουρα

Τρωες επερῥιψαν περι Πηλειωνι θανοντι.

Odyss., lib. v. ver. 306.

Happy, thrice happy; who, in battle slain,

Press'd, in Atrides' cause, the Trojan plain:

O, had I died before that well fought wall;

Had some distinguished day renown'd my fall,

Such as was that when showers of javelins fled,

From conquering Troy, around Achilles dead.

Pope.

Thus imitated by the prince of the Roman poets: -

Extemplo Aeneae solvuntur frigore membra.

Ingemit, et, duplices tendens ad sidera palmas,

Talia voce refert: O terque quaterque beati,

Queis ante ora patrum Trojae sub moenibus altis

Contigit oppetere! O Danaum fortissime gentis

Tydide, mene Iliacis occumbere campis

Non potuisse? tuaque animam hanc effundere dextra?

Saevus ubi Aeacidae telo jacet Hector, ubi ingens

Sarpedon: ubi tot Simois correpta sub undis

Scuta virum, galeasque, et fortis corpora volvit.

Virg., Aen. i., ver. 93.

"In horror fix'd the Trojan hero stands,

He groans, and spreads to heaven his lifted hands.

Thrice happy those whose fate it was to fall,

Exclaims the chief, before the Trojan wall!

O, 'twas a glorious fate to die in fight!

To die so bravely in their parents' sight!

O, had I there, beneath Tydides' hand,

That bravest hero of the Grecian band,

Pour'd out this soul, with martial glory fired,

And in the plain triumphantly expired,

Where Hector fell, by fierce Achilles' spear,

And great Sarpedon, the renown'd in war;

Where Simois' stream, encumber'd with the slain,

Rolls shields and helms and heroes to the main."

Pitt.

Which die in the Lord - These are the only glorious dead. They die, not
in the field of battle, in either what are called lawful or unlawful
wars against their fellow men; but they die in the cause of God, they
die under the smile and approbation of God, and they die to live and
reign with God for ever and ever.

From henceforth - Απαρτι· From this time; now; immediately. This word is
joined to the following by many MSS. and some versions. It was a maxim
among the Jews, that as soon as the souls of the just departed from this
life they ascended immediately to heaven.

Yea, saith the Spirit - The Holy Spirit confirms the declaration from
heaven, and assigns the reasons of it.

That they may rest from their labors - Have no more tribulation and
distress.

And their works do follow there - Εργα αυτων ακολουθει μετ' αυτων· And
their works follow With them. They are in company. Here is an elegant
prosopopoeia or personification; their good works, sufferings, etc., are
represented as so many companions escorting them on their way to the
kingdom of God.

There are some good and pertinent things in the Jewish writers on this
subject. "Rabbi Jonathan taught, If a man perform one righteous action
in this life, it goes before him into the world to come. But if a man
commit one crime, it cleaves to him, and drags him to the day of
judgment." Sota, fol. 3, 2. Avoda Sara, fol. 5, 1.

"Come and see, If any man observe a precept, that work ascends to God,
and says, Such a one performed me. But if a man transgress the law, that
sin ascends to the holy blessed God, and says, I came from such a one,
who has performed me." Sohar Levit., fol. 34, col. 136. Here the same
personification is observed as that in the text.

"In that hour in which a man passes from this life into eternity, all
his works precede him; and there they say unto him, 'This and that thou
hast done in such a place on such a day.' This he shall acknowledge.
They shall require that he shall subscribe this with his own hand, as it
is written, [Job 37:7](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#007); each man shall
subscribe with his own hand; and not only this, but he shall acknowledge
that the sentence brought against him is most just." Taanith, fol. 11,
1.

The following elegant similitude Schoettgen gives from Sepher Hachayim,
Part II., fol. 47, 1, 2. "A certain man had three friends, two of whom
he loved; but the third he did not highly esteem. On a time the king
commanded him to be called before him; and being alarmed, he sought to
find an advocate. He went to that friend whom he loved most, but he
utterly refused to go with him. The second offered to go with him as far
as the door of the king's palace, but refused to speak a word in his
behalf. The third, whom he loved least, not only went with him, but
pleaded his cause so well before the king that he was cleared from all
blame. In like manner, every man has three friends, when he is cited by
death to appear before God. The first friend, whom he loved most, viz.,
his money, cannot accompany him at all. His second, viz., his relations
and neighbors, accompanied him only to the grave, and then returned; but
could not deliver him from the Judge. The third friend, whom he held but
in little esteem, viz., the law and his good works, went with him to the
king, and delivered him from judgment." The meaning of this most plainly
is, that nothing except the deeds of good and evil men shall accompany
them to the judgment-seat of God, and that a man's lot will be in the
other world as his conduct has been in this; Their works follow with
them.

[Revelation 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 14:14</span></span>

A white cloud - It is supposed that, from this verse to the end of the
chapter, the destruction of Rome is represented under the symbols of
harvest and vintage; images very frequent among the ancient prophets, by
which they represented the destruction and excision of nations. See [Joe
3:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#012); [Isa
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#005); [Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001); and [Mat
13:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#037).

A golden crown - In token of victory and regal power.

[Revelation 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 14:15</span></span>

Thrust in thy sickle - Execute the judgments which God has decreed.

For the harvest of the earth is ripe - The cup of the people's iniquity
is full.

[Revelation 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 14:16</span></span>

The earth was reaped - The judgments were executed. But where, or on
whom, who can tell?

[Revelation 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 14:18</span></span>

Power over fire - Probably meaning the same angel which is mentioned,
[Rev 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003); [Rev
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#013), who stood by the altar of
burnt-offering, having authority over its fire to offer that incense to
God which represents the prayers of the saints.

[Revelation 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 14:19</span></span>

The great winepress of the wrath of God - The place or kingdom where God
executes his judgments on the workers of iniquity, whether pagans or
persecuting Christians; Rome pagan, or Rome papal.

[Revelation 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 14:20</span></span>

Even unto the horse bridles - A hyperbolical expression, to denote a
great effusion of blood. The Jews said, "When Hadrian besieged the city
called Bitter, he slew so many that the horses waded in blood up to
their mouths." The same kind of hyperbole with that above. See Wetstein
on this verse.

The space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs - It is said that the
state of the Church, or St. Peter's patrimony, extends from Rome to the
Po, two hundred Italian miles, which make exactly one thousand six
hundred furlongs! If this be really so, the coincidence is certainly
surprising, and worthy of deep regard.

On these two last verses pious Quesnel thus speaks: "As the favorable
sickle of Jesus Christ reaps his wheat when ripe for heaven, so that of
the executioners of his justice cuts off from this life the tares which
are only fit for the fire of hell. Then shall the blood of Christ cease
to be trampled on by sinners; and that of the wicked shall be eternally
trodden down in hell, which is the winepress of the wrath of God.

"And the winepress was trodden without the city, eternally without the
city of the heavenly Jerusalem, and far from the presence of God;
eternally crushed and trodden down by his justice; eternally tormented
in body and soul, without any hope either of living or dying! This is
the miserable lot and portion of those who shall have despised the law
of God, and died in impenitence. My God, pierce my heart with a salutary
dread of thy judgments!"

Whatever these passages may mean, this is a prudent and Christian use of
them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 15](rev015)

</div>
