<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev020)  [Next](rev022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 21:0</span></span>

The new heaven and the new earth, [Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001). The new Jerusalem, [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002). God dwells with men; the happy
state of his followers, [Rev 21:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003).
The wretched state of the ungodly, [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008). An angel shows John the holy
city, the New Jerusalem, [Rev 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009),
[Rev 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010). Her light, wall, gates,
and foundations, described, [Rev
21:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011). God and the Lamb are the
temple and light of it, [Rev 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#022),
[Rev 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023). The nations and kings of
the earth bring their glory and honor to it; the gates shall never be
shut, nor shall any defilement enter into it, [Rev
21:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024).

[Revelation 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 21:1</span></span>

A new heaven and a new earth - See the notes on [Pe2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013) : The ancient Jews believed that
God would renew the heavens and the earth at the end of seven thousand
years. The general supposition they founded on [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017).

There was no more sea - The sea no more appeared than did the first
heaven and earth. All was made new; and probably the new sea occupied a
different position and was differently distributed, from that of the old
sea.

However, with respect to these subjects as they stand in this most
figurative book, I must express myself in the words of Calmet: Vouloir
dire quels seront ce nouveau ciel, et cette nouvelle terre, quels seront
leurs ornamens et leur qualite, c'est a mon avis la plus grande de
toutes les presomptions. En general, ces manieres de parler marquent de
tres grands changemens dans l'univers. "To pretend to say what is meant
by this new heaven and new earth, and what are their ornaments and
qualities, is in my opinion the greatest of all presumptions. In general
these figures of speech point out great alternations in the universe."

[Revelation 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 21:2</span></span>

And I John - The writer of this book; whether the evangelist and
apostle, or John the Ephesian presbyter, has been long doubted in the
Church.

New Jerusalem - See the notes on [Gal
4:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024) (note). This doubtless means
the Christian Church in a state of great prosperity and purity; but some
think eternal blessedness is intended.

Coming down from God - It is a maxim of the ancient Jews that both the
tabernacle, and the temple, and Jerusalem itself, came down from heaven.
And in Midrash Hanaalem, Sohar Gen. fol. 69, col. 271, Rab. Jeremias
said, "The holy blessed God shall renew the world, and build Jerusalem,
and shall cause it to descend from heaven." Their opinion is, that there
is a spiritual temple, a spiritual tabernacle, and a spiritual
Jerusalem; and that none of these can be destroyed, because they subsist
in their spiritual representatives. See Schoettgen.

[Revelation 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 21:3</span></span>

The tabernacle of God is with men - God, in the most especial manner,
dwells among his followers, diffusing his light and life everywhere.

[Revelation 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 21:4</span></span>

There shall be no more death - Because there shall be a general
resurrection. And this is the inference which St Paul makes from his
doctrine of a general resurrection, [Co1
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026), where he says, "The last enemy
that shall be destroyed is death." But death cannot be destroyed by
there being simply no farther death; death can only be destroyed and
annihilated by a general resurrection; if there be no general
resurrection, it is most evident that death will still retain his
empire. Therefore, the fact that there shall be no more death assures
the fact that there shall be a general resurrection; and this also is a
proof that, after the resurrection, there shall be no more death. See
the whole of the note on [Co1 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027).

[Revelation 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 21:5</span></span>

Behold, I make all things new - As the creation of the world at the
beginning was the work of God alone, so this new creation.

These words are true and faithful - Truth refers to the promise of these
changes; faithfulness, to the fulfillment of these promises.

[Revelation 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 21:6</span></span>

It is done - All is determined, and shall be fulfilled in due time. The
great drama is finished, and what was intended is now completed;
referring to the period alluded to by the angel.

I am Alpha and Omega - See on [Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008)
(note).

The fountain of the water of life - See on [Joh
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#010) (note), [Joh
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014) (note); [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037) (note), etc.

The rabbins consider the fountain of the world to come as one of the
particular blessings of a future state. In Sanhedrim, Aboth R. Nathan,
c. 31, it is said, "He will show them the excellency of the fountain of
the future world, that they may accurately see and consider, and say, Wo
to us! what good have we lost! and our race is cut off from the face of
the earth."

[Revelation 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 21:7</span></span>

Inherit all things - Here he had no inheritance; there he shall inherit
the kingdom of heaven, and be with God and Christ, and have every
possible degree of blessedness.

[Revelation 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 21:8</span></span>

But the fearful - Δειλοις· Those who, for fear of losing life or their
property, either refused to receive the Christian religion, though
convinced of its truth and importance; or, having received it, in times
of persecution fell away, not being willing to risk their lives.

And unbelieving - Those who resist against full evidence. And sinners,
και ἁμαρτωλοις, is added here by about thirty excellent MSS., and is
found in the Syrian, Arabic, some of the Slavonic, and in Andreas and
Arethas. On this evidence Griesbach has admitted it into the text.

The abominable - Εβδελυγμενοις· Those who are polluted with unnatural
lust.

And murderers - Φονευσι· Those who take away the life of man for any
cause but the murder of another, and those who hate a brother in their
heart.

And whoremongers - Πορνοις· Adulterers, fornicators, whores,
prostitutes, and rakes of every description.

Sorcerers - Φαρμακοις· Persons who, by drugs, philtres, fumigations,
etc., pretend to produce supernatural effects, chiefly by spiritual
agency.

Idolaters - Ειδωλολατραις· Those who offer any kind of worship or
religious reverence to any thing but God. All image worshippers are
idolaters in every sense of the word.

And all liars - Και πασι τοις ψευδεσι· Every one who speaks contrary to
the truth when he knows the truth, and even he who speaks the truth with
the intention to deceive; i.e., to persuade a person that a thing is
different from what it really is, by telling only a part of the truth,
or suppressing some circumstance which would have led the hearer to a
different end to the true conclusion. All these shall have their
portion, το μερος, their share, what belongs to them, their right, in
the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone. This is the second
death, from which there is no recovery.

[Revelation 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 21:9</span></span>

The bride, the Lamb's wife - The pure and holy Christian Church.

[Revelation 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 21:10</span></span>

To a great and high mountain - That, being above this city, he might see
every street and lane of it.

The holy Jerusalem - See on [Rev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002)
(note).

[Revelation 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 21:11</span></span>

Having the glory of God - Instead of the sun and moon, it has the
splendor of God to enlighten it.

Unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal -
Among precious stones there are some even of the same species more
valuable than others: for their value is in proportion to their being
free from flaws, and of a good water, i.e., a uniform and brilliant
transparency. A crystal is perfectly clear, the oriental jasper is a
beautiful sea-green. The stone that is here described is represented as
a perfectly transparent jasper, being as unclouded as the brightest
crystal, and consequently the most precious of its species. Nothing can
be finer than this description: the light of this city is ever intense,
equal, and splendid; but it is tinged with this green hue, in order to
make it agreeable to the sight. Nothing is so friendly to the eye as
blue or green; all other colors fatigue; and, if very intense, injure
the eye. These are the colors of the earth and sky, on which the eye of
man is to be constantly fixed. To these colors the structure of the eye
is adapted; and the general appearance of the earth and the sky is
adapted to this structure.

[Revelation 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 21:12</span></span>

Had a wall great and high - An almighty defense.

Twelve gates - A gate for every tribe of Israel, in the vicinity of
which gate that tribe dwelt; so that in coming in and going out they did
not mix with each other. This description of the city is partly taken
from [Eze 48:30-35](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#030).

In Synopsis Sohar, p. 115, n. 27, it is said: "In the palace of the
world to come there are twelve gates, each of which is inscribed with
one of the twelve tribes, as that of Reuben, of Simeon, etc.: he,
therefore, who is of the tribe of Reuben is received into none of the
twelve gates but his own; and so of the rest."

[Revelation 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 21:13</span></span>

On the east three gates - The city is here represented as standing to
the four cardinal points of heaven, and presenting one side to each of
these points.

[Revelation 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 21:14</span></span>

The wall - had twelve foundations - Probably twelve stones, one of which
served for a foundation or threshold to each gate; and on these were
inscribed the names of the twelve apostles, to intimate that it was by
the doctrine of the apostles that souls enter into the Church, and
thence into the New Jerusalem.

[Revelation 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 21:15</span></span>

Had a golden reed - Several excellent MSS. add μετρον, a measure; he had
a measuring rod made of gold. This account of measuring the city seems
to be copied, with variations, from [Eze
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#003), etc.

[Revelation 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 21:16</span></span>

The city lieth foursquare - Each side was equal, consequently the length
and breadth were equal; and its height is here said to be equal to its
length. It is hard to say how this should be understood. It cannot mean
the height of the buildings, nor of the walls, for neither houses nor
walls could be twelve thousand furlongs in height; some think this means
the distance from the plain country to the place where the city stood.
But what need is there of attempting to determine such measures in such
a visionary representation? The quadrangular form intimates its
perfection and stability, for the square figure was a figure of
perfection among the Greeks; αντρ τετραγωνος, the square or cubical man,
was, with them, a man of unsullied integrity, perfect in all things.

[Revelation 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 21:17</span></span>

The wall - a hundred and forty and four cubits - This is twelve, the
number of the apostles, multiplied by itself: for twelve times twelve
make one hundred and forty-four.

The measure of a man, that is, of the angel - The cubit, so called from
cubitus, the elbow, is the measure from the tip of the elbow to the tip
of the middle finger, and is generally reckoned at one foot and a half,
or eighteen inches; though it appears, from some measurements at the
pyramids of Egypt, that the cubit was, at least in some cases,
twenty-one inches.

By the cubit of a man we may here understand the ordinary cubit, and
that this was the angel's cubit who appeared in the form of a man. Or
suppose we understand the height of the man as being here intended, and
that this was the length of the measuring rod. Now allowing this height
and rod to be six feet, and that this was intended to have some kind of
symbolical reference to the twelve tribes, mentioned [Rev
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012), represented by the twelve
gates; and to the twelve apostles, represented by the twelve thresholds
or foundations; then twenty-four, the number of the tribes and apostles,
multiplied by six, make precisely the number one hundred and forty-four.

[Revelation 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 21:18</span></span>

The building of the wall of it was of jasper - The oriental jasper is
exceedingly hard, and almost indestructible. Pillars made of this stone
have lasted some thousands of years, and appear to have suffered
scarcely any thing from the tooth of time.

Pure gold, like unto clear glass - Does not this imply that the walls
were made of some beautifully bright yellow stone, very highly polished?
This description has been most injudiciously applied to heaven; and in
some public discourses, for the comfort and edification of the pious, we
hear of heaven with its golden walls, golden pavements, gates of pearl,
etc., etc., not considering that nothing of this description was ever
intended to be literally understood; and that gold and jewels can have
no place in the spiritual and eternal world. But do not such
descriptions as these tend to keep up a fondness for gold and ornaments?
In symbols they are proper; but construed into realities, they are very
improper.

The ancient Jews teach that "when Jerusalem and the temple shall be
built, they will be all of precious stones, and pearls, and sapphire,
and with every species of jewels." - Sepher Rasiel Haggadol, fol. 24, 1.

The same authors divide paradise into seven parts or houses; the third
they describe thus: "The third house is built of gold and pure silver,
and all kinds of jewels and pearls. It is very spacious, and in it all
kinds of the good things, either in heaven or earth, are to be found.
All kinds of precious things, perfumes, and spiritual virtues, are there
planted. In the midst of it is the tree of life, the height of which is
five hundred years; (i.e., it is equal in height to the journey which a
man might perform in five hundred years), and under it dwell Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, the twelve patriarchs, and all that came out of Egypt, and
died in the wilderness. Over these Moses and Aaron preside, and teach
them the law," etc. - Yalcut Rubeni, fol. 13, 4. In the same tract, fol.
182, 1, we find these words: "Know that we have a tradition, that when
the Messiah, with the collected captivity, shall come to the land of
Israel, in that day the dead in Israel shall rise again; and in that day
the fiery walls of the city of Jerusalem shall descend from heaven, and
in that day the temple shall be builded of jewels and pearls."

[Revelation 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 21:19</span></span>

The foundations of the wall - Does not this mean the foundations or
thresholds of the gates? The gates represented the twelve tribes, [Rev
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012); and these foundations or
thresholds, the twelve apostles, [Rev
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#014). There was no entrance into the
city but through those gates, and none through the gates but over these
thresholds. The whole of the Mosaic dispensation was the preparation of
the Gospel system: without it the Gospel would have no original; without
the Gospel, it would have no reference nor proper object. Every part of
the Gospel necessarily supposes the law and the prophets. They are the
gates, it is the threshold; without the Gospel no person could enter
through those gates. The doctrine of Christ crucified, preached by the
apostles, gives a solid foundation to stand on; and we have an entrance
into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, [Heb
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019), etc. And in reference to this
we are said to be built on the Foundation of the Apostles and prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, [Eph
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020).

The first foundation was jasper - A stone very hard, some species of
which are of a sea-green color; but it is generally a bright reddish
brown.

The second, sapphire - This is a stone of a fine blue color, next in
hardness to the diamond.

The third, a chalcedony - A genus of the semipellucid gems, of which
there are four species: -

1\. A bluish white; this is the most common sort.

2\. The dull milky veined; this is of little worth.

3\. The brownish black; the least beautiful of all.

4\. The yellow and red; the most beautiful, as it is the most valuable
of all. Hitherto this has been found only in the East Indies.

The fourth, an emerald - This is of a bright green color without any
mixture, and is one of the most beautiful of all the gems, The true
oriental emerald as very scarce, and said to be found only in the
kingdom of Cambay.

[Revelation 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 21:20</span></span>

The fifth, sardonyx - The onyx is an accidental variety of the agate
kind; it is of a dark horny color, in which is a plate of a bluish
white, and sometimes of red. When on one or both sides of the white
there happens to lie also a plate of a reddish color, the jewelers call
the stone a sardonyx.

The sixth, sardius - The sardius, sardel, or sardine stone, is a
precious stone of a blood-red color.

The seventh, chrysolite - The gold stone. It is of a dusky green with a
cast of yellow. It is a species of the topaz.

The eighth, beryl - This is a pellucid gem of a bluish green color.

The ninth, a topaz - A pale dead green, with a mixture of yellow. It is
considered by the mineralogists as a variety of the sapphire.

The tenth, a chrysoprasus - A variety of the chrysolite, called by some
the yellowish green and cloudy topaz. It differs from the chrysolite
only in having a bluish hue.

The eleventh, a jacinth - A precious stone of a dead red color, with a
mixture of yellow. It is the same as the hyacenet or cinnamon stone.

The twelfth, an amethyst - A gem generally of a purple or violet color,
composed of a strong blue and deep red.

These stones are nearly the same with those on the breastplate of the
high priest, [Exo 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#017), etc., and
probably were intended to express the meaning of the Hebrew words there
used. See the notes on [Exo 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#017),
etc. where these gems are particularly explained.

[Revelation 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 21:21</span></span>

The twelve gates were twelve pearls - This must be merely figurative,
for it is out of all the order of nature to produce a pearl large enough
to make a gate to such an immense city. But St. John may refer to some
relations of this nature among his countrymen, who talk much of most
prodigious pearls. I shall give an example: "When Rabbi Juchanan (John)
once taught that God would provide jewels and pearls, thirty cubits
every way, ten of which should exceed in height twenty cubits, and would
place them in the gates of Jerusalem, according to what is said [Isa
54:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#012), I will make thy windows of
agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, one of his disciples ridiculed him,
saying, Where can such be found, since at present there is none so large
as a pigeon's egg? Afterwards, being at sea in a ship, he saw the
ministering angels cutting gems and pearls; and he asked them for what
purpose they were preparing those. They answered, to place them in the
gates of Jerusalem. On his return he found Rabbi Juchanan teaching as
usual; to whom he said, Explain, master, what I have seen. He answered,
Thou knave, unless thou hadst seen, thou wouldst not have believed; wilt
thou not receive the saying of the wise men? At that moment he fixed his
eyes upon him, and he was reduced into a heap of bones." - Bava bathra,
fol. 77, 1, and Sanhedrim, fol. 100, 1, page 393. Edit. Cocceii. See
Schoettgen.

[Revelation 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rev 21:22</span></span>

I saw no temple - There was no need of a temple where God and the Lamb
were manifestly present.

[Revelation 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rev 21:23</span></span>

No need of the sun - This is also one of the traditions of the ancient
Jews, that "in the world to come the Israelites shall have no need of
the sun by day, nor the moon by night." - Yalcut Rubeni, fol. 7, 3.
God's light shines in this city, and in the Lamb that light is
concentrated, and from him everywhere diffused.

[Revelation 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rev 21:24</span></span>

The nations of them which are saved - This is an illusion to the promise
that the Gentiles should bring their riches, glory, and excellence, to
the temple at Jerusalem, after it should be rebuilt. See [Rev
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#026).

[Revelation 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rev 21:25</span></span>

The gates of it shall not be shut at all - The Christian Church shall
ever stand open to receive sinners of all sorts, degrees, and nations.

There shall be no night there - No more idolatry, no intellectual
darkness; the Scriptures shall be everywhere read, the pure word
everywhere preached, and the Spirit of God shall shine and work in every
heart.

[Revelation 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rev 21:26</span></span>

The glory and honor of the nations into it - Still alluding to the
declarations of the prophets, (see the passages in the margin, [Rev
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024), etc.), that the Gentiles would
be led to contribute to the riches and glory of the temple by their
gifts, etc.

[Revelation 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rev 21:27</span></span>

There shall in nowise enter into it any thing that defileth - See [Isa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008); [Isa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001). Neither an impure person - he
who turns the grace of God into lasciviousness, nor a liar - he that
holds and propagates false doctrines.

But they which are written - The acknowledged persevering members of the
true Church of Christ shall enter into heaven, and only those who are
saved from their sins shall have a place in the Church militant.

All Christians are bound by their baptism to renounce the devil and all
his works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and all the
sinful lusts of the flesh; to keep God's holy word and commandments; and
to walk in the same all the days of their life. This is the generation
of them that seek thy face, O God of Jacob! Reader, art thou of this
number? Or art thou expecting an eternal glory while living in sin? If
so, thou wilt be fearfully disappointed. Presuming on the mercy of God
is as ruinous as despairing of his grace. Where God gives power both to
will and to do, the individual should work out his salvation with fear
and trembling.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 22](rev022)

</div>
