<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev000)  [Next](rev002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

The preface to this book, and the promise to them who read it, [Rev
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001). John's address to the seven
Churches of Asia, whose high calling he particularly mentions; and shows
the speedy coming of Christ, [Rev
1:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004). Mentions his exile to Patmos,
and the appearance of the Lord Jesus to him, [Rev
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009). Of whom he gives a most
glorious description, [Rev 1:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012).
The command to write what he saw, and the explanation of the seven stars
and seven golden candlesticks, [Rev
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#019), [Rev
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020).

The Revelation of St. John the divine. To this book the inscriptions are
various.

" - The Revelation.

\- The Revelation of John.

\- Of John the divine.

\- Of John the divine and evangelist.

\- The Revelation of John the apostle and evangelist.

\- The Revelation of the holy and glorious apostle and evangelist, the
beloved virgin John the divine, which he saw in the island of Patmos.

\- The Revelation of Jesus Christ, given to John the divine."

These several inscriptions are worthy of little regard; the first verse
contains the title of the book.

[Revelation 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 1:1</span></span>

The Revelation of Jesus Christ - The word Αποκαλυψις, from which we have
our word Apocalypse, signifies literally, a revelation, or discovery of
what was concealed or hidden. It is here said that this revelation, or
discovery of hidden things, was given by God to Jesus Christ; that
Christ gave it to his angel; that this angel showed it to John; and that
John sent it to the Churches. Thus we find it came from God to Christ,
from Christ to the angel, from the angel to John, and from John to the
Church. It is properly, therefore, the Revelation of God, sent by these
various agents to his servants at large; and this is the proper title of
the book.

Things which must shortly come to pass - On the mode of interpretation
devised by Wetstein, this is plain; for if the book were written before
the destruction of Jerusalem, and the prophecies in it relate to that
destruction, and the civil wars among the Romans, which lasted but three
or four years, then it might be said the Revelation is of things which
must shortly come to pass. But if we consider the book as referring to
the state of the Church in all ages, the words here, and those in [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003), must be understood of the
commencement of the events predicted; as if he had said: In a short time
the train of these visions will be put in motion: -

\- et incipient magni procedere menses.

"And those times, pregnant with the most stupendous events, will begin
to roll on."

[Revelation 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 1:2</span></span>

Who bare record of the word of God - Is there a reference here to the
first chapter of John's gospel, In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, etc.? Of this Word John did bear record. Or, does the
writer mean the fidelity with which he noted and related the word -
doctrines or prophecies, which he received at this time by revelation
from God? This seems more consistent with the latter part of the verse.

[Revelation 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 1:3</span></span>

Blessed is he that readeth - This is to be understood of the happiness
or security of the persons who, reading and hearing the prophecies of
those things which were to come to pass shortly, took proper measures to
escape from the impending evils.

The time is at hand - Either in which they shall be all fulfilled, or
begin to be fulfilled. See the note on [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001).

These three verses contain the introduction; now the dedication to the
seven Churches commences.

[Revelation 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 1:4</span></span>

John to the seven Churches - The apostle begins this much in the manner
of the Jewish prophets. They often name themselves in the messages which
they receive from God to deliver to the people; e.g. "The vision of
Isaiah, the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem."
"The words of Jeremiah, the son of Hilkiah; to whom the word of the Lord
came." "The word of the Lord came expressly unto Ezekiel, the priest."
"The word of the Lord that came unto Hosea, the son of Beeri." "The word
of the Lord that came to Joel." "The words of Amos, who was among the
herdsmen of Tekoa." "The vision of Obadiah; thus saith the Lord." "The
word of the Lord came unto Jonah." So, "The revelation of Jesus Christ,
which he sent and signified to his servant John." "John to the seven
Churches," etc.

The Asia here mentioned was what is called Asia Minor, or the Lydian or
Proconsular Asia; the seven Churches were those of Ephesus, Smyrna,
Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea. Of these as they
occur. We are not to suppose that they were the only Christian Churches
then in Asia Minor; there were several others then in Phrygia,
Pamphylia, Galatia, Pontus, Cappadocia, etc., etc. But these seven were
those which lay nearest to the apostle, and were more particularly under
his care; though the message was sent to the Churches in general, and
perhaps it concerns the whole Christian world. But the number seven may
be used here as the number of perfection; as the Hebrews use the seven
names of the heavens, the seven names of the earth, the seven
patriarchs, seven suns, seven kinds, seven years, seven months, seven
days, etc., etc.; in which the rabbins find a great variety of
mysteries.

Grace be unto you - This form of apostolical benediction we have often
seen in the preceding epistles.

From him which is, and which was, and which is to come - This
phraseology is purely Jewish, and probably taken from the
Tetragrammaton, יהוה Yehovah; which is supposed to include in itself all
time, past, present, and future. But they often use the phrase of which
the ὁ ων, και ὁ ην, και ὁ ερχομενος, of the apostle, is a literal
translation. So, in Sohar Chadash, fol. 7, 1: "Rabbi Jose said, By the
name Tetragrammaton, (i.e. יהוה, Yehovah), the higher and lower regions,
the heavens, the earth, and all they contain, were perfected; and they
are all before him reputed as nothing; והוא היה והוא הוה והוא יהיה vehu
hayah, vehu hoveh, vehu yihyeh; and He Was, and He Is, and He Will Be.
So, in Shemoth Rabba, sec. 3, fol. 105, 2: "The holy blessed God said to
Moses, tell them: - אני שהייתי ואני הוא עכשיו ואני הוא לעתיד לבוא ani
shehayithi, veani hu achshaiu, veani hu laathid labo; I Was, I Now Am,
and I Will Be in Future." In Chasad Shimuel, Rab. Samuel ben David asks:
"Why are we commanded to use three hours of prayer? Answer: These hours
point out the holy blessed God; שהוא היה הוה ויהיה shehu hayah, hoveh,
veyihyeh; he who Was, who Is, and who Shall Be. The Morning prayer
points out him who Was before the foundation of the world; the Noonday
prayer points out him who Is; and the Evening prayer points out him who
Is to Come." This phraseology is exceedingly appropriate, and strongly
expresses the eternity of God; for we have no other idea of time than as
past, or now existing, or yet to exist; nor have we any idea of eternity
but as that duration called by some aeternitas a parte ante, the
eternity that was before time, and aeternitas a parte post, the endless
duration that shall be when time is no more. That which Was, is the
eternity before time; that which Is, is time itself; and that which Is
to Come, is the eternity which shall be when time is no more.

The seven Spirits - before his throne - The ancient Jews, who
represented the throne of God as the throne of an eastern monarch,
supposed that there were seven ministering angels before this throne, as
there were seven ministers attendant on the throne of a Persian monarch.
We have an ample proof of this, Tobit 12:15: I am Raphael, one of the
Seven Holy Angels which present the prayers of the saints, and which go
in and out before the glory of the Holy One. And in Jonathan ben
Uzziel's Targum, on [Gen 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007) : God
said to the Seven Angels which stand before him, Come now, etc.

In Pirkey Eliezer, iv. and vii: "The angels which were first created
minister before him without the veil." Sometimes they represent them as
seven cohorts or troops of angels, under whom are thirty inferior
orders.

That seven Angels are here meant, and not the Holy Spirit, is most
evident from the place, the number, and the tradition. Those who imagine
the Holy Ghost to be intended suppose the number seven is used to denote
his manifold gifts and graces. That these seven spirits are angels, see
[Rev 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001); [Rev
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005); and particularly [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006), where they are called the seven
spirits of God Sent Forth into All the Earth.

[Revelation 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 1:5</span></span>

The faithful witness - The true teacher, whose testimony is infallible,
and whose sayings must all come to pass.

The first-begotten of the dead - See the note on [Col
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018).

The prince of the kings - Ὁ αρχων, The chief or head, of all earthly
potentates; who has them all under his dominion and control, and can
dispose of them as he will.

Unto him that loved us - This should begin a new verse, as it is the
commencement of a new subject. Our salvation is attributed to the love
of God, who gave his Son; and to the love of Christ, who died for us.
See [Joh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016).

Washed us from our sins - The redemption of the soul, with the remission
of sins, and purification from unrighteousness, is here, as in all the
New Testament, attributed to the blood of Christ shed on the cross for
man.

[Revelation 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 1:6</span></span>

Kings and priests - See on [Pe1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)
(note), [Pe1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009) (note). But instead
of βασιλεις και ἱερεις, kings and priests the most reputable MSS.,
versions, and fathers have βασιλειαν ἱερεις, a kingdom and priests; i.e.
a kingdom of priests, or a royal priesthood. The regal and sacerdotal
dignities are the two highest that can possibly exist among men; and
these two are here mentioned to show the glorious prerogatives and state
of the children of God.

To him be glory - That is, to Christ; for it is of him that the prophet
speaks, and of none other.

For ever and ever - Εις τους αιωνας των αιωνων· To ages of ages; or
rather, through all indefinite periods; through all time, and through
eternity.

Amen - A word of affirmation and approbation; so it shall be, and so it
ought to be.

[Revelation 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 1:7</span></span>

Behold, he cometh with clouds - This relates to his coming to execute
judgment on the enemies of his religion; perhaps to his coming to
destroy Jerusalem, as he was to be particularly manifested to them that
pierced him, which must mean the incredulous and rebellious Jews.

And all kindreds of the earth - Πασαι αἱ φυλαι της γης· All the tribes
of the land. By this the Jewish people are most evidently intended, and
therefore the whole verse may be understood as predicting the
destruction of the Jews; and is a presumptive proof that the Apocalypse
was written before the final overthrow of the Jewish state.

Even so, Amen - Ναι, αμην· Yea, Amen. It is true, so be it. Our Lord
will come and execute judgment on the Jews and Gentiles. This the Jews
and Romans particularly felt.

[Revelation 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 1:8</span></span>

I am Alpha and Omega - I am from eternity to eternity. This mode of
speech is borrowed from the Jews, who express the whole compass of
things by א aleph and ת tau, the first and last letters of the Hebrew
alphabet; but as St. John was writing in Greek, he accommodates the
whole to the Greek alphabet, of which Α alpha and Ω omega are the first
and last letters. With the rabbins מא ועד ת meeleph vead tau, "from
aleph to tau," expressed the whole of a matter, from the beginning to
the end. So in Yalcut Rubeni, fol. 17, 4: Adam transgressed the whole
law from aleph to tau; i.e., from the beginning to the end.

Ibid., fol. 48, 4: Abraham observed the law, from aleph to tau; i.e., he
kept it entirely, from beginning to end.

Ibid., fol. 128, 3: When the holy blessed God pronounced a blessing on
the Israelites, he did it from aleph to tau; i.e., he did it perfectly.

The beginning and the ending - That is, as aleph or alpha is the
beginning of the alphabet, so am I the author and cause of all things;
as tau or omega is the end or last letter of the alphabet, so am I the
end of all thinks, the destroyer as well as the establisher of all
things. This clause is wanting in almost every MS. and version of
importance. It appears to have been added first as an explanatory note,
and in process of time crept into the text. Griesbach has left it out of
the text. It is worthy of remark, that as the union of א aleph and ת tau
in Hebrew make את eth, which the rabbins interpret of the first matter
out of which all things were formed, (see on [Gen
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001) (note)); so the union of Α alpha
and Ω omega, in Greek, makes the verb αω, I breathe, and may very
properly, in such a symbolical book, point out Him in whom we live, and
move, and have our being; for, having formed man out of the dust of the
earth, he breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and he became a
living soul; and it is by the inspiration or inbreathing of his Spirit
that the souls of men are quickened, made alive from the dead, and
fitted for life eternal. He adds also that he is the Almighty, the
all-powerful framer of the universe, and the inspirer of men.

[Revelation 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 1:9</span></span>

Your brother - A Christian, begotten of God, and incorporated in the
heavenly family.

Companion in tribulation - Suffering under the persecution in which you
also suffer.

In the kingdom - For we are a kingdom of priests unto God.

And patience of Jesus - Meekly bearing all indignities, privations, and
sufferings, for the sake and after the example of our Lord and Master.

The isle that is called Patmos - This island is one of the Sporades, and
lies in the Aegean Sea, between the island of Icaria, and the promontory
of Miletus. It is now called Pactino, Patmol, or Palmosa. It has derived
all its celebrity from being the place to which St. John was banished by
one of the Roman emperors; whether Domitian, Claudius, or Nero, is not
agreed on, but it was most probably the latter. The island has a convent
on a well fortified hill, dedicated to John the apostle; the inhabitants
are said to amount to about three hundred men, and about twenty women to
one man. It is very barren, producing very little grain, but abounding
in partridges, quails, turtles, pigeons, snipes, and rabbits. It has
many good harbours, and is much infested by pirates. Patmos, its capital
and chief harbour, lies in east Long. 26 24', north Lat. 37 24'. The
whole island is about thirty miles in circumference.

For the testimony of Jesus Christ - For preaching Christianity, and
converting heathens to the Lord Jesus.

[Revelation 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 1:10</span></span>

I was in the Spirit - That is, I received the Spirit of prophecy, and
was under its influence when the first vision was exhibited.

The Lord's day - The first day of the week, observed as the Christian
Sabbath, because on it Jesus Christ rose from the dead; therefore it was
called the Lord's day, and has taken place of the Jewish Sabbath
throughout the Christian world.

And heard behind me a great voice - This voice came unexpectedly and
suddenly. He felt himself under the Divine afflatus; but did not know
what scenes were to be represented.

As of a trumpet - This was calculated to call in every wandering
thought, to fix his attention, and solemnize his whole frame. Thus God
prepared Moses to receive the law. See [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016), [Exo
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#019), etc.

[Revelation 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 1:11</span></span>

I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and - This whole clause is
wanting in ABC, thirty-one others; some editions; the Syriac, Coptic,
Ethiopic, Armenian, Slavonic, Vulgate, Arethas, Andreas, and Primasius.
Griesbach has left it out of the text.

Saying - What thou seest, write in a book - Carefully note down every
thing that is represented to thee. John had the visions from heaven; but
he described them in his own language and manner.

Send it unto the seven Churches - The names of which immediately follow.
In Asia. This is wanting in the principal MSS. and versions. Griesbach
has left it out of the text.

Ephesus - This was a city of Ionia, in Asia Minor, situated at the mouth
of the river Cayster, on the shore of the Aegean Sea, about fifty miles
south of Smyrna. See preface to the Epistle to the Ephesians.

Smyrna - Now called also Ismir, is the largest and richest city of Asia
Minor. It is situated about one hundred and eighty-three miles west by
south of Constantinople, on the shore of the Aegean Sea. It is supposed
to contain about one hundred and forty thousand inhabitants, of whom
there are from fifteen to twenty thousand Greeks, six thousand
Armenians, five thousand Roman Catholics, one hundred and forty
Protestants, eleven thousand Jews, and fifteen thousand Turks. It is a
beautiful city, but often ravaged by the plague, and seldom two years
together free from earthquakes. In 1758 the city was nearly desolated by
the plague; scarcely a sufficient number of the inhabitants survived to
gather in the fruits of the earth. In 1688 there was a terrible
earthquake here, which overthrew a great number of houses; in one of the
shocks, the rock on which the castle stood opened, swallowed up the
castle and five thousand persons! On these accounts, nothing but the
love of gain, so natural to man, could induce any person to make it his
residence; though, in other respects, it can boast of many advantages.
In this city the Turks have nineteen mosques; the Greeks, two churches;
the Armenians, one; and the Jews, eight synagogues; and the English and
Dutch factories have each a chaplain. Smyrna is one hundred miles north
of the island of Rhodes, long. 27 25' E., lat. 38 28' N.

Pergamos - A town of Mysia, situated on the river Caicus. It was the
royal residence of Eumenes, and the kings of the race of the Attali. It
was anciently famous for its library, which contained, according to
Plutarch, two hundred thousand volumes. It was here that the membranae
Pergameniae, Pergamenian skins, were invented; from which we derive our
word parchment. Pergamos was the birthplace of Galen; and in it P.
Scipio died. It is now called Pergamo and Bergamo, and is situated in
long. 27 0' E., lat. 39 13' N.

Thyatira - Now called Akissat and Ak-kissar, a city of Natolia, in Asia
Minor, seated on the river Hermus, in a plain eighteen miles broad, and
is about fifty miles from Pergamos; long. 27 49' E., lat. 38 16' N. The
houses are chiefly built of earth, but the mosques are all of marble.
Many remarkable ancient inscriptions have been discovered in this place.

Sardis - Now called Sardo and Sart, a town of Asia, in Natolia, about
forty miles east from Smyrna. It is seated on the side of mount Tmolus,
and was once the capital of the Lydian kings, and here Croesus reigned.
It is now a poor, inconsiderable village. Long. 28 5' E., lat. 37 51' N.

Philadelphia - A city of Natolia, seated at the foot of mount Tmolus, by
the river Cogamus. It was founded by Attalus Philadelphus, brother of
Eumenes, from whom it derived its name. It is now called Alah-sheker,
and is about forty miles ESE. of Smyrna. Long. 28 15' E., lat. 38 28' N.

Laodicea - A town of Phrygia, on the river Lycus; first called
Diospolis, or the city of Jupiter. It was built by Antiochus Theos, and
named after his consort Laodice. See the note on [Col
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001). And, for a very recent account of
these seven Churches, see a letter from the Rev. Henry Lindsay, inserted
at the end of Revelation 3.

[Revelation 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 1:12</span></span>

And I turned For he had heard the voice behind him. To see the voice;
i.e., the person from whom the voice came.

Seven golden candlesticks - Ἑπτα λυχνιας χρυσας· Seven golden lamps. It
is absurd to say, a golden silver, or brazen candlestick. These seven
lamps represented the seven Churches, in which the light of God was
continually shining, and the love of God continually burning. And they
are here represented as golden, to show how precious they were in the
sight of God. This is a reference to the temple at Jerusalem, where
there was a candlestick or chandelier of seven branches; or rather six
branches; three springing out on either side, and one in the center. See
[Exo 25:31-37](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031). This reference to the
temple seems to intimate that the temple of Jerusalem was a type of the
whole Christian Church.

[Revelation 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 1:13</span></span>

Like unto the Son of man - This seems a reference to [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013). This was our blessed Lord
himself, [Rev 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018).

Clothed with a garment down to the foot - This is a description of the
high priest, in his sacerdotal robes. See these described at large in
the notes on [Exo 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#004), etc., Jesus is
our high priest, even in heaven. He is still discharging the sacerdotal
functions before the throne of God.

Golden girdle - The emblem both of regal and sacerdotal dignity.

[Revelation 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 1:14</span></span>

His head and his hairs were white like wool - This was not only an
emblem of his antiquity, but it was the evidence of his glory; for the
whiteness or splendor of his head and hair doubtless proceeded from the
rays of light and glory which encircled his head, and darted from it in
all directions. The splendor around the head was termed by the Romans
nimbus, and by us a glory; and was represented round the heads of gods,
deified persons, and saints. It is used in the same way through almost
all the nations of the earth.

His eyes were as a flame of fire - To denote his omniscience, and the
all-penetrating nature of the Divine knowledge.

[Revelation 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 1:15</span></span>

His feet like unto fine brass - An emblem of his stability and
permanence, brass being considered the most durable of all metallic
substances or compounds.

The original word, χαλκολιβανον, means the famous aurichalcum, or
factitious metal, which, according to Suidas, was ειδος ηλεκτρου,
τιμιωτερον χρυσου, "a kind of amber, more precious than gold." It seems
to have been a composition of gold, silver, and brass, and the same with
the Corinthian brass, so highly famed and valued; for when Lucius
Mummius took and burnt the city of Corinth, many statues of these three
metals, being melted, had run together, and formed the composition
already mentioned, and which was held in as high estimation as gold. See
Pliny, Hist. Nat., lib. 34, c. 2; Florus, lib. 2, c. 16. It may however
mean no more than copper melted with lapis calaminaris, which converts
it into brass; and the flame that proceeds from the metal during this
operation is one of the most intensely and unsufferably vivid that can
be imagined. I have often seen several furnaces employed in this
operation, and the flames bursting up through the earth (for these
furnaces are under ground) always called to remembrance this description
given by St. John: His feet of fine brass, as if they burned in a
furnace; the propriety and accuracy of which none could doubt, and every
one must feel who has viewed this most dazzling operation.

His voice as the sound of many waters - The same description we find in
[Eze 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#002) : The glory of the God of
Israel came from the way of the east; and his voice was like the noise
of many waters: and the earth shined with his glory.

[Revelation 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 1:16</span></span>

In his right hand seven stars - The stars are afterwards interpreted as
representing the seven angels, messengers, or bishops of the seven
Churches. Their being in the right hand of Christ shows that they are
under his special care and most powerful protection. See below.

Out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword - This is no doubt
intended to point out the judgments about to be pronounced by Christ
against the rebellious Jews and persecuting Romans; God's judgments were
just now going to fall upon both. The sharp two-edged sword may
represent the word of God in general, according to that saying of the
apostle, [Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012) : The word of God
is quick and powerful, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even
to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, etc. And the word of God is
termed the sword of the Spirit, [Eph
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017).

And his countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength - His face
was like the disk of the sun in the brightest summer's day, when there
were no clouds to abate the splendor of his rays. A similar form of
expression is found in [Jdg 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#031) : Let
them that love him be as the sun when he Goeth Forth in His Might. And a
similar description may be found, Midrash in Yalcut Simeoni, part I.,
fol. 55, 4: "When Moses and Aaron came and stood before Pharaoh, they
appeared like the ministering angels; and their stature, like the cedars
of Lebanon: - וגלגלי עיניהם דומים לגלגלי חמה vegalgilley eyneyhem domim
legalgilley chammah, and the pupils of their eyes were like the wheels
of the sun; and their beards were as the grape of the palm trees; וזיו
פניהם כזיו חמה veziv peneyhem keziv chammah, and the Splendor of Their
Faces was as the Splendor of the Sun."

[Revelation 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 1:17</span></span>

I fell at his feet as dead - The appearance of the glory of the Lord had
then same effect upon Ezekiel, [Eze
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028) : and the appearance of Gabriel
had the same effect on Daniel, [Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017). The terrible splendor of such
majesty was more than the apostle could bear, and he fell down deprived
of his senses, but was soon enabled to behold the vision by a
communication of strength from our Lord's right hand.

[Revelation 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 1:18</span></span>

I am he that liveth, and was dead - I am Jesus the Savior, who, though
the fountain of life, have died for mankind; and being raised from the
dead I shall die no more, the great sacrifice being consummated. And
have the keys of death and the grave, so that I can destroy the living
and raise the dead. The key here signifies the power and authority over
life, death, and the grave. This is also a rabbinical form of speech. In
the Jerusalem Targum, on [Gen 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#022),
are these words: "There are four Keys in the hand of God which he never
trusts to angel or seraph.

1\. The key of the rain;

2\. The key of provision;

3\. The key of the grave; and

4\. The key of the barren womb."

In Sanhedrin, fol. 113, 1, it is said: "When the son of the woman of
Sarepta died, Elijah requested that to him might be given the key of the
resurrection of the dead. They said to him, there are three Keys which
are not given into the hand of the apostle, the key of life, the key of
the rain, and the key of the resurrection of the dead." From these
examples it is evident that we should understand ᾁδης, hades, here, not
as hell, nor the place of separate spirits, but merely as the grave; and
the key we find to be merely the emblem of power and authority. Christ
can both save and destroy, can kill and make alive. Death is still under
his dominion, and he can recall the dead whensoever he pleases. He is
the resurrection and the life.

[Revelation 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 1:19</span></span>

Write the things which thou hast seen - These visions and prophecies are
for general instruction, and therefore every circumstance must be
faithfully recorded. What he had seen was to be written; what he was
about to see, relative to the seven Churches, must be also written; and
what he was to see afterwards, concerning other Churches and states, to
be recorded likewise.

[Revelation 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 1:20</span></span>

The mystery - That is, the allegorical explanation of the seven stars is
the seven angels or ministers of the Churches; and the allegorical
meaning of the seven golden lamps is the seven Churches themselves.

1\. In the seven stars there may be an allusion to the seals of
different offices under potentates, each of which had its own particular
seal, which verified all instruments from that office; and as these
seals were frequently set in rings which were worn on the fingers, there
may be an allusion to those brilliants set in rings, and worn επι της
δεξιας, Upon the right hand. In [Jer
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024), Coniah is represented as a
signet on the right hand of the Lord; and that such signets were in
rings see [Gen 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#018), [Gen
38:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#025); [Exo
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#011); [Dan
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#017), [Hag
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#023). On close examination we shall
find that all the symbols in this book have their foundation either in
nature, fact, custom, or general opinion. One of the cutchery seals of
the late Tippoo Saib, with which he stamped all the commissions of that
office, lies now before me; it is cut on silver, in the Taaleck
character, and the piece of silver is set in a large gold ring, heavy,
but roughly manufactured.

2\. The Churches are represented by these lamps; they hold the oil and
the fire, and dispense the light. A lamp is not light in itself, it is
only the instrument of dispensing light, and it must receive both oil
and fire before it can dispense any; so no Church has in itself either
grace or glory, it must receive all from Christ its head, else it can
dispense neither light nor life.

3\. The ministers of the Gospel are signets or seals of Jesus Christ; he
uses them to stamp his truth, to accredit it, and give it currency. But
as a seal can mark nothing of itself unless applied by a proper hand, so
the ministers of Christ can do no good, seal no truth, impress no soul,
unless the great owner condescend to use them.

4\. How careful should the Church be that it have the oil and the light,
that it continue to burn and send forth Divine knowledge! In vain does
any Church pretend to be a Church of Christ if it dispense no light; if
souls are not enlightened, quickened, and converted in it. If Jesus walk
in it, its light will shine both clearly and strongly, and sinners will
be converted unto him; and the members of that Church will be children
of the light, and walk as children of the light and of the day, and
there will be no occasion of stumbling in them.

5\. How careful should the ministers of Christ be that they proclaim
nothing as truth, and accredit nothing as truth, but what comes from
their master!

They should also take heed lest, after having preached to others,
themselves should be cast-aways; lest God should say unto them as he
said of Coniah, As I live, saith the Lord, though Coniah, the son of
Jehoiakim, were the Signet Upon My Right Hand, yet would I pluck thee
thence.

On the other hand, if they be faithful, their labor shall not be in
vain, and their safety shall be great. He that toucheth them toucheth
the apple of God's eye, and none shall be able to pluck them out of his
hand. they are the angels and ambassadors of the Lord; their persons are
sacred; they are the messengers of the Churches, and the glory of
Christ. Should they lose their lives in the work, it will be only a
speedier entrance into an eternal glory.

The rougher the way, the shorter their stay, The troubles that rise
Shall gloriously hurry their souls to the skies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 2](rev002)

</div>
