<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom005)  [Next](rom007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 6:0</span></span>

We must not abuse the boundless goodness of God by continuing in sin,
under the wicked persuasion that the more we sin the more the grace of
God will abound, [Rom 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001). For, having
been baptized into Christ, we have professed thereby to be dead to sin,
[Rom 6:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002). And to be planted in the
likeness of his resurrection, [Rom
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005). For we profess to be crucified
with him, to die and rise again from the dead, [Rom
6:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006). We should not, therefore, let
sin reign in our bodies, but live to the glory of God, [Rom
6:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012). The Gospel makes no provision
for living in sin, any more than the law did; and those who commit sin
are the slaves of sin, [Rom 6:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015).
The degrading and afflictive service of sin, and its wages eternal
death; the blessed effects of the grace of God in the heart, of which
eternal life is the fruit, [Rom
6:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020).

The apostle, having proved that salvation, both to Jew and Gentile, must
come through the Messiah, and be received by faith only, proceeds in
this chapter to show the obligations under which both were laid to live
a holy life, and the means and advantages they enjoyed for that purpose.
This he does, not only as a thing highly and indispensably necessary in
itself - for without holiness none can see the Lord - but to confute a
calumny which appears to have been gaining considerable ground even at
that time, viz. that the doctrine of justification by faith alone,
through the grace of Christ Jesus, rendered obedience to the moral law
useless; and that the more evil a man did, the more the grace of God
would abound to him, in his redemption from that evil. That this calumny
was then propagated we learn from [Rom
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008); and the apostle defends himself
against it in the 31st verse of the same, ([Rom
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#031)) by asserting, that his doctrine,
far from making void the law, served to establish it. But in this and
the two following chapters he takes up the subject in a regular, formal
manner; and shows both Jews and Gentiles that the principles of the
Christian religion absolutely require a holy heart and a holy life, and
make the amplest provisions for both.

[Romans 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 6:1</span></span>

Shall we continue in sin - It is very likely that these were the words
of a believing Gentile, who - having as yet received but little
instruction, for he is but just brought out of his heathen state to
believe in Christ Jesus - might imagine, from the manner in which God
had magnified his mercy, in blotting out his sin on his simply believing
on Christ, that, supposing he even gave way to the evil propensities of
his own heart, his transgressions could do him no hurt now that he was
in the favor of God. And we need not wonder that a Gentile, just
emerging from the deepest darkness, might entertain such thoughts as
these; when we find that eighteen centuries after this, persons have
appeared in the most Christian countries of Europe, not merely asking
such a question, but defending the doctrine with all their might; and
asserting in the most unqualified manner, "that believers were under no
obligation to keep the moral law of God; that Christ had kept it for
them; that his keeping it was imputed to them; and that God, who had
exacted it from Him, who was their surety and representative, would not
exact it from them, forasmuch as it would be injustice to require two
payments for one debt." These are the Antinomians who once flourished in
this land, and whose race is not yet utterly extinct.

[Romans 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 6:2</span></span>

God forbid - Μη γενοιτο, Let it not be; by no means; far from it; let
not such a thing be mentioned! - Any of these is the meaning of the
Greek phrase, which is a strong expression of surprise and
disapprobation: and is not properly rendered by our God forbid! for,
though this may express the same thing, yet it is not proper to make the
sacred Name So familiar on such occasions.

How shall we, that are dead to sin - The phraseology of this verse is
common among Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins. To Die to a thing or person,
is to have nothing to do with it or him; to be totally separated from
them: and to live to a thing or person is to be wholly given up to them;
to have the most intimate connection with them. So Plautus, Clitell.
iii. 1, 16: Nihil mecum tibi, Mortuus Tibi Sum. I have nothing to do
with thee; I am Dead to thee. Persa, i. 1, 20: Mihi quidem tu jam
Mortuus Eras, quia te non visitavi. Thou wast Dead to me because I
visited thee not. So Aelian, Var. Hist. iii. 13: Ὁτι φιλοινοτατον εθνος
το των Ταπυρων, τοσουτον, ὡστε ζῃν αυτους εν οινῳ, και το πλειστον του
βιου εν τῃ προς αυτον ὁμιλιᾳ καταναλισκειν· "The Tapyrians are such
lovers of wine, that they Live in wine; and the principal part of their
Life is Devoted to it." They live to wine; they are insatiable
drunkards. See more examples in Wetstein and Rosenmuller.

[Romans 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 6:3</span></span>

Know ye not, etc. - Every man who believes the Christian religion, and
receives baptism as the proof that he believes it, and has taken up the
profession of it, is bound thereby to a life of righteousness. To be
baptized into Christ, is to receive the doctrine of Christ crucified,
and to receive baptism as a proof of the genuineness of that faith, and
the obligation to live according to its precepts.

Baptized into his death? - That, as Jesus Christ in his crucifixion died
completely, so that no spark of the natural or animal life remained in
his body, so those who profess his religion should be so completely
separated and saved from sin, that they have no more connection with it,
nor any more influence from it, than a dead man has with or from his
departed spirit.

[Romans 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 6:4</span></span>

We are buried with him by baptism into death - It is probable that the
apostle here alludes to the mode of administering baptism by immersion,
the whole body being put under the water, which seemed to say, the man
is drowned, is dead; and, when he came up out of the water, he seemed to
have a resurrection to life; the man is risen again; he is alive! He
was, therefore, supposed to throw off his old Gentile state as he threw
off his clothes, and to assume a new character, as the baptized
generally put on new or fresh garments. I say it is probable that the
apostle alludes to this mode of immersion; but it is not absolutely
certain that he does so, as some do imagine; for, in the next verse, our
being incorporated into Christ by baptism is also denoted by our being
planted, or rather, grafted together in the likeness of his death; and
Noah's ark floating upon the water, and sprinkled by the rain from
heaven, is a figure corresponding to baptism, [Pe1
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020), [Pe1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021); but neither of these gives us
the same idea of the outward form as burying. We must be careful,
therefore, not to lay too much stress on such circumstances. Drowning
among the ancients was considered the most noble kind of death; some
think that the apostle may allude to this. The grand point is, that this
baptism represents our death to sin, and our obligation to walk in
newness of life: without which, of what use can it or any other rite be?

Raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father - From this we learn,
that as it required the glory of the Father, that is, his glorious
energy, to raise up from the grave the dead body of Christ, so it
requires the same glorious energy to quicken the dead soul of a sinner,
and enable him to walk in newness of life.

[Romans 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 6:5</span></span>

For if we have been planted together - Συμφυτοι γεγοναμεν. Dr. Taylor
observes, that our translation does not completely express the apostle's
meaning. Τα συμφυτα are such plants as grow, the one upon and in the
other, deriving sap and nourishment from it, as the mistletoe upon the
oak, or the scion upon the stock in which it is grafted. He would
therefore translate the words: For if we have been growers together with
Christ in the likeness of his death, (or in that which is like his
death), we shall be also growers together with him in the likeness of
his resurrection; or in that which is like his resurrection. He reckons
it a beautiful metaphor, taken from grafting, or making the scion grow
together with a new stock.

But if we take the word planted in its usual sense, we shall find it to
be a metaphor as beautiful and as expressive as the former. When the
seed or plant is inserted in the ground, it derives from that ground all
its nourishment, and all those juices by which it becomes developed; by
which it increases in size, grows firm, strong, and vigorous; and puts
forth its leaves, blossoms, and fruit. The death of Jesus Christ is
represented as the cause whence his fruitfulness, as the author of
eternal salvation to mankind is derived; and genuine believers in him
are represented as being planted in his death, and growing out of it;
deriving their growth, vigor, firmness, beauty, and fruitfulness from
it. In a word, it is by his death that Jesus Christ redeems a lost
world; and it is from that vicarious death that believers derive that
pardon and holiness which makes them so happy in themselves, and so
useful to others. This sacrificial death is the soil in which they are
planted; and from which they derive their life, fruitfulness, and their
final glory.

[Romans 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 6:6</span></span>

Our old man is crucified with him - This seems to be a farther extension
of the same metaphor. When a seed is planted in the earth, it appears as
if the whole body of it perished. All seeds, as they are commonly
termed, are composed of two parts; the germ, which contains the
rudiments of the future plant; and the lobes, or body of the seed, which
by their decomposition in the ground, become the first nourishment to
the extremely fine and delicate roots of the embryo plant, and support
it till it is capable of deriving grosser nourishment from the common
soil. The body dies that the germ may live. Parables cannot go on all
fours; and in metaphors or figures, there is always some one (or more)
remarkable property by which the doctrine intended is illustrated. To
apply this to the purpose in hand: how is the principle of life which
Jesus Christ has implanted in us to be brought into full effect, vigor,
and usefulness? By the destruction of the body of sin, our old man, our
wicked, corrupt, and fleshly self, is to be crucified; to be as truly
slain as Christ was crucified; that our souls may as truly be raised
from a death of sin to a life of righteousness, as the body of Christ
was raised from the grave, and afterwards ascended to the right hand of
God. But how does this part of the metaphor apply to Jesus Christ?
Plainly and forcibly. Jesus Christ took on him a body; a body in the
likeness of sinful flesh, [Rom 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003);
and gave up that body to death; through which death alone an atonement
was made for sin, and the way laid open for the vivifying Spirit, to
have the fullest access to, and the most powerful operation in, the
human heart. Here, the body of Christ dies that he may be a quickening
Spirit to mankind. Our body of sin is destroyed by this quickening
Spirit, that henceforth we should live unto Him who died and rose again.
Thus the metaphor, in all its leading senses, is complete, and applies
most forcibly to the subject in question. We find that παλαιος ανθρωπος,
the old man, used here, and in [Eph
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022), and [Col
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009), is the same as the flesh with its
affections and lusts, [Gal 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024); and
the body of the sins of the flesh, [Col
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011); and the very same which the
Jewish writers term אדם הקדמוני, Adam hakkadmoni, the old Adam; and
which they interpret by יצר הרע yetsar hara, "evil concupiscence," the
same which we mean by indwelling sin, or the infection of our nature, in
consequence of the fall. From all which we may learn that the design of
God is to counterwork and destroy the very spirit and soul of sin, that
we shall no longer serve it, δουλευειν, no longer be its slaves. Nor
shall it any more be capable of performing its essential functions than
a dead body can perform the functions of natural life.

[Romans 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 6:7</span></span>

He that is dead is freed from sin - Δεδικαιωται, literally, is justified
from sin; or, is freed or delivered from it. Does not this simply mean,
that the man who has received Christ Jesus by faith, and has been,
through believing, made a partaker of the Holy Spirit, has had his old
man, all his evil propensities destroyed; so that he is not only
justified freely from all sin, but wholly sanctified unto God? The
context shows that this is the meaning. Every instance of violence is
done to the whole scope and design of the apostle, by the opinion, that
"this text is a proof that believers are not fully saved from sin in
this life, because only he that is dead is freed from sin." Then death
is his justifier and deliverer! Base and abominable insinuation, highly
derogatory to the glory of Christ! Dr. Dodd, in his note on the
preceding verse, after some inefficient criticism on the word καταργηθῃ,
destroyed, which, he thinks, should be rendered enervated, has the
following most unevangelical sentiment: "The body of sin in believers
is, indeed, an enfeebled, conquered, and deposed tyrant, and the stroke
of death finishes its destruction." So then, the death of Christ and the
influences of the Holy Spirit were only sufficient to depose and
enfeeble the tyrant sin; but Our death must come in to effect his total
destruction! Thus our death is, at least partially, our Savior; and
thus, that which was an effect of sin (for sin entered into the world,
and death by sin) becomes the means of finally destroying it! That is,
the effect of a cause can become so powerful, as to react upon that
cause and produce its annihilation! The divinity and philosophy of this
sentiment are equally absurd. It is the blood of Christ alone that
cleanses from all unrighteousness; and the sanctification of a believer
is no more dependent on death than his justification. If it he said,
"that believers do not cease from sin till they die;" I have only to
say, they are such believers as do not make a proper use of their faith;
and what can be said more of the whole herd of transgressors and
infidels? They cease to sin, when they cease to breathe. If the
Christian religion bring no other privileges than this to its upright
followers, well may we ask, wherein doth the wise man differ from the
fool, for they have both one end? But the whole Gospel teaches a
contrary doctrine.

[Romans 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 6:8</span></span>

Now if we be dead with Christ - According to what is stated in the
preceding verses. See particularly on the 5th verse ([Rom
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005) (note)).

[Romans 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 6:9</span></span>

Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more - So we, believing in
Christ Jesus, and having a death unto sin, and a life unto
righteousness, should sin no more. If we be risen indeed with Christ, we
should seek the things above, and set our affections on things above,
and not on the earth. The man who walks in humble, loving obedience, to
an indwelling Christ, sin has no more dominion over his soul than death
has over the immortal and glorified body of his Redeemer.

[Romans 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 6:10</span></span>

He died unto sin once - On this clause Rosenmuller speaks thus: "Τῃ
ἁμαρτιᾳ απεθανεν εφαπαξ· propter peccatum mortuus est semel, et quidem
misera morte. Τῃ ἁμαρτιᾳ , i.e. ὑπερ της ἁμαρτιας, ad expianda peccata;
res ipsa docet aliter homines αποθνησκειν τῃ ἁμαρτιᾳ, aliter Christum:
amat Paulus parallelismum, in quo interpretando multa cautione opus
est." "He died unto sin once: i.e. he died on account of sin, and truly
a miserable death. Τῃ ἁμαρτιᾳ, is the same as ὑπερ της ἁμαρτιας, for the
expiation of sin. Common sense teaches us that men die to sin in one
sense; Christ in another: St. Paul loves parallelisms, in the
interpretation of which there is need of much caution." From the whole
scope of the apostle's discourse it is plain that he considers the death
of Christ as a death or sacrifice for sin; a sin-offering: in this sense
no man has ever died for sin, or ever can die.

[Romans 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 6:11</span></span>

Reckon ye also yourselves to be dead - Die as truly unto sin, as he died
for sin. Live as truly unto God, as he lives with God. This seems to be
the spirit of the apostle's meaning.

[Romans 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 6:12</span></span>

Let not sin therefore reign - This is a prosopopoeia, or
personification. Sin is represented as a king, ruler, or tyrant, who has
the desires of the mind and the members of the body under his control so
that by influencing the passions he governs the body. Do not let sin
reign, do not let him work; that is, let him have no place, no being in
your souls; because, wherever he is he governs, less or more: and indeed
sin is not sin without this. How is sin known? By evil influences in the
mind, and evil acts in the life. But do not these influences and these
acts prove his dominion? Certainly, the very existence of an evil
thought to which passion or appetite attaches itself, is a proof that
there sin has dominion; for without dominion such passions could not be
excited. Wherever sin is felt, there sin has dominion; for sin is sin
only as it works in action or passion against God. Sin cannot be a
quiescent thing: if it do not work it does not exist.

That ye should obey it in the lusts thereof - Αυτῃ εν ταις επιθυμιαις
αυτου. This clause is wanting in the most ancient and reputable MSS. and
in the principal versions. Griesbach has left it out of his text; and
Professor White says, Certissime delenda: "These words should certainly
he expunged" they are not necessary to the apostle's argument; it was
enough to say, Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should
obey it. If it be there it will reign there; and its reign supposes,
necessarily, the subjection of that in which it reigns. A king reigns
when his laws are enforced, and the people obey them. When there is no
executive government there is no reign. There may be a royal shadow
there, but there is no king.

[Romans 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 6:13</span></span>

Neither yield ye your members - Do not yield to temptation. It is no sin
to be tempted, the sin lies in yielding. While the sin exists only in
Satan's solicitation, it is the devil's sin, not ours: when we yield, we
make the devil's sin our own: then we Enter Into temptation. Resist the
devil, and he will flee from you. Satan himself cannot force you to sin:
till he wins over your will, he cannot bring you into subjection. You
may be tempted; but yield not to the temptation.

Yield yourselves unto God - Let God have your wills; keep them ever on
his side; there they are safe, and there they will be active. Satan
cannot force the will, and God will not. Indeed it would cease to be
will were it forced by either: it is essential to its being that it be
free.

And your members as instruments, etc. - Let soul and body be employed in
the service of your Maker; let him have your hearts; and with them, your
heads, your hands, your feet. Think and devise what is pure; speak what
is true, and to the use of edifying; work that which is just and good;
and walk steadily in the way that leads to everlasting felicity. Be holy
within and holy without.

[Romans 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 6:14</span></span>

Sin shall not have dominion over you - God delivers you from it; and if
you again become subject to it, it will be the effect of your own choice
or negligence.

Ye are not under the law - That law which exacts obedience, without
giving power to obey; that condemns every transgression and every unholy
thought without providing for the extirpation of evil or the pardon of
sin.

But under grace - Ye are under the merciful and beneficent dispensation
of the Gospel, that, although it requires the strictest conformity to
the will of God, affords sufficient power to be thus conformed; and, in
the death of Christ, has provided pardon for all that is past, and grace
to help in every time of need.

[Romans 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 6:15</span></span>

Shall we sin because we are not under the law - Shall we abuse our high
and holy calling because we are not under that law which makes no
provision for pardon, but are under that Gospel which has opened the
fountain to wash away all sin and defilement? Shall we sin because grace
abounds? Shall we do evil that good may come of it? This be far from us!

[Romans 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 6:16</span></span>

To whom ye yield yourselves - Can you suppose that you should continue
to be the servants of Christ if ye give way to sin? Is he not the master
who exacts the service, and to whom the service is performed? Sin is the
service of Satan; righteousness the service of Christ. If ye sin ye are
the servants of Satan, and not the servants of God.

The word δουλος, which we translate servant, properly signifies slave;
and a slave among the Greeks and Romans was considered as his master's
property, and he might dispose of him as he pleased. Under a bad master,
the lot of the slave was most oppressive and dreadful; his ease and
comfort were never consulted; he was treated worse than a beast; and, in
many cases, his life hung on the mere caprice of the master. This state
is the state of every poor, miserable sinner; he is the slave of Satan,
and his own evil lusts and appetites are his most cruel task-masters.
The same word is applied to the servants of Christ, the more forcibly to
show that they are their Master's property; and that, as he is
infinitely good and benevolent, therefore his service must be perfect
freedom. Indeed, he exacts no obedience from them which he does not turn
to their eternal advantage; for this master has no self-interest to
secure. See on [Rom 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001) (note).

[Romans 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 6:17</span></span>

But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin - This verse should
be read thus: But thanks be to God that, although ye were the servants
of sin, nevertheless ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine
that was delivered unto you; or, that mould of teaching into which ye
were cast. The apostle does not thank God that they were sinners; but
that, although they were such, they had now received and obeyed the
Gospel. The Hebrew phrase, [Isa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001),
is exactly the same as that of the apostle here: In that day thou shalt
say, I will praise thee, for thou wast angry with me: that is, although
thou wast angry with me, thou hast turned away thy wrath, etc.

That form of doctrine - Τυπον διδαχης; here Christianity is represented
under the notion of a mould, or die, into which they were cast, and from
which they took the impression of its excellence. The figure upon this
die is the image of God, righteousness and true holiness, which was
stamped on their souls in believing the Gospel and receiving the Holy
Ghost. The words εις ὁν παρεδοθητε τυπον refer to the melting of metal;
which, when it is liquefied, is cast into the mould, that it may receive
the impression that is sunk or cut in the mould; and therefore the words
may be literally translated, into which mould of doctrine ye have been
cast. They were melted down under the preaching of the word, and then
were capable of receiving the stamp of its purity.

[Romans 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 6:18</span></span>

Being then made free from sin - Ελευθερωθεντες is a term that refers to
the manumission of a slave. They were redeemed from the slavery of sin,
and became the servants of righteousness. Here is another prosopopoeia:
both sin and righteousness are personified: sin can enjoin no good and
profitable work; righteousness can require none that is unjust or
injurious.

[Romans 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 6:19</span></span>

I speak after the manner of men - This phrase is often used by the Greek
writers to signify what was easy to be comprehended; what was ad captum
vulgi, level with common understandings, delivered in a popular style;
what was different from the high flights of the poets, and the studied
sublime obscurity of the philosophers.

Because of the infirmity of your flesh - As if he had said: I make use
of metaphors and figures connected with well-known natural things; with
your trades and situation in life; because of your inexperience in
heavenly things, of which ye are only just beginning to know the nature
and the names.

Servants to uncleanness, etc. - These different expressions show how
deeply immersed in and enslaved by sin these Gentiles were before their
conversion to Christianity. Several of the particulars are given in the
first chapter of this epistle.

[Romans 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 6:20</span></span>

Ye were free from righteousness - These two servitudes are incompatible;
if we cannot serve God and Mammon, surely we cannot serve Christ and
Satan. We must be either sinners or saints; God's servants or the
devil's slaves. It cannot be as a good mistaken man has endeavored to
sing: -

"To good and evil equal bent,

I'm both a devil and a saint."

I know not whether it be possible to paint the utter prevalence of sin
in stronger colors than the apostle does here, by saying they were Free
from righteousness. It seems tantamount to that expression in Genesis,
[Gen 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005), where, speaking of the total
degeneracy of the human race, the writer says, Every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. They were all corrupt;
they were altogether abominable: there was none that did good; no, not
one.

[Romans 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 6:21</span></span>

What fruit had ye then in those things - God designs that every man
shall reap benefit by his service. What benefit have ye derived from the
service of sin?

Whereof ye are now ashamed? - Ye blush to remember your former life. It
was scandalous to yourselves, injurious to others, and highly provoking
to God.

The end of those things is death - Whatever sin may promise of pleasure
or advantage, the end to which it necessarily tends is the destruction
of body and soul.

[Romans 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 6:22</span></span>

But now being made free from sin - As being free from righteousness is
the finished character of a sinner, so being made free from sin is the
finished character of a genuine Christian.

And become servants to God - They were transferred from the service of
one master to that of another: they were freed from the slavery of sin,
and engaged in the service of God.

Fruit unto holiness - Holiness of heart was the principle; and
righteousness of life the fruit.

[Romans 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 6:23</span></span>

For the wages of sin is death - The second death, everlasting perdition.
Every sinner earns this by long, sore, and painful service. O! what
pains do men take to get to hell! Early and late they toil at sin; and
would not Divine justice be in their debt, if it did not pay them their
due wages?

But the gift of God is eternal life - A man may Merit hell, but he
cannot Merit heaven. The apostle does not say that the wages of
righteousness is eternal life: no, but that this eternal life, even to
the righteous, is το χαρισμα του Θεου, The gracious Gift of God. And
even this gracious gift comes through Jesus Christ our Lord. He alone
has procured it; and it is given to all those who find redemption in his
blood. A sinner goes to hell because he deserves it; a righteous man
goes to heaven because Christ has died for him, and communicated that
grace by which his sin is pardoned and his soul made holy. The word
οψωνια, which we here render wages, signified the daily pay of a Roman
soldier. So every sinner has a daily pay, and this pay is death; he has
misery because he sins. Sin constitutes hell; the sinner has a hell in
his own bosom; all is confusion and disorder where God does not reign:
every indulgence of sinful passions increases the disorder, and
consequently the misery of a sinner. If men were as much in earnest to
get their souls saved as they are to prepare them for perdition, heaven
would be highly peopled, and devils would be their own companions. And
will not the living lay this to heart?

1\. In the preceding chapter we see the connection that subsists between
the doctrines of the Gospel and the practice of Christianity. A doctrine
is a teaching, instruction, or information concerning some truth that is
to be believed, as essential to our salvation. But all teaching that
comes from God, necessarily leads to him. That Christ died for our sins
and rose again for our justification, is a glorious doctrine of the
Gospel. But this is of no use to him who does not die to sin, rise in
the likeness of his resurrection, and walk in newness of life: this is
the use that should be made of the doctrine. Every doctrine has its use,
and the use of it consists in the practice founded on it. We hear there
is a free pardon - we go to God and receive it; we hear that we may be
made holy - we apply for the sanctifying Spirit; we hear there is a
heaven of glory, into which the righteous alone shall enter - we watch
and pray, believe, love, and obey, in order that, when he doth appear,
we may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless. Those are
the doctrines; these are the uses or practice founded on those
doctrines.

2\. It is strange that there should be found a person believing the
whole Gospel system, and yet living in sin! Salvation From Sin is the
long-continued sound, as it is the spirit and design, of the Gospel. Our
Christian name, our baptismal covenant, our profession of faith in
Christ, and avowed belief in his word, all call us to this: can it be
said that we have any louder calls than these? Our self-interest, as it
respects the happiness of a godly life, and the glories of eternal
blessedness; the pains and wretchedness of a life of sin, leading to the
worm that never dies and the fire that is not quenched; second most
powerfully the above calls. Reader, lay these things to heart, and:
answer this question to God; How shall I escape, if I neglect so great
salvation? And then, as thy conscience shall answer, let thy mind and
thy hands begin to act.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 7](rom007)

</div>
