<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom014)  [Next](rom016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 15:0</span></span>

The strong should bear the infirmities of the weak, and each strive to
please, not himself, but his neighbor, after the example of Christ, [Rom
15:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001). Whatsoever was written in old
times was written for our learning, [Rom
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004). We should be of one mind, that
we might with one mouth glorify God, [Rom
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#005), [Rom
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006). We should accept each other as
Christ has accepted us, [Rom 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#007).
Scriptural proofs that Jesus Christ was not only the minister of the
circumcision, but came also for the salvation of the Gentiles, [Rom
15:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008). The God of hope can fill us
with all peace and joy in believing, [Rom
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#013). Character of the Church of
Rome, [Rom 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#014). The reason why the
apostle wrote so boldly to the Church in that city - what God had
wrought by him, and what he purposed to do, [Rom
15:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#015). He tells them of his
intended journey to Jerusalem, with a contribution to the poor saints -
a sketch of this journey, [Rom
15:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025). He commends himself to their
prayers, [Rom 15:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030).

[Romans 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 15:1</span></span>

We then that are strong - The sense of this verse is supposed to be the
following: We, Gentile Christians, who perfectly understand the nature
of our Gospel liberty, not only lawfully may, but are bound in duty to
bear any inconveniences that may arise from the scruples of the weaker
brethren, and to ease their consciences by prudently abstaining from
such indifferent things as may offend and trouble them; and not take
advantage from our superior knowledge to make them submit to our
judgment.

[Romans 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 15:2</span></span>

Let every one of us please his neighbor - For it should be a maxim with
each of us to do all in our power to please our brethren; and especially
in those things in which their spiritual edification is concerned.
Though we should not indulge men in mere whims and caprices, yet we
should bear with their ignorance and their weakness, knowing that others
had much to bear with from us before we came to our present advanced
state of religious knowledge.

[Romans 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 15:3</span></span>

For even Christ pleased not himself - Christ never acted as one who
sought his own ease or profit; he not only bore with the weakness, but
with the insults, of his creatures; as it is written in [Psa
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009) : The reproaches of them that
reproached thee fell on me - I not only bore their insults, but bore the
punishment due to them for their vicious and abominable conduct. That
this Psalm refers to the Messiah and his sufferings for mankind is
evident, not only from the quotation here, but also from [Joh
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028), [Joh
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029), when our Lord's receiving the
vinegar during his expiatory suffering is said to be a fulfilling of the
scripture, viz. of [Psa 69:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021) of this
very Psalm; and his cleansing the temple, [Joh
2:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#015), is said to be a fulfillment
of [Psa 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009) : For the zeal of thy
house hath eaten me up, the former part of which verse the apostle
quotes here.

[Romans 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 15:4</span></span>

For whatsoever things were written aforetime - This refers not only to
the quotation from the 69th Psalm, but to all the Old Testament
scriptures; for it can be to no other scriptures that the apostle
alludes. And, from what he says here of them, we learn that God had not
intended them merely for those generations in which they were first
delivered, but for the instruction of all the succeeding generations of
mankind. That we, through patience and comfort of the scriptures - that
we, through those remarkable examples of patience exhibited by the
saints and followers of God, whose history is given in those scriptures,
and the comfort which they derived from God in their patient endurance
of sufferings brought upon them through their faithful attachment to
truth and righteousness, might have hope that we shall be upheld and
blessed as they were, and our sufferings become the means of our greater
advances in faith and holiness, and consequently our hope of eternal
glory be the more confirmed. Some think that the word παρακλησις, which
we translate comfort, should be rendered exhortation; but there is
certainly no need here to leave the usual acceptation of the term, as
the word comfort makes a regular and consistent sense with the rest of
the verse.

[Romans 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 15:5</span></span>

Now the God of patience and consolation - May that God who endued them
with patience, and gave them the consolation that supported them in all
their trials and afflictions, grant you to be like-minded - give you the
same mode of thinking, and the same power of acting towards each other,
according to the example of Christ.

[Romans 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 15:6</span></span>

That ye - Jews and Gentiles - may with one mind - Thinking the same
things, and bearing with each other, after the example of Christ; and
one mouth, in all your religious assemblies, without jarring or
contentions, glorify God for calling you into such a state of salvation,
and showing himself to be your loving compassionate Father, as he is the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

It is very likely that the apostle refers here to religious acts in
public worship, which might have been greatly interrupted by the
dissensions between the converted Jews and the converted Gentiles; these
differences he labors to compose; and, after having done all that was
necessary in the way of instruction and exhortation, he now pours out
his soul to God, who alone could rule and manage the heart, that he
would enable them to think the same things, to be of the same judgment,
and that all, feeling their obligation to him, might join in the
sweetest harmony in every act of religious worship.

[Romans 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 15:7</span></span>

Wherefore receive ye one another - Προσλαμβανεσθε Have the most
affectionate regard for each other, and acknowledge each other as the
servants and children of God Almighty.

As Christ also received us - Καθως και ὁ Χριστος προσελαβετο ἡμας· In
the same manner, and with the same cordial affection, as Christ has
received us into communion with himself, and has made us partakers of
such inestimable blessings, condescending to be present in all our
assemblies. And as Christ has received us thus to the glory of God, so
should we, Jews and Gentiles, cordially receive each other, that God's
glory may be promoted by our harmony and brotherly love.

[Romans 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 15:8</span></span>

Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision - To show the Gentiles
the propriety of bearing with the scrupulous Jews, he shows them here
that they were under the greatest obligations to this people; to whom,
in the days of his flesh, Jesus Christ confined his ministry; giving the
world to see that he allowed the claim of the Jews as having the first
right to the blessings of the Gospel. And he confined his ministry thus
to the Jews, to confirm the truth of God, contained in the promises made
unto the patriarchs; for God had declared that thus it should be; and
Jesus Christ, by coming according to the promise, has fulfilled this
truth, by making good the promises: therefore, salvation is of the Jews,
as a kind of right conveyed to them through the promises made to their
fathers. But this salvation was not exclusively designed for the Jewish
people; as God by his prophets had repeatedly declared.

[Romans 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 15:9</span></span>

And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy - As the Jews were
to glorify God for his truth, so the Gentiles were to glorify God for
his mercy. The Jews received the blessings of the Gospel by right of
promise, which promise God had most punctually and circumstantially
fulfilled. The Gentiles had received the same Gospel as an effect of
God's mere mercy, having no right in consequence of any promise or
engagement made with any of their ancestors, though they were originally
included in the covenant made with Abraham; and the prophets had
repeatedly declared that they should be made equal partakers of those
blessings with the Jews themselves; as the apostle proceeds to prove.

I will confess to thee among the Gentiles - This quotation is taken from
[Psa 18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049), and shows that the
Gentiles had a right to glorify God for his mercy to them; and we shall
see the strength of this saying farther, when we consider a maxim of the
Jews delivered in Megillah, fol. 14: "From the time that the children of
Israel entered into the promised land, no Gentile had any right to sing
a hymn of praise to God. But after that the Israelites were led into
captivity, then the Gentiles began to have a right to glorify God." Thus
the Jews themselves confess that the Gentiles have a right to glorify
God; and this on account of being made partakers of his grace and mercy.
And if, says Schoettgen, we have a right to glorify God, then it follows
that our worship must be pleasing to him; and if it be pleasing to him,
then it follows that this worship must be good, otherwise God could not
be pleased with it.

Dr. Taylor gives a good paraphrase of this and the three following
verses: As you Jews glorify God for his truth, so the Gentiles have a
right to join with you in glorifying God for his mercy. And you have
Scripture authority for admitting them to such fellowship; for instance,
David says, [Psa 18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049), Therefore will
I give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the Gentiles, and sing praises
unto thy name. And again, Moses himself says, [Deu
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043), Rejoice, O ye Gentiles, with
his people. And again, it is evident, from [Psa
117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001), [Psa
117:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#002), that praise to God is not to be
confined to the Jews only, but that all people, as they all share in his
goodness, should also join in thanks to their common benefactor: O
praise the Lord, all ye nations, (Gentiles), praise him all ye people;
for his merciful kindness is great towards us; and the truth of the Lord
endureth for ever. Again the Prophet Isaiah expressly and clearly
declares, [Isa 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010), There shall be a
root of Jesse, (that is, the Messiah), and he shall rise to reign over
the Gentiles, and in him shall the Gentiles hope: ελπιουσιν· And thus
the apostle proves, both to the Jews and to the Gentiles, who were
probably unwilling to join with each other in religious fellowship, that
they had both an equal right to glorify God, being equally interested in
his mercy, goodness, and truth; and that, from the evidence of the above
scriptures, the Gentiles had as much right to hope in Christ, for the
full enjoyment of his kingdom, as the Jews had: and, taking occasion
from the last word hope, ελπιουσιν, which we improperly translate trust,
he pours out his heart in the following affectionate prayer.

[Romans 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 15:13</span></span>

Now the God of hope, etc. - Ὁ δε Θεος της ελπιδος, May the God of this
hope - that God who caused both Jews and Gentiles to hope that the
gracious promises which he made to them should be fulfilled; and who,
accordingly, has fulfilled them in the most punctual and circumstantial
manner;

Fill you with all joy - Give you true spiritual happiness; peace in your
own hearts, and unity among yourselves; in believing not only the
promises which he has given you, but believing in Christ Jesus, in whom
all the promises are yea and amen.

That ye may abound in hope - That ye may be excited to take more
enlarged views of the salvation which God has provided for you, and have
all your expectations fulfilled by the power of the Holy Ghost, enabling
you to hope and believe; and then sealing the fulfillment of the
promises upon your hearts.

[Romans 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 15:14</span></span>

And I - am persuaded of you - This is supposed to be an address to the
Gentiles; and it is managed with great delicacy: he seems to apologize
for the freedom he had used in writing to them; which he gives them to
understand proceeded from the authority he had received by his
apostolical office, the exercise of which office respected them
particularly. So they could not be offended when they found themselves
so particularly distinguished.

Ye - are full of goodness - Instead of αγαθωσυνης, goodness, some MSS.
of good repute have αγαπης, love. In this connection both words seem to
mean nearly the same thing. They were so full of goodness and love that
they were disposed, of themselves, to follow any plan that might be
devised, in order to bring about the most perfect understanding between
them and their Jewish brethren.

Filled with all knowledge - So completely instructed in the mind and
design of God, relative to their calling, and the fruit which they were
to bring forth to the glory of God, that they were well qualified to
give one another suitable exhortations on every important point.

Instead of αλληλους, one another, several MSS. have αλλους, others,
which gives a clearer sense: for, if they were all filled with
knowledge, there was little occasion for them to admonish one another;
but by this they were well qualified to admonish others - to impart the
wisdom they had to those who were less instructed.

[Romans 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 15:15</span></span>

Nevertheless - I have written - Not withstanding I have this conviction
of your extensive knowledge in the things of God, I have made bold to
write to you in some sort, απο μερους, to a party among you, as some
learned men translate the words, who stand more in need of such
instructions than the others; and I do this, because of the grace, δια
την χαριν - because of the office which I have received from God,
namely, to be the apostle of the Gentiles. This authority gave him full
right to say, advise, or enjoin any thing which he judged to be of
importance to their spiritual interests. This subject he pursues farther
in the following verse.

[Romans 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 15:16</span></span>

Ministering the Gospel of God - Ἱερουργουντα, Acting as a priest. Here
is a plain allusion, says Dr. Whitby, to the Jewish sacrifices offered
by the priest, and sanctified or made acceptable by the libamen offered
with them; for he compares himself, in preaching the Gospel, to the
priest performing his sacred functions - preparing his sacrifice to be
offered. The Gentiles, converted by him and dedicated to the service of
God, are his sacrifices and oblation. The Holy Spirit is the libamen
poured upon this sacrifice, by which it was sanctified and rendered
acceptable to God. The words of Isaiah, [Isa
66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020), And they shall bring all your
brethren for an Offering unto the Lord, out of all Nations, might have
suggested the above idea to the mind of the apostle.

[Romans 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 15:17</span></span>

I here therefore whereof I may glory - Being sent of God on this most
honorable and important errand, I have matter of great exultation, not
only in the honor which he has conferred upon me, but in the great
success with which he has crowned my ministry.

[Romans 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 15:18</span></span>

For I will not dare to speak - If the thing were not as I have stated
it, I would not dare to arrogate to myself honors which did not belong
to me. But God has made me the apostle of the Gentiles; and the
conversion of the Gentiles is the fruit of my ministry, Christ having
wrought by me for this purpose.

By word and deed - Αογῳ και εργῳ· These words may refer to the doctrines
which he taught and to the miracles which he wrought among them. So they
became obedient to the doctrines, on the evidence of the miracles with
which they were accompanied.

[Romans 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 15:19</span></span>

Through mighty signs and wonders - This more fully explains the
preceding clause: through the power of the Holy Ghost he was enabled to
work among the Gentiles mighty signs and wonders; so that they were
fully convinced that both his doctrine and mission were Divine; and
therefore they cheerfully received the Gospel of the Lord Jesus.

Round about unto Illyricum - Among ancient writers this place has gone
by a great variety of names, Illyria, Illyrica, Illyricum, Illyris, and
Illyrium. It is a country of Europe, extending from the Adriatic gulf to
Pannonia: according to Pliny, it extended from the river Arsia to the
river Drinius, thus including Liburnia on the west, and Dalmatia on the
east. Its precise limits have not been determined by either ancient or
modern geographers. It seems, according to an inscription in Gruter, to
have been divided by Augustus into two provinces, the upper and lower.
It now forms part of Croatia, Bosnia, Istria, and Slavonia. When the
apostle says that he preached the Gospel from Jerusalem round about to
Illyricum, he intends his land journeys chiefly; and, by looking at the
map annexed to the Acts of the Apostles, the reader will see that from
Jerusalem the apostle went round the eastern coast of the Mediterranean
Sea, and that he passed through Syria, Phoenicia, Arabia, Cilicia,
Pamphylia, Pisidia, Lycaonia, Galatia, Pontus, Paphlagonia, Phrygia,
Troas, Asia, Caria, Lycia, Ionia, Lydia, Thrace, Macedonia, Thessaly,
and Achaia; besides the isles of Cyprus and Crete. And no doubt he
visited many other places which are not mentioned in the New Testament.

I have fully preached the Gospel - Πεπληρωκεναι το ευαγγελιον, I have
successfully preached - I have not only proclaimed the word, but made
converts and founded Churches. See the note on [Mat
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017), where this sense of the word
πληρουν is noticed; for it signifies not only fully or perfectly, but
also to teach with prosperity and success.

[Romans 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 15:20</span></span>

So have I strived to preach the Gospel - Οὑτω δε φιλοτιμουμενον· For I
have considered it my honor to preach the Gospel where that Gospel was
before unknown. This is the proper import of the word φιλοτιμεισθαι;
from φιλος, a friend, and τιμη, honor. As I am not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, so I esteem it an honor to preach it, and especially to
proclaim it among the heathen; not building on another man's foundation
- not watering what another apostle had planted; but cheerfully exposing
myself to all kinds of dangers and hardships, in order to found new
Churches.

[Romans 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 15:21</span></span>

But as it is written - These words, quoted from [Isa
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015), the apostle applies to his own
conduct; not that the words themselves predicted what Paul had done, but
that he endeavored to fulfill such a declaration by his manner of
preaching the Gospel to the heathen.

[Romans 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 15:22</span></span>

For which cause, etc. - My considering it a point of honor to build on
no other man's foundation; and, finding that the Gospel has been long
ago planted at Rome, I have been prevented from going thither, purposing
rather to spend my time and strength in preaching where Christ has not,
as yet, been proclaimed.

[Romans 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 15:23</span></span>

But - having no more place in these parts - Having nothing farther at
present that I can do - for τοπον εχειν signifies not merely to have a
place of residence, or the like, but convenience, opportunity; which is
a frequent meaning of the phrase among the best Greek writers - having
no large place or city, where Christianity has not yet been planted, in
which I can introduce the Gospel. The apostle was then at Corinth; and
having evangelized all those parts, he had no opportunity of breaking up
any new ground.

[Romans 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 15:24</span></span>

Whensoever I take my journey into Spain - Where it is very likely the
Gospel had not yet been planted; though legendary tales inform us that
St. James had planted the Gospel there long before this time, and had
founded many bishoprics! But this is as unfounded as it is ridiculous
and absurd; for nothing like what is now termed a bishopric, nor even a
parish, was founded for many years after this. An itinerant preacher,
might, with more propriety, say travelling circuits were formed, rather
than bishoprics. Whether the apostle ever fulfilled his design of going
to Spain is unknown; but there is no evidence whatever that he did, and
the presumption is that he did not undertake this voyage. Antiquity
affords no proof that he fulfilled his intention.

I will come to you - Ελευσο μαιπρος ὑμας. These words are wanting in
almost every MS. of note, and in the Syriac of Erpen, Coptic, Vulgate,
Ethiopic, Armenian, and Itala. If the first clause of this verse be read
in connection with the latter clause of the preceding, it will fully
appear that this rejected clause is useless. Having a great desire,
these many years to come unto you whensoever I take my journey into
Spain: for I trust to see you in my journey, etc.

Somewhat filled with your company - The word εμπλησθω, which we
translate filled, would be better rendered gratified; for εμπλησθηναι
signifies to be satisfied, to be gratified, and to enjoy. Aelian., Hist.
Anim., lib. v., c. 21, speaking of the peacock spreading out his
beautiful plumage, says: εα γαρ εμπλησθηναι της θεος τον παρεστωτα· "He
readily permits the spectator to gratify himself by viewing him." And
Maximus Tyrius, Dissert. 41, page 413: "That he may behold the heavens,
και εμπλησθη λαμπρου φωτος, and be gratified with the splendor of the
light." Homer uses the word in the same sense: -

Ἡ δ' εμη ουδε περ υἱος ενιπλησθηναι ακοιτις Οφθαλμοισιν εασε

Odyss., lib. xi., ver. 451.

"But my wife never suffered my eyes to be delighted with my son."

The apostle, though he had not the honor of having planted the Church at
Rome, yet expected much gratification from the visit which he intended
to pay them.

[Romans 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 15:25</span></span>

Now I go unto Jerusalem - From this and the two following verses we
learn that the object of his journey to Jerusalem was, to carry a
contribution made among the Gentile Christians of Macedonia and Achaia
for the relief of the poor Jewish Christians at Jerusalem. About this
affair he had taken great pains, as appears from [Co1
16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001); 2 Corinthians 8, and [Co2
9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001). His design in this affair is
very evident from [Co2 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#012), [Co2
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013), where he says: The
administration of this service not only supplieth the want of the
saints, but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God; whiles, by
the experiment of this ministration, they glorify God for your professed
subjection unto the Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution
unto them and unto all men. The apostle was in hopes that this liberal
contribution, sent by the Gentile Christians who had been converted by
St. Paul's ministry, would engage the affections of the Jewish
Christians, who had been much prejudiced against the reception of the
Gentiles into the Church, without being previously obliged to submit to
the yoke of the law. He wished to establish a coalition between the
converted Jews and Gentiles, being sensible of its great importance to
the spread of the Gospel; and his procuring this contribution was one
laudable device to accomplish this good end. And this shows why he so
earnestly requests the prayers of the Christians at Rome, that his
service which he had for Jerusalem might be accepted of the saints. See
Dr. Taylor.

[Romans 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 15:27</span></span>

For if the Gentiles have been made partakers, etc. - It was through and
by means of the Jews that the Gentiles were brought to the knowledge of
God and the Gospel of Christ. These were the spiritual things which they
had received; and the pecuniary contribution was the carnal things which
the Gentiles were now returning.

[Romans 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 15:28</span></span>

When, therefore, I have performed this - Service, and have sealed -
faithfully delivered up, to them this fruit, of the success of my
ministry and of your conversion to God, I will come by you into Spain:
this was in his desire; he had fully purposed it, if God should see meet
to permit him; but it does not appear that he ever went. See [Rom
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#024).

[Romans 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 15:29</span></span>

In the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ - The words του
ευαγγελιου του, of the Gospel, are wanting in almost every MS. of
importance. Griesbach has left them out of the text. There is no doubt
they should be omitted. The fullness of the blessing of Christ is really
more than the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ. He hoped
to come to them not only with the blessing of the Gospel, but endued
with the gifts and graces of the Lord Jesus himself; which he was now a
constant instrument, in the hand of God, to dispense among those who
were converted to the Christian faith.

[Romans 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 15:30</span></span>

For the love of the Spirit - By that love of God which the Holy Spirit
sheds abroad in your hearts.

That ye strive together - Συναγωνισασθαι That ye agonize with me. He
felt that much depended on the success of his present mission to the
Christians at Jerusalem, and their acceptance of the charitable
contribution which he was bringing with him, in order to conciliate them
to the reception of the Gentiles into the Church of God without obliging
them to submit to circumcision.

[Romans 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 15:31</span></span>

That I may be delivered from them that do not believe - He knew that his
countrymen, who had not received the Gospel, lay in wait for his life;
and, no doubt, they thought they should do God service by destroying
him, not only as an apostate, in their apprehension, from the Jewish
religion, but as one who was labouring to subvert and entirely destroy
it.

And that my service - Διακονια. But several eminent MSS. read δωροφορια,
the gift which I bear. This probably was a gloss, which in many MSS.
subverted the word in the text; for διακονια, service, in its connection
here, could refer to nothing else but the contribution which he was
carrying to the poor saints at Jerusalem.

[Romans 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">rom 15:32</span></span>

That I may come unto you with joy - That his apprehensions of ill usage
were not groundless, and the danger to which his life was exposed, real,
we have already seen in the account given of this visit, Acts 21, 22,
23, and 24; and that he had such intimations from the Holy Spirit
himself appears from [Act 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#023); [Act
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#011); [Act
20:38](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#038). Should his journey to Jerusalem
be prosperous, and his service accepted, so that the converted Jews and
Gentiles should come to a better understanding, he hoped to see them at
Rome with great joy: and if he got his wishes gratified through their
prayers, it would be the full proof that this whole business had been
conducted according to the will of God.

[Romans 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">rom 15:33</span></span>

The God of peace be with you - The whole object of the epistle is to
establish peace between the believing Jews and Gentiles, and to show
them their mutual obligations, and the infinite mercy of God to both;
and now he concludes with praying that the God of peace - he from whom
it comes, and by whom it is preserved - may be for ever with them. The
word Amen, at the end, does not appear to have been written by the
apostle: it is wanting in some of the most ancient MSS.

1\. In the preceding chapters the apostle enjoins a very hard, but a
very important and necessary, duty - that of bearing with each other,
and endeavoring to think and let think, in those religious matters which
are confessedly not essential to the salvation of the soul. Most of the
disputes among Christians have been concerning non-essential points.
Rites and ceremonies, even in the simple religion of Christ, have
contributed their part in promoting those animosities by which
Christians have been divided. Forms in worship and sacerdotal garments
have not been without their influence in this general disturbance. Each
side has been ready to take out of the 14th and 15th chapters of this
epistle such expressions as seemed suitable to their own case; but few
have been found who have taken up the whole. You believe that a person
who holds such and such opinions is wrong: pity him and set him right,
lovingly, if possible. He believes you to be wrong because you do not
hold those points; he must bear with you. Both of you stand precisely on
the same ground, and are mutually indebted to mutual forbearance.

2\. Beware of contentions in religion, if you dispute concerning any of
its doctrines, let it be to find out truth; not to support a
preconceived and pre-established opinion. Avoid all polemical heat and
rancour; these prove the absence of the religion of Christ. Whatever
does not lead you to love God and man more, is most assuredly from
beneath. The God of peace is the author of Christianity; and the Prince
of peace, the priest and sacrifice of it: therefore love one another,
and leave off contention before it be meddled with. On this subject the
advice of the pious Mr. Herbert is good: -

Be calm in arguing; for fierceness makes

Error a fault, and truth discourtesy.

Why should I feel another man's mistakes

More than his sickness or his poverty?

In love I should; but anger is not love;

Nor wisdom neither: - therefore g-e-n-t-l-y m-o-v-e.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 16](rom016)

</div>
