<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom011)  [Next](rom013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 12:0</span></span>

Such displays of God's mercy as Jews and Gentiles have received should
induce them to consecrate themselves to Him; and not be conformed to the
world, [Rom 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001), [Rom
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002). Christians are exhorted to think
meanly of themselves, [Rom 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003). And
each to behave himself properly in the office which he has received from
God, [Rom 12:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#004); Various important
moral duties recommended, [Rom
12:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009). We must not avenge ourselves,
but overcome evil with good, [Rom
12:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019).

The apostle having now finished the doctrinal part of this epistle,
proceeds to the practical; and here it may be necessary to take a view
of his arguments in the preceding chapters.

The election, calling, and justification of the believing Gentiles, and
their being admitted into the kingdom and covenant of God, and having an
interest in all the privileges and honors of his children.

(1.) That they have a clear and substantial title to all these he has
proved in Romans 1, 2, and 3.

(2.) That this right is set on the same footing with Abraham's title to
the blessings of the covenant he proves Romans 6.

(3.) That it gives us a title to privileges and blessings, as great as
any the Jews could glory in, by virtue of that covenant, [Rom
5:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001).

(4.) He goes still higher, and shows that our being interested in the
gift and grace of God in Christ Jesus is perfectly agreeable to the
grace which he has bestowed upon all mankind, in delivering them from
that death of the body brought on them by Adams' transgression, [Rom
5:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012).

(5.) He fully explains, both with regard to the Gentiles and Jews, the
nature of the Gospel constitution in relation to its obligations to
holiness, and the advantages it gives for encouragement, obedience, and
support, under the severest trials and persecutions, Romans 6, 7, 8.

(6.) As to the pretences of the Jews, that "God was bound by express
promise to continue them as his only people for ever, and that this was
directly inconsistent with the election and calling of the Gentiles, on
the condition of faith alone;" he demonstrates that the rejection of the
Jews is consistent with the truth of God's word, and with his
righteousness: he shows the true cause and reason of their rejection,
and concludes with an admirable discourse upon the extent and duration
of it; which he closes with adoration of the Divine wisdom in its
various dispensations, Romans 9, 10, 11. Thus, having cleared this
important subject with surprising judgment, and the nicest art and skill
in writing, he now proceeds, after his usual manner in his epistles and
the apostolic method of preaching, to inculcate various Christian
duties, and to exhort to that temper of mind and conduct of life which
are suitable to the profession of the Gospel, and the enjoyment of its
privileges. - Dr. Taylor.

[Romans 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 12:1</span></span>

I beseech you therefore, brethren - This address is probably intended
both for the Jews and the Gentiles; though some suppose that the Jews
are addressed in the first verse, the Gentiles in the second.

By the mercies of God! - Δια των οικτιρμων του Θεου· By the tender
mercies or compassions of God, such as a tender father shows to his
refractory children; who, on their humiliation, is easily persuaded to
forgive their offenses. The word οικτιρμος comes from οικτος,
compassion; and that from εικω, to yield; because he that has
compassionate feelings is easily prevailed on to do a kindness, or remit
an injury.

That ye present your bodies - A metaphor taken from bringing sacrifices
to the altar of God. The person offering picked out the choicest of his
flock, brought it to the altar, and presented it there as an atonement
for his sin. They are exhorted to give themselves up in the spirit of
sacrifice; to be as wholly the Lord's property as the whole
burnt-offering was, no part being devoted to any other use.

A living sacrifice - In opposition to those dead sacrifices which they
were in the habit of offering while in their Jewish state; and that they
should have the lusts of the flesh mortified, that they might live to
God.

Holy - Without spot or blemish; referring still to the sacrifice
required by the law.

Acceptable unto God - Ευαρεστον· The sacrifice being perfect in its
kind, and the intention of the offerer being such that both can be
acceptable and well pleasing to God, who searches the heart. All these
phrases are sacrificial, and show that there must be a complete
surrender of the person - the body, the whole man, mind and flesh, to be
given to God; and that he is to consider himself no more his own, but
the entire property of his Maker.

Your reasonable service - Nothing can be more consistent with reason
than that the work of God should glorify its Author. We are not our own,
we are the property of the Lord, by the right of creation and
redemption; and it would be as unreasonable as it would be wicked not to
live to his glory, in strict obedience to his will. The reasonable
service, λογικην λατρειαν, of the apostle, may refer to the difference
between the Jewish and Christian worship. The former religious service
consisted chiefly in its sacrifices, which were δι' αλογων, of
irrational creatures, i.e. the lambs, rams, kids, bulls, goats, etc.,
which were offered under the law. The Christian service or worship is
λογικη, rational, because performed according to the true intent and
meaning of the law; the heart and soul being engaged in the service. He
alone lives the life of a fool and a madman who lives the life of a
sinner against God; for, in sinning against his Maker he wrongs his own
soul, loves death, and rewards evil unto himself.

Reasonable service, λογικην λατρειαν, "a religious service according to
reason," one rationally performed. The Romanists make this distinction
between λατρεια, and δουλεια, latreia and douleia, (or dulia, as they
corruptly write it), worship and service, which they say signify two
kinds of religious worship; the first proper to God, the other
communicated to the creatures. But δουλεια, douleia, services, is used
by the Septuagint to express the Divine worship. See [Deu
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#004); [Jdg
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#007); [Sa1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003), and [Sa1
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#010) : and in the New Testament, [Mat
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024); [Luk
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#023); [Rom
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018); [Col
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#024). The angel refused δουλειαν,
douleia, [Rev 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007), because he was
συνδουλος sundoulos, a fellow servant; and the Divine worship is more
frequently expressed by this word δουλεια, douleia, service, than by
λατρεια, latreia, worship. The first is thirty-nine times in the Old and
New Testament ascribed unto God, the other about thirty times; and
latreia, worship or service, is given unto the creatures, as in [Lev
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#007), [Lev
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#008), [Lev
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#021); [Num
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#018); yea, the word signifies cruel
and base bondage, [Deu 28:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#048) : once in
the New Testament it is taken for the worship of the creatures, [Rom
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025). The worshipping of idols is
forbidden under the word λατρεια, latreia, thirty-four times in the Old
Testament, and once in the New, as above; and twenty-three times under
the term δουλεια, douleia, in the Old Testament; and St. Paul uses
δουλευειν Θεὡ, and λατρευειν Θεὡ indifferently, for the worship we owe
to God. See [Rom 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009), [Rom
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025); [Rom
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001), [Gal
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008), [Gal
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009); [Th1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009); [Mat
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024). And Ludouicus Vives, a learned
Romanist, has proved out of Suidas, Xenophon, and Volla, that these two
words are usually taken the one for the other, therefore the popish
distinction, that the first signifies "the religious worship due only to
God," and the second, "that which is given to angels, saints, and men,"
is unlearned and false. - See Leigh's Crit. Sacra.

[Romans 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 12:2</span></span>

And be not conformed to this world - By this world, αιωνι τουτῳ, may be
understood that present state of things both among the Jews and
Gentiles; the customs and fashions of the people who then lived, the
Gentiles particularly, who had neither the power nor the form of
godliness; though some think that the Jewish economy, frequently termed
עולם הזה olam hazzeh, this world, this peculiar state of things, is
alone intended. And the apostle warns them against reviving usages that
Christ had abolished: this exhortation still continues in full force.
The world that now is - This present state of things, is as much opposed
to the spirit of genuine Christianity as the world then was. Pride,
luxury, vanity, extravagance in dress, and riotous living, prevail now,
as they did then, and are as unworthy of a Christian's pursuit as they
are injurious to his soul, and hateful in the sight of God.

Be ye transformed - Μεταμορφουσθε, Be ye metamorphosed, transfigured,
appear as new persons, and with new habits, as God has given you a new
form of worship, so that ye serve in the newness of the spirit, and not
in the oldness of the letter. The word implies a radical, thorough, and
universal change, both outward and inward. Seneca, Epis. vi, shows us
the force of this word when used in a moral sense. Sentio, says he, non
Emendari me tantum, sed Transfigurari; "I perceive myself not to be
amended merely, but to be transformed:" i. e entirely renewed.

By the renewing of your mind - Let the inward change produce the
outward. Where the spirit, the temper, and disposition of the mind, [Eph
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023), are not renewed, an outward
change is of but little worth, and but of short standing.

That ye may prove - Εις το δοκιμαζειν, That ye may have practical proof
and experimental knowledge of, the will of God - of his purpose and
determination, which is good in itself; infinitely so. Acceptable,
ευαρεστον, well pleasing to and well received by every mind that is
renewed and transformed.

And perfect - Τελειον, Finished and complete: when the mind is renewed,
and the whole life changed, then the will of God is perfectly fulfilled;
for this is its grand design in reference to every human being.

These words are supposed by Schoettgen to refer entirely to the Jewish
law. The Christians were to renounce this world - the Jewish state of
things; to be transformed, by having their minds enlightened in the pure
and simple Christian worship, that they might prove the grand
characteristic difference between the two covenants: the latter being
good in opposition to the statutes which were not good, [Eze
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025); acceptable, in opposition to
those sacrifices and offerings which God would not accept, as it is
written, [Psa 40:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006); and perfect, in
opposition to that system which was imperfect, and which made nothing
perfect, and was only the shadow of good things to come. There are both
ingenuity and probability in this view of the subject.

[Romans 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 12:3</span></span>

Through the grace given unto me - By the grace given St. Paul most
certainly means his apostolical office, by which he had the authority,
not only to preach the Gospel, but also to rule the Church of Christ.
This is the meaning of the word, ἡ χαρις, in [Eph
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008) : Unto me who am less than the
least of all saints is this grace given - is conceded this office or
employment immediately by God himself; that I should preach among the
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ.

Not to think - more highly - Μη ὑπερφρονειν, Not to act proudly; to
arrogate nothing to himself on account of any grace he had received, or
of any office committed to him.

But to think soberly - Αλλα φρονειν εις το σωφρονειν. The reader will
perceive here a sort of paronomasia, or play upon words: φρονειν, from
φρην, the mind, signifies to think, mind, relish, to be of opinion,
etc.; and σωφρονειν from σοος, sound, and φρην, the mind, signifies to
be of a sound mind; to think discreetly, modestly, humbly. Let no man
think himself more or greater than God has made him; and let him know
that what ever he is or has of good or excellence, he has it from God;
and that the glory belongs to the giver, and not to him who has received
the gift.

Measure of faith - Μετρον πιστεως. It is very likely, as Dr. Moore has
conjectured, that the πιστις, faith, here used, means the Christian
religion; and the measure, the degree of knowledge and experience which
each had received in it, and the power this gave him of being useful in
the Church of God. See [Rom 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006).

[Romans 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 12:4</span></span>

For as we have many members - As the human body consists of many parts,
each having its respective office, and all contributing to the
perfection and support of the whole; each being indispensably necessary
in the place which it occupies, and each equally useful though
performing a different function;

[Romans 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 12:5</span></span>

So we, being many - We who are members of the Church of Christ, which is
considered the body of which he is the head, have various offices
assigned to us, according to the measure of grace, faith and religious
knowledge which we possess; and although each has a different office,
and qualifications suitable to that office, yet all belong to the same
body; and each has as much need of the help of another as that other has
of his; therefore, let there be neither pride on the one hand, nor envy
on the other. The same metaphor, in nearly the same words, is used in
Synopsis Sohar, page 13. "As man is divided into various members and
joints, united among themselves, and raised by gradations above each
other, and collectively compose one body; so all created things are
members orderly disposed, and altogether constitute one body. In like
manner the law, distributed into various articulations, constitutes but
one body." See Schoettgen.

[Romans 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 12:6</span></span>

Having then gifts differing, etc. - As the goodness of God, with this
view of our mutual subserviency and usefulness, has endowed us with
different gifts and qualifications, let each apply himself to the
diligent improvement of his particular office and talent, and modestly
keep within the bounds of it, not exalting himself or despising others.

Whether prophecy - That prophecy, in the New Testament, often means the
gift of exhorting, preaching, or of expounding the Scriptures, is
evident from many places in the Gospels, Acts, and St. Paul's Epistles,
see [Co1 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004), [Co1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005); and especially [Co1
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003) : He that prophesieth speaketh
unto men to edification, and exhortation, and comfort. This was the
proper office of a preacher; and it is to the exercise of this office
that the apostle refers in the whole of the chapter from which the above
quotations are made. See also [Luk
1:76](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#076); [Luk
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#028); [Act
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#032); [Co1
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#029). I think the apostle uses the
term in the same sense here - Let every man who has the gift of
preaching and interpreting the Scriptures do it in proportion to the
grace and light he has received from God, and in no case arrogate to
himself knowledge which he has not received; let him not esteem himself
more highly on account of this gift, or affect to be wise above what is
written, or indulge himself in fanciful interpretations of the word of
God.

Dr. Taylor observes that the measure of faith, [Rom
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003), and the proportion of faith,
[Rom 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#006), seem not to relate to the
degree of any gift considered in itself, but rather in the relation and
proportion which it bore to the gifts of others; for it is plain that he
is here exhorting every man to keep soberly within his own sphere. It is
natural to suppose that the new converts might be puffed up with the
several gifts that were bestowed upon them; and every one might be
forward to magnify his own to the disparagement of others: therefore the
apostle advises them to keep each within his proper sphere; to know and
observe the just measure and proportion of the gift intrusted to him,
not to gratify his pride but to edify the Church.

The αναλογια της πιστεως, which we here translate the proportion of
faith, and which some render the analogy of faith, signifies in grammar
"the similar declension of similar words;" but in Scriptural matters it
has been understood to mean the general and consistent plan or scheme of
doctrines delivered in the Scriptures; where every thing bears its due
relation and proportion to another. Thus the death of Christ is
commensurate in its merits to the evils produced by the fall of Adam.
The doctrine of justification by faith bears the strictest analogy or
proportion to the grace of Christ and the helpless, guilty, condemned
state of man: whereas the doctrine of justification by Works is out of
all analogy to the demerit of sin, the perfection of the law, the
holiness of God, and the miserable, helpless state of man. This may be a
good general view of the subject; but when we come to inquire what those
mean by the analogy of faith who are most frequent in the use of the
term, we shall find that it means neither more nor less than their own
creed; and though they tell you that their doctrines are to be examined
by the Scriptures, yet they give you roundly to know that you are to
understand these Scriptures in precisely the same way as they have
interpreted them. "To the law and to the testimony," says Dr. Campbell,
"is the common cry; only every one, the better to secure the decision on
the side he has espoused, would have you previously resolve to put no
sense whatever on the law and the testimony but what his favourite
doctrine will admit. Thus they run on in a shuffling, circular sort of
argument, which, though they studiously avoid exposing, is, when dragged
into the open light, neither more nor less than this; 'you are to try
our doctrine by the Scriptures only; but then you are to be very careful
that you explain the Scripture solely by our doctrine.' A wonderful plan
of trial, which begins with giving judgment, and ends with examining the
proof, wherein the whole skill and ingenuity of the judges are to be
exerted in wresting the evidence so as to give it the appearance of
supporting the sentence pronounced before hand." See Dr. Campbell's
Dissertations on the Gospels, Diss. iv. sect. 14, vol. i, page 146, 8vo.
edit., where several other sensible remarks may be found.

[Romans 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 12:7</span></span>

Or ministry - Διακονια simply means the office of a deacon; and what
this office was, see in the note on [Act
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#004) (note), where the subject is
largely discussed.

Or he that teacheth - The teacher, διδασκαλος, was a person whose office
it was to instruct others, who thereby catechizing, or simply explaining
the grand truths of Christianity.

[Romans 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 12:8</span></span>

Or he that exhorteth - Ὁ παρακαλων, The person who admonished and
reprehended the unruly or disorderly; and who supported the weak and
comforted the penitents, and those who were under heaviness through
manifold temptations.

He that giveth - He who distributeth the alms of the Church, with
simplicity - being influenced by no partiality, but dividing to each
according to the necessity of his case.

He that ruleth - Ὁ προΐσταμενος, He that presides over a particular
business; but as the verb προΐσταμαι also signifies to defend or
patronize, it is probably used here to signify receiving and providing
for strangers, and especially the persecuted who were obliged to leave
their own homes, and were destitute, afflicted, and tormented. It might
also imply the persons whose business it was to receive and entertain
the apostolical teachers who traveled from place to place, establishing
and confirming the Churches. In this sense the word προστατις is applied
to Phoebe, [Rom 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#002) : She hath been a
Succorer of many, and of myself also. The apostle directs that this
office should be executed with diligence, that such destitute persons
should have their necessities as promptly and as amply supplied as
possible.

He that showeth mercy - Let the person who is called to perform any act
of compassion or mercy to the wretched do it, not grudgingly nor of
necessity, but from a spirit of pure benevolence and sympathy. The poor
are often both wicked and worthless: and, if those who are called to
minister to them as stewards, overseers, etc., do not take care, they
will get their hearts hardened with the frequent proofs they will have
of deception, lying, idleness, etc. And on this account it is that so
many of those who have been called to minister to the poor in parishes,
workhouses, and religious societies, when they come to relinquish their
employment find that many of their moral feelings have been considerably
blunted; and perhaps the only reward they get for their services is the
character of being hard-hearted. If whatever is done in this way be not
done unto the Lord, it can never be done with cheerfulness.

[Romans 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 12:9</span></span>

Let love be without dissimulation - Ἡ αγαπη ανυποκριτος· Have no
hypocritical love; let not your love wear a mask; make no empty
professions. Love God and your neighbor; and, by obedience to the one
and acts of benevolence to the other, show that your love is sincere.

Abhor that which is evil - Αποστυγουντες το πονηρον· Hate sin as you
would hate that hell to which it leads. Στυγεω signifies to hate or
detest with horror; the preposition απο greatly strengthens the meaning.
Στυξ, Styx, was a feigned river in hell by which the gods were wont to
swear, and if any of them falsified this oath he was deprived of his
nectar and ambrosia for a hundred years; hence the river was reputed to
be hateful, and στυγεω signified to be as hateful as hell. Two MSS. read
μισουντες, which signifies hating in the lowest sense of the term. The
word in the text is abundantly more expressive, and our translation is
both nervous and appropriate.

Cleave to that which is good - Κολλωμενοι τῳ αγαθῳ· Be Cemented or Glued
to that which is good; so the word literally signifies. Have an
unalterable attachment to whatever leads to God, and contributes to the
welfare of your fellow creatures.

[Romans 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 12:10</span></span>

Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love - It is
difficult to give a simple translation of the original: τῃ φιλαδελφιᾳ
εις αλληλους φιλοστοργοι. The word φιλαδελφια signifies that
affectionate regard which every Christian should feel for another, as
being members of the same mystical body: hence it is emphatically termed
the love of the brethren. When William Penn, of deservedly famous
memory, made a treaty with the Indians in North America, and purchased
from them a large woody tract, which, after its own nature and his name,
he called Pennsylvania, he built a city on it, and peopled it with
Christians of his own denomination, and called the city from the word in
the text, φιλαδελφια, Philadelphia; an appellation which it then bore
with strict propriety: and still it bears the name.

The word φιλοστοργος, which we translate kindly affectioned, from φιλος
and στοργη, signifies that tender and indescribable affection which a
mother bears to her child, and which almost all creatures manifest
towards their young; and the word φιλος, or φιλεω, joined to it,
signifies a delight in it. Feel the tenderest affection towards each
other, and delight to feel it. "Love a brother Christian with the
affection of a natural brother."

In honor preferring one another - The meaning appears to be this:
Consider all your brethren as more worthy than yourself; and let neither
grief nor envy affect your mind at seeing another honored and yourself
neglected. This is a hard lesson, and very few persons learn it
thoroughly. If we wish to see our brethren honored, still it is with the
secret condition in our own minds that we be honored more than they. We
have no objection to the elevation of others, providing we may be at the
head. But who can bear even to be what he calls neglected? I once heard
the following conversation between two persons, which the reader will
pardon my relating in this place, as it appears to be rather in point,
and is worthy of regard. "I know not," said one, "that I neglect to do
any thing in my power to promote the interest of true religion in this
place, and yet I seem to be held in very little repute, scarcely any
person even noticing me." To which the other replied: "My good friend,
set yourself down for nothing, and if any person takes you for something
it will be all clear gain." I thought this a queer saying: but how full
of meaning and common sense! Whether the object of this good counsel was
profited by it I cannot tell; but I looked on it and received
instruction.

[Romans 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 12:11</span></span>

Not slothful in business - That God, who forbade working on the seventh
day, has, by the same authority, enjoined it on the other six days. He
who neglects to labor during the week is as culpable as he is who works
on the Sabbath. An idle, slothful person can never be a Christian.

Fervent in spirit - Τῳ πνευματι ζεοντες· Do nothing at any time but what
is to the glory of God, and do every thing as unto him; and in every
thing let your hearts be engaged. Be always in earnest, and let your
heart ever accompany your hand.

Serving the Lord - Ever considering that his eye is upon you, and that
you are accountable to him for all that you do, and that you should do
every thing so as to please him. In order to this there must be
simplicity in the Intention, and purity in the Affections.

Instead of τῳ Κυριῳ δουλευοντες, serving the Lord, several MSS., as DFG,
and many editions, have τῳ καιρῳ δουλευοντες, serving the time -
embracing the opportunity. This reading Griesbach has received into the
text, and most critics contend for its authenticity. Except the Codes
Claromontanus, the Codex Augiensis, and the Codex Boernerianus, the
first a MS. of the seventh or eighth century, the others of the ninth or
tenth, marked in Griesbach by the letters DFG, all the other MSS. of
this epistle have Κυριῳ, the Lord; a reading in which all the versions
concur. Καιρῳ, the time, is not found in the two original editions; that
of Complutum, in 1514, which is the first edition of the Greek Testament
ever printed; and that of Erasmus, in 1516, which is the first edition
published; the former having been suppressed for several years after it
was finished at the press. As in the ancient MSS. the word Κυριῳ is
written contractedly, ΚΩ, some appear to have read it καιρῳ instead of
Κυριῳ; but I confess I do not see sufficient reason after all that the
critics have said, to depart from the common reading.

[Romans 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 12:12</span></span>

Rejoicing in hope - Of that glory of God that to each faithful follower
of Christ shall shortly be revealed.

Patient in tribulation - Remembering that what you suffer as Christians
you suffer for Christ's sake; and it is to his honor, and the honor of
your Christian profession, that you suffer it with an even mind.

Continuing instant in prayer - Προσκαρτερουντες· Making the most fervent
and intense application to the throne of grace for the light and power
of the Holy Spirit; without which you can neither abhor evil, do good,
love the brethren, entertain a comfortable hope, nor bear up patiently
under the tribulations and ills of life.

[Romans 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 12:13</span></span>

Distributing to the necessity of saints - Relieve your poor brethren
according to the power which God has given you. Do good unto all men,
but especially to them which are of the household of faith. Instead of
χρειαις, necessities, some ancient MSS. have μνειαις, memorials;
distributing to the memorials of the saints, which some interpret as
referring to saints that were absent; as if he had said: Do not forget
those in other Churches who have a claim on your bounty. But I really
cannot see any good sense which this various reading can make in the
text; I therefore follow the common reading.

Given to hospitality - Την φιλοξενιαν διωκοντες, pursuing hospitality,
or the duty of entertaining strangers. A very necessary virtue in
ancient times, when houses of public accommodation were exceedingly
scarce. This exhortation might have for its object the apostles, who
were all itinerants; and in many cases the Christians, flying before the
face of persecution. This virtue is highly becoming in all Christians,
and especially in all Christian ministers, who have the means of
relieving a brother in distress, or of succouring the poor wherever he
may find them. But providing for strangers in distress is the proper
meaning of the term; and to be forward to do this is the spirit of the
duty.

[Romans 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 12:14</span></span>

Bless them which persecute you - Ευλογειτε, Give good words, or pray for
them that give you bad words, καταρασθε, who make dire imprecations
against you. Bless them, pray for them, and on no account curse them,
whatever the provocation may be. Have the loving, forgiving mind that
was in your Lord.

[Romans 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 12:15</span></span>

Rejoice with them that do rejoice - Take a lively interest in the
prosperity of others. Let it be a matter of rejoicing to you when you
hear of the health, prosperity, or happiness of any brother.

Weep with them that weep - Labour after a compassionate or sympathizing
mind. Let your heart feel for the distressed; enter into their sorrows,
and bear a part of their burdens. It is a fact, attested by universal
experience, that by sympathy a man may receive into his own affectionate
feelings a measure of the distress of his friend, and that his friend
does find himself relieved in the same proportion as the other has
entered into his griefs. "But how do you account for this?" I do not
account for it at all, it depends upon certain laws of nature, the
principles of which have not been as yet duly developed.

[Romans 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 12:16</span></span>

Be of the same mind - Live in a state of continual harmony and concord,
and pray for the same good for all which you desire for yourselves.

Mind not high things - Be not ambitious; affect nothing above your
station; do not court the rich nor the powerful; do not pass by the poor
man to pay your court to the great man; do not affect titles or worldly
distinctions; much less sacrifice your conscience for them. The
attachment to high things and high men is the vice of little, shallow
minds. However, it argues one important fact, that such persons are
conscious that they are of no worth and of no consequence in Themselves,
and they seek to render themselves observable and to gain a little
credit by their endeavors to associate themselves with men of rank and
fortune, and if possible to get into honorable employments; and, if this
cannot be attained, they affect honorable Titles.

But condescend to men of low estate - Be a companion of the humble, and
pass through life with as little noise and show as possible. Let the
poor, godly man be your chief companion; and learn from his humility and
piety to be humble and godly. The term συναπαγομενοι, which we translate
condescend, from συν, together, and απαγω, to lead, signifies to be led,
carried, or dragged away to prison with another; and points out the
state in which the primitive Christians were despised and rejected of
men, and often led forth to prison and death. False or man-pleasing
professors would endeavor to escape all this disgrace and danger by
getting into the favor of the great, the worldly, and the irreligious.
There have not been wanting, in all ages of the Church, persons who,
losing the savour of Divine things from their own souls by drinking into
a worldly spirit, have endeavored to shun the reproach of the cross by
renouncing the company of the godly, speaking evil of the way of life,
and perhaps sitting down in the chair of the scorner with apostates like
themselves. And yet, strange to tell, these men will keep up a form of
godliness! for a decent outside is often necessary to enable them to
secure the ends of their ambition.

Be not wise in your own conceits - Be not puffed up with an opinion of
your own consequence; for this will prove that the consequence itself is
imaginary. Be not wise, παρ' ἑαυτοις, by yourselves - do not suppose
that wisdom and discernment dwell alone with you. Believe that you stand
in need both of help and instruction from others.

[Romans 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 12:17</span></span>

Recompense, etc. - Do not take notice of every little injury you may
sustain. Do not be litigious. Beware of too nice a sense of your own
honor; intolerable pride is at the bottom of this. The motto of the
royal arms of Scotland is in direct opposition to this Divine direction
- Nemo me impune lacesset, of which "I render evil for evil to every
man," is a pretty literal translation. This is both antichristian and
abominable, whether in a state or in an individual.

Provide things honest - Be prudent, be cautious, neither eat, drink, nor
wear, but as you pay for every thing. "Live not on trust, for that is
the way to pay double;" and by this means the poor are still kept poor.
He who takes credit, even for food or raiment, when he has no probable
means of defraying the debt, is a dishonest man. It is no sin to die
through lack of the necessaries of life when the providence of God has
denied the means of support; but it is a sin to take up goods without
the probability of being able to pay for them. Poor man! suffer poverty
a little; perhaps God is only trying thee for a time; and who can tell
if he will not turn again thy captivity. Labour hard to live honestly;
if God still appear to withhold his providential blessing, do not
despair; leave it all to him; do not make a sinful choice; he cannot
err. He will bless thy poverty, while he curses the ungodly man's
blessings.

[Romans 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 12:18</span></span>

If it be possible - To live in a state of peace with one's neighbors,
friends, and even family, is often very difficult. But the man who loves
God must labor after this, for it is indispensably necessary even for
his own sake. A man cannot have broils and misunderstandings with
others, without having his own peace very materially disturbed: he must,
to be happy, be at peace with all men, whether they will be at peace
with him or not. The apostle knew that it would be difficult to get into
and maintain such a state of peace, and this his own words amply prove:
And if it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably. Though
it be but barely possible, labor after it.

[Romans 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 12:19</span></span>

Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves - Ye are the children of God, and
he loves you; and because he loves you he will permit nothing to be done
to you that he will not turn to your advantage. Never take the execution
of the law into your own hands; rather suffer injuries. The Son of man
is come, not to destroy men's lives, but to save: be of the same spirit.
When he was reviled, he reviled not again. It is the part of a noble
mind to bear up under unmerited disgrace; little minds are litigious and
quarrelsome.

Give place unto wrath - Δοτε τοπον τῃ οργῃ· Leave room for the civil
magistrate to do his duty, he holds the sword for this purpose; and if
he be unfaithful to the trust reposed in him by the state, leave the
matter to God, who is the righteous judge: for by avenging yourselves
you take your cause both out of the hands of the civil magistrate and
out of the hands of God. I believe this to be the meaning of give place
to wrath, οργῃ, punishment; the penalty which the law, properly
executed, will inflict. This is well expressed by the author of the book
of Ecclesiasticus, 19:17: Admonish thy neighbor before thou threaten
him, and, not being, angry, Give Place to the Law of the Most High.

Vengeance is mine - This fixes the meaning of the apostle, and at once
shows that the exhortation, Rather give place to wrath or punishment,
means, Leave the matter to the judgment of God; it is his law that in
this case is broken; and to him the infliction of deserved punishment
belongs. Some think it means, "Yield a little to a man when in a violent
passion, for the sake of peace, until he grow cooler."

I will repay - In my own time and in my own way. But he gives the sinner
space to repent, and this longsuffering leads to salvation. Dr. Taylor,
after Dr. Benson, conjectures that the apostle in these directions had
his eye upon the indignities which the Jews, and probably the Christians
too, (for they were often confounded by the heathen), suffered by the
edict of Claudius, mentioned [Act
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#002), which "commanded all Jews to
depart from Rome." Upon this occasion Aquila and Priscilla removed to
Corinth, where Paul found them, and dwelt with them a considerable time.
No doubt they gave him a full account of the state of the Christian
Church at Rome, and of every thing relating to the late persecution
under Claudius. That emperor's edict probably died with him, if it were
not repealed before, and then the Jews and Christians (if the Christians
were also expelled) returned again to Rome; for Aquila and Priscilla
were there when Paul wrote this epistle, [Rom
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#003), which was in the fourth year of
Nero, successor to Claudius.

[Romans 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 12:20</span></span>

If thine enemy hunger, feed him - Do not withhold from any man the
offices of mercy and kindness; you have been God's enemy, and yet God
fed, clothed, and preserved you alive: do to your enemy as God has done
to you. If your enemy be hungry, feed him; if he be thirsty, give him
drink: so has God dealt with you. And has not a sense of his goodness
and long-suffering towards you been a means of melting down your heart
into penitential compunction, gratitude, and love towards him? How know
you that a similar conduct towards your enemy may not have the same
gracious influence on him towards you? Your kindness may be the means of
begetting in him a sense of his guilt; and, from being your fell enemy,
he may become your real friend! This I believe to be the sense of this
passage, which many have encumbered with difficulties of their own
creating. The whole is a quotation from [Pro
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#021), [Pro
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#022), in the precise words of the
Septuagint; and it is very likely that the latter clause of this verse,
Thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, is a metaphor taken from
smelting metals. The ore is put into the furnace, and fire put both
under and over, that the metal may be liquefied, and, leaving the
scoriae and dross, may fall down pure to the bottom of the furnace. This
is beautifully expressed by one of our own poets, in reference to this
explanation of this passage: -

"So artists melt the sullen ore of lead,

By heaping coals of fire upon its head.

In the kind warmth the metal learns to glow,

And pure from dross the silver runs below."

It is most evident, from the whole connection of the place and the
apostle's use of it, that the heaping of the coals of fire upon the head
of the enemy is intended to produce not an evil, but the most beneficial
effect; and the following verse is an additional proof of this.

[Romans 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 12:21</span></span>

Be not overcome of evil - Do not, by giving place to evil, become
precisely the same character which thou condemnest in another. Overcome
evil with good - however frequently he may grieve and injure thee,
always repay him with kindness; thy good-will, in the end, may overcome
his evil.

1\. Thomas Aquinas has properly said: Vincitur a malo qui vult peccare
in alium, quia ille peccavit in ipsum. "He is overcome of evil who sins
against another, because he sins against him." A moral enemy is more
easily overcome by kindness than by hostility. Against the latter he
arms himself; and all the evil passions of his heart concentrate
themselves in opposition to him who is striving to retaliate, by
violence, the injurious acts which he has received from him. But where
the injured man is labouring to do him good for his evil - to repay his
curses with blessings and prayers, his evil passions have no longer any
motive, any incentive; his mind relaxes; the turbulence of his passions
is calmed; reason and conscience are permitted to speak; he is disarmed,
or, in other words, he finds that he has no use for his weapons; he
beholds in the injured man a magnanimous friend whose mind is superior
to all the insults and injuries which he has received, and who is
determined never to permit the heavenly principle that influences his
soul to bow itself before the miserable, mean, and wretched spirit of
revenge. This amiable man views in his enemy a spirit which he beholds
with horror, and he cannot consent to receive into his own bosom a
disposition which he sees to be so destructive to another; and he knows
that as soon as he begins to avenge himself, he places himself on a par
with the unprincipled man whose conduct he has so much reason to blame,
and whose spirit he has so much cause to abominate. He who avenges
himself receives into his own heart all the evil and disgraceful
passions by which his enemy is rendered both wretched and contemptible.
There is the voice of eternal reason in "Avenge not yourselves: -
overcome evil with good;" as well as the high authority and command of
the living God.

2\. The reader will, no doubt, have observed with pleasure the skill and
address, as well as the Divine wisdom, with which the apostle has
handled the important subjects which he has brought forth to view in the
preceding chapters. Nothing can be more regular or judicious than his
plan of proceeding. He first shows the miserable, wretched, fallen,
degraded state of man; next, the merciful provision which God has made
for his salvation, and lastly, the use which man should make of the
mercies of his God. He shows us, in a most pointed manner, the
connection that subsists between the doctrines of the Gospel and
practical piety. From the beginning of the first to the end of the
eleventh chapter he states and defends the grand truths of Christianity,
and from the beginning of the twelfth to the end of the epistle he shows
the practical use of these doctrines. This is a point which is rarely
considered by professors; multitudes run to the Epistle to the Romans
for texts to prop up their peculiar system of doctrine, but how few go
to this sacred book for rules relative to holy life! They abound in
quotations from the doctrinal parts, but seldom make that use of them
which the apostle makes in this chapter. "I beseech you, therefore,
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service,
and be not conformed to this world, etc." Now we learn from the use
which the apostle makes of his doctrines, that whatsoever teaching comes
from God leads to a holy and useful life. And if we hold any doctrine
that does not excite us to labor after the strictest conformity to the
will of God in all our tempers, spirit, and actions, we may rest assured
that either that doctrine is not of God, or we make an improper use of
it. He that knows God best, loves and resembles him most.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 13](rom013)

</div>
