<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1010)  [Next](sa1012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 11:0</span></span>

Nahash, king of the Ammonites, besieges Jabesh-gilead; and proposes to
its inhabitants the most degrading conditions of peace, [Sa1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001), [Sa1
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#002). They apply to their brethren for
help, [Sa1 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#003), [Sa1
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#004). Saul hears of their distress;
takes a yoke of oxen, hews them in pieces, and sends them throughout the
coasts of Israel, with the threat that all who did not come to his
standard should have his cattle served in like manner; in consequence of
which he is soon at the head of an army of three hundred and thirty
thousand men, [Sa1 11:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#005). He sends to
Jabesh-gilead, and promises help, [Sa1
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#009), [Sa1
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#010). Saul attacks the Ammonites next
morning, and gives them a total overthrow, [Sa1
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#011). The people are greatly
encouraged, and propose to put to death those who are opposed to Saul's
government: but this he prevents, [Sa1
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#012), [Sa1
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#013). Samuel leads the people to
Gilgal: they offer sacrifices, and renew the kingdom to Saul, [Sa1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#014), [Sa1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#015).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 11:1</span></span>

Nahash the Ammonite - In the Vulgate this chapter begins thus: Et factum
est quasi post mensem, "And it came to pass about a month after." This
addition appears also in the principal copies of the Septuagint; though
it is wanting in the Complutensian edition, both in the Greek and Latin,
and is not acknowledged by any of the Oriental versions. But it is in
Josephus, and probably was inserted from him into some copies of the
Septuagint, and thence into the Vulgate. It appears to be of very little
authority.

We know little about Nahash; there was a king of this name among the
Ammonites in the time of David, [Sa2
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#002), but probably not the same
person. Nahash might have been a common name of the Ammonitish kings.

Make a covenant with us - They found they were in no condition to risk a
war; and they wish to have peace, and desire to know his conditions.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 11:2</span></span>

I may thrust out all your right eves - This cruel condition would serve
at once as a badge of their slavery, and a means of incapacitating them
from being effective warriors. Theodoret observes, "He who opposes his
shield to the enemy with his left hand, thereby hides his left eye, and
looks at his enemy with his right eye; he therefore who plucks out that
right eye makes men useless in war." Josephus gives the same reason.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 11:3</span></span>

Give us seven days respite - Such promises are frequently made by
besieged places: "We will surrender if not relieved in so many days;"
and such conditions are generally received by the besiegers.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 11:4</span></span>

Then came the messengers to Gibeah - It does not appear that the people
of Jabesh-gilead knew any thing of Saul's appointment to the kingdom,
for the message is not directed to him but to the people.

The people lifted up their voices and wept - They saw no hope of
deliverance, and they expected that their reproach would be laid on all
Israel.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 11:5</span></span>

Saul came after the herd - He had been bred up to an agricultural life,
and after his consecration he returned to it, waiting for a call of
Divine providence, which he considered he had now received in the
message from Jabesh-gilead.

It has often been remarked, that mighty kings and accomplished generals
have been chosen from among those who were engaged in agricultural
concerns. In these observations one fact is lost sight of, viz., that in
ancient times agriculture was the only employment. Trade and commerce
were scarcely known; therefore all descriptions of official dignities
must be chosen out of this class, there being no other to choose them
from. We need not wonder at these words of the poet: -

Jura dabat populis posito modo consul aratro; Pascebatque suas ipse
senator oves.

"The consul, having now laid aside his plough, gives laws to the people;
And the senator himself feeds his own sheep."

Ovid, Fast. lib. i., v. 204-207.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 11:6</span></span>

The Spirit of God came upon Saul - He felt himself strongly excited to
attempt the relief of his brethren.

And his anger was kindled greatly - I believe this means no more than
that his courage was greatly excited, he felt himself strong for fight,
and confident of success.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 11:7</span></span>

He took a yoke of open - The sending the pieces of the oxen was an act
similar to that of the Levite, [Jdg
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#029) (note), where see the note. And
both customs are similar to the sending about of the bloody cross, to
call the clans to battle, practiced by the ancient Highlanders of
Scotland. See at the end of this chapter, [Sa1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#015) (note).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 11:8</span></span>

The children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah
thirty thousand - This was a vast army, but the Septuagint make it even
more: "All the men of Israel were ἑξακοσιας χιλιαδας, Six Hundred
thousand; and the men of Judah ἑβδομηκοντα χιλιαδας, Seventy thousand."
Josephus goes yet higher with the number of the Israelites: "He found
the number of those whom he had gathered together to be ἑβδομηκοντα
μυριαδας Seven Hundred thousand." Those of the tribe of Judah he makes
seventy thousand, with the Septuagint. These numbers are not all right;
and I suspect even the Hebrew text to be exaggerated, by the mistake or
design of some ancient scribe.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 11:10</span></span>

To-morrow we will come out unto you - They concealed the information
they had received of Saul's promised assistance. They did come out unto
them; but it was in a different manner to what the Ammonites expected.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 11:11</span></span>

Put the people in three companies - Intending to attack the Ammonites in
three different points, and to give his own men more room to act.

In the morning watch - He probably began his march in the evening,
passed Jordan in the night, and reached the camp of the Ammonites by
daybreak.

That two of them were not left together - This proves that the rout was
complete.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 11:12</span></span>

Who is he that said, Shall Saul reign - Now, flushed with victory and
proud of their leader, they wished to give him a proof of their
attachment by slaying, even in cool blood, the persons who were at first
averse from his being intrusted with the supreme power! The common
soldier is scarcely ever inspired by his victory to acts of magnanimity;
he has shed blood - he wishes to shed more!

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 11:13</span></span>

There shall not a man be put to death - This was as much to Saul's
credit as the lately proposed measure was to the discredit of his
soldiers.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 11:14</span></span>

Renew the kingdom - The unction of Saul, in the first instance, was a
very private act; and his being appointed to be king was not known to
the people in general. He had now shown himself worthy to command the
people; and Samuel takes advantage of this circumstance to gain the
general consent in his favor. Josephus says that Saul was anointed a
second time at this convocation.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 11:15</span></span>

There they made Saul king - It is likely, from these words, that Saul
was anointed a second time; he was now publicly acknowledged, and there
was no gainsayer. Thus far Saul acted well, and the kingdom seemed to be
confirmed in his hand; but soon through imprudence he lost it.

On the custom referred to in [Sa1 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#007)
I am favored with the following observations by a learned correspondent:
-

"It is considered that the authenticity of records respecting a peculiar
people cannot be better illustrated, or the fidelity of the historian
more clearly ascertained, than by proving that the manners and customs
recorded are in unison with, or bear a resemblance to, the manners and
customs of other nations of the same antiquity; or, what may be more
correct, in a similar state of improvement; and the records of such
rites and customs may possibly acquire an additional mark of
authenticity, when the similarity is not so exact as to admit a
presumption that the customs of one nation were merely copied from the
other.

"Sir Walter Scott, in the third canto of the Lady of the Lake, describes
the rites, incantations, and imprecations, used prior to the fiery cross
being circulated, to summon the rough warriors of ancient times to the
service of their chief; and in the first note of this canto he alludes
to this ancient custom which, in comparatively modern times, has been
used in Scotland, and proves that a similar punishment of death or
destruction of the houses for disobeying the summons was inflicted by
the ancient Scandinavians, as recorded by Olaus Magnus, in his history
of the Goths. A custom still more in point than the one cited may be
found to have existed in a more ancient nation, whose history is
supposed the most, if not the only authentic narrative of deeds of
ancient times, and which also records the sanguinary manners of
uncultivated nations; see the preceding chapter, [Sa1
10:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001) (note). The similarity of the
custom is to be found in the seventh verse; with the Highlanders a goat
was slain; with the Israelites, an ox. The exhibition of a cross stained
with the blood of the sacrificed animal was the summons of the former,
while part of the animal was the mandate of the latter. Disobedience in
the one nation was punished with the death of the parties, and burning
of their dwellings; in the other, the punishment was more simple, and
more allusive to the sacrificed emblem, the forfeiture or destruction of
their oxen. It is not difficult to judge whether the comparison be
correct.

"The first verses record the sanguinary practices of ancient times,
which to many appear merely as the gratification of revenge, or as
proofs of victory; yet when it is considered that the right eye must
chiefly aid the warrior in aiming at his adversary, whether the weapon
be of ancient or modern warfare, here arises a military reason,
corroborative of the truth of history, for the deprivation, and in some
degree lessening the cruelty of the mutilation, which would be increased
if it were caused by revenge or wantonness; though Nahash declares it to
be a reproach upon all Israel."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 12](sa1012)

</div>
