<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1003)  [Next](sa1005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 4:0</span></span>

A battle between Israel and the Philistines, in which the former are
defeated, with the loss of four thousand men, [Sa1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001), [Sa1
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#002). They resolve to give the
Philistines battle once more, and bring the ark of the Lord, with Hophni
and Phinehas the priests, into the camp, [Sa1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#003), [Sa1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#004). They do so, and become vainly
confident, [Sa1 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#005). At this the
Philistines are dismayed, [Sa1 4:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#006).
The battle commences; the Israelites are again defeated, with the loss
of thirty thousand men; Hophni and Phinehas are among the slain; and the
ark of the Lord is taken, [Sa1 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#010),
[Sa1 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011). A Benjamite runs with the
news to Eli; who, hearing of the capture of the ark, falls from his
seat, and breaks his neck, [Sa1
4:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#012). The wife of Phinehas, hearing
of the death of her husband, and father-in-law, and of the capture of
the ark, is taken in untimely travail, beings forth a son, calls him
I-chabod, and expires, [Sa1 4:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#019).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 4:1</span></span>

The word of Samuel came to all Israel - This clause certainly belongs to
the preceding chapter, and is so placed by the Vulgate, Septuagint,
Syriac, and Arabic.

Pitched beside Eben-ezer - This name was not given to this place till
more than twenty years after this battle, see [Sa1
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#012); for the monument called האבן
העזר haeben haezer, the "Stone of Help," was erected by Samuel in the
place which was afterwards from this circumstance, called Eben-ezer,
when the Lord had given the Israelites a signal victory over the
Philistines. It was situated in the tribe of Judah, between Mizpeh and
Shen, and not far from the Aphek here mentioned. This is another proof
that this book was compiled after the times and transactions which it
records, and probably from memoranda which had been made by a
contemporary writer.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 4:2</span></span>

Put themselves in array - There is no doubt that both the Philistines
and Israelites had what might be called the art of war, according to
which they marshalled their troops in the field, constructed their
camps, and conducted their retreats, sieges, etc.; but we know not the
principles on which they acted.

They slew of the army in the field about four thousand men - This must
have been a severe conflict, as four thousand were left dead on the
field of battle. The contest also must have lasted some considerable
time, as these were all slain hand to hand; swords and spears being in
all probability the only weapons then used.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 4:3</span></span>

Let us fetch the ark - They vainly supposed that the ark could save
them, when the God of it had departed from them because of their
wickedness. They knew that in former times their fathers had been beaten
by their enemies, when they took not the ark with them to battle; as in
the case of their wars with the Canaanites, [Num
14:44](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#044), [Num
14:45](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#045); and that they had conquered
when they took this with them, as in the case of the destruction of
Jericho, [Jos 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#004). From the latter
clause they took confidence; but the cause of their miscarriage in the
former they laid not to heart. It was customary with all the nations of
the earth to take their gods and sacred ensigns with them to war. The
Persians, Indians, Greeks, Romans, Germans, Philistines, etc., did so.
Consecrated crosses, blessing and hallowing of colors and standards, are
the modern remains of those ancient superstitions.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 4:4</span></span>

The Lord of hosts - See on [Sa1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003)
(note).

Dwelleth between the cherubims - Of what shape the cherubim were, we
know not; but there was one of these representative figures placed at
each end of the ark of the covenant; and between them, on the lid or
cover of that ark, which was called the propitiatory or mercy-seat, the
shechinah, or symbol of the Divine presence, was said to dwell. They
thought, therefore, if they had the ark, they must necessarily have the
presence and influence of Jehovah.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 4:5</span></span>

All Israel shouted - Had they humbled themselves, and prayed devoutly
and fervently for success, they would have been heard and saved. Their
shouting proved both their vanity and irreligion.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 4:7</span></span>

God is come into the camp - They took for granted, as did the
Israelites, that his presence was inseparable from his ark or shrine.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 4:8</span></span>

These mighty Gods - מיד האלהים האדרים miyad haelohim haaddirim, from the
hand of these illustrious Gods. Probably this should be translated in
the singular, and not in the plural: Who shall deliver us from the hand
of this illustrious God?

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 4:9</span></span>

Be strong, etc. - This was the address to the whole army, and very
forcible it was. "If ye do not fight, and acquit yourselves like men, ye
will be servants to the Hebrews, as they have been to you; and you may
expect that they will avenge themselves of you for all the cruelty you
have exercised towards them."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 4:11</span></span>

Hophni and Phinehas were slain - They probably attempted to defend the
ark, and lost their lives in the attempt.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 4:12</span></span>

Came to Shiloh the same day - The field of battle could not have been at
any great distance, for this young man reached Shiloh the same evening
after the defeat.

With his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head - These were signs
of sorrow and distress among all nations. The clothes rent, signified
the rending, dividing, and scattering, of the people; the earth, or
ashes on the head, signified their humiliation: "We are brought down to
the dust of the earth; we are near to our graves." When the Trojan fleet
was burnt, Aeneas is represented as tearing his robe from his shoulder,
and invoking the aid of his gods: -

Tum pius Aeneas humeris abscindere vestem,

Auxilioque vocare Deos, et tendere palmas.

Virg. Aen. lib. v., ver. 685.

"The prince then tore his robes in deep despair,

Raised high his hands, and thus address'd his prayer."

Pitt.

We have a remarkable example in the same poet, where he represents the
queen of King Latinus resolving on her own death, when she found that
the Trojans had taken the city by storm: -

Purpueros moritura manu discindit amictus.

Aen. lib. xii., ver. 603.

She tears with both her hands her purple vest.

But the image is complete in King Latinus himself, when he heard of the
death of his queen, and saw his city in flames: -

\- It scissa veste Latinus, Conjugis attonitus fatis, urbisque ruina,

Canitiem immundo perfusam pulvere turpans.

Ib., ver. 609.

Latinus tears his garments as he goes.

Both for his public and his private woes:

With filth his venerable beard besmears,

And sordid dust deforms his silver hairs.

Dryden.

We find the same custom expressed in one line by Catullus: -

Canitiem terra, atque infuso pulvere foedans.

Epith. Pelei et Thetidos, ver. 224.

Dishonoring her hoary locks with earth and sprinkled dust.

The ancient Greeks in their mourning often shaved off their hair: -

Τουτο νυ και γερας οιον οΐζυροισι βροτοισι,

Κειρασθαι τε κομην, βαλεειν τ' απο δακρυ παρειων.

Hom. Odyss. lib. iv., ver. 197.

"Let each deplore his dead: the rites of wo

Are all, alas! the living can bestow

O'er the congenial dust, enjoin'd to shear

The graceful curl, and drop the tender tear."

Pope.

And again: -

Κατθεμεν εν λεχεεσσι καθηραντες χροα καλον

Ὑδατι τε λιαρῳ και αλειφατι· πολλα δε σ' αμφις

Δακρυα θερμα χεον Δαναοι, κειροντο τε χαιτας.

Ib., lib. xxiv., ver. 44.

"Then unguents sweet, and tepid streams, we shed;

Tears flow'd from every eye; and o'er the dead

Each clipp'd the curling honors of his head."

Pope.

The whole is strongly expressed in the case of Achilles, when he heard
of the death of his friend Patroclus: -

Ὡς φατο· τον δ' αχεος νεφεος νεφελη εκαλυψε μελαινα

Αμφοτερῃσι δε χερσιν ἑλων κονιν αοθαλοεσσαν,

Χευατο κακ κεφαλης, χαριεν δ' ῃσχυνε προσωπον·

Νεκταρεῳ δε χιτωνι μελαιν' αμφιζανε τεφρη.

Iliad, lib. xviii., ver. 22.

"A sudden horror shot through all the chief,

And wrapp'd his senses in the cloud of grief.

Cast on the ground, with furious hands he spread

The scorching ashes o'er his graceful head:

His purple garments, and his golden hairs.

Those he deforms with dust, and these with tears."

Pope.

It is not unusual, even in Europe, and in the most civilized parts of
it, to see grief expressed by tearing the hair, beating the breasts, and
rending the garments; all these are natural signs, or expression of deep
and excessive grief, and are common to all the nations of the world.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 4:13</span></span>

His heart trembled for the ark of God - He was a most mild and
affectionate father, and yet the safety of the ark lay nearer to his
heart than the safety of his two sons. Who can help feeling for this
aged, venerable man?

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 4:17</span></span>

And the messenger answered - Never was a more afflictive message,
containing such a variety of woes, each rising above the preceding,
delivered in so few words.

1\. Israel is fled before the Philistines.

This was a sore evil: that Israel should turn their backs upon their
enemies, was bad; and that they should turn their backs on such enemies
as the

Philistines, was yet worse; for now they might expect the chains of
their slavery to be strengthened and riveted more closely.

2\. There hath also been a great slaughter among the people.

A rout might have taken place without any great previous slaughter; but
in this case the field was warmly contested, thirty thousand were laid
dead on the spot. This was a deeper cause of distress than the
preceding; as if he had said, "The flower of our armies is destroyed;
scarcely a veteran now to take the field."

3\. Thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead.

This was still more afflictive to him as a father, to lose both his
sons, the only hope of the family; and to have them taken away by a
violent death when there was so little prospect of their having died in
the peace of God, was more grievous than all.

4\. The ark of God is taken.

This was the most dreadful of the whole; now Israel is dishonored in the
sight of the heathen, and the name of the Lord will be blasphemed by
them. Besides, the capture of the ark shows that God is departed from
Israel; and now there is no farther hope of restoration for the people,
but every prospect of the destruction of the nation, and the final ruin
of all religion! How high does each wo rise on the back of the
preceding! And with what apparent art is this very laconic message
constructed! And yet, probably, no art at all was used, and the
messenger delivered the tidings just as the facts rose up in his own
mind.

How vapid, diffused, and alliterated, is the report of the messenger in
the Persae of Aeschylus, who comes to the queen with the tremendous
account of the destruction of the whole naval power of the Persians, at
the battle of Salamis? I shall give his first speech, and leave the
reader to compare the two accounts.

Ω γης ἁπασης Ασιδος πολισματα,

Ω Περσις αια, και πολυς πλουτου λιμην,

Ὡς εν μιᾳ πληγῃ κατεφθαρται πολυς

Ολβος, το Περσων δ' ανθος οιχται πεσον.

Ωμοι, κακον μεν πρωτον αγγελλειν κακα·

Περσαις, στρατος γαρ πας αλωλε βαρβαρων.

Of which I subjoin the following translation by Mr. Potter: -

Wo to the towns through Asia's peopled realms!

Wo to the land of Persia, once the port

Of boundless wealth! how is thy glorious state

Vanish'd at once, and all thy spreading honors

Fallen, lost! Ah me! unhappy is his task

That bears unhappy tidings; but constraint

Compels me to relate this tale of wo:

Persians! the whole barbaric host is fallen.

This is the sum of his account, which he afterwards details in about a
dozen of speeches.

Heroes and conquerors, ancient and modern, have been celebrated for
comprising a vast deal of information in a few words. I will give three
examples, and have no doubt that the Benjamite in the text will be found
to have greatly the advantage.

1\. Julius Caesar having totally defeated Pharnaces, king of Pontus,
wrote a letter to the Roman senate, which contained only these three
words: -

Veni, Vidi, Vici;

I came, I saw, I conquered.

This war was begun and ended in one day.

2\. Admiral Hawke having totally defeated the French fleet, in 1759, off
the coast of Brittany, wrote as follows to King George II.: -

"Sire, I have taken, burnt, and destroyed all the French fleet, as per
margin. - Hawke."

3\. Napoleon Buonaparte, then general-in-chief of the French armies in
Italy, wrote to Josephine, his wife, the evening before he attacked
Field Marshal Alvinzi, the imperial general: -

"Demain j'attaquerai l'enemie; je le battrai; et j'en finirai."

"To-morrow I shall attack the enemy; I shall defeat them, and terminate
the business."

He did so: the imperialists were totally defeated, Mantua surrendered,
and the campaign for that year (1796) was concluded.

In the above examples, excellent as they are in their kind, we find
little more than one idea, whereas the report of the Benjamite includes
several; for, in the most forcible manner, he points out the general and
particular disasters of the day, the rout of the army, the great
slaughter, the death of the priests, who were in effect the whole
generals of the army, and the capture of the ark; all that, on such an
occasion, could affect and distress the heart of an Israelite. And all
this he does in four simple assertions.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 4:18</span></span>

When he made mention of the ark of God - Eli bore all the relation till
the messenger came to this solemn word; he had trembled before for the
ark, and now, hearing that it was captured, he was transfixed with
grief, fell down from his seat, and dislocated his neck! Behold the
judgments of God! But shall we say that this man, however remiss in the
education of his children, and criminal in his indulgence towards his
profligate sons, which arose more from the easiness of his disposition
than from a desire to encourage vice, is gone to perdition? God forbid!
No man ever died with such benevolent and religious feelings, and yet
perished.

He had judged Israel forty years - Instead of forty years, the
Septuagint has here εικοσι ετη, twenty years. All the other versions, as
well as the Hebrew text, have forty years.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 4:19</span></span>

And his daughter-in-law - This is another very affecting story; the
defeat of Israel, the capture of the ark, the death of her
father-in-law, and the slaughter of her husband, were more than a woman
in her circumstances, near the time of her delivery could bear. She
bowed, travailed, was delivered of a son, gave the child a name
indicative of the ruined state of Israel, and expired!

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 4:20</span></span>

But she answered not - She paid no attention to what the women had said
concerning her having borne a son; that information she regarded not.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 4:21</span></span>

She named the child I-chabod - The versions are various on the original
words כבוד I-chabod; the Septuagint, ουαιβαρχαβωθ ouaibrachaboth; the
Syriac, yochobor; the Arabic, yochabad. But none of these give us much
light on the subject. It is pretty evident they did not know well what
signification to give the name; and we are left to collect its meaning
from what she says afterwards, The glory is departed from Israel; the
words literally mean, Where is the glory? And indeed where was it, when
the armies of Israel were defeated by the Philistines, the priests
slain, the supreme magistrate dead, and the ark of the Lord taken?

This is a very eventful, interesting, and affecting chapter, and
prepares the reader for those signal manifestations of God's power and
providence by which the ark was restored, the priesthood re-established,
an immaculate judge given to Israel, the Philistine yoke broken, and the
people of the Most High caused once more to triumph. God humbled them
that he might exalt them; he suffered his glory for a time to become
eclipsed, that he might afterwards cause it to break out with the
greater effulgence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 5](sa1005)

</div>
