<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1024)  [Next](sa1026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 25:0</span></span>

The death of Samuel, [Sa1 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001). The
history of Nabal, and his churlishness towards David and his men, [Sa1
25:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002). David, determining to punish
him, is appeased by Abigail, Nabal's wife, vv. 13-35. Abigail returns,
and tells Nabal of the danger that he has escaped: who on hearing it is
thunderstruck, and dies in ten days, [Sa1
25:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#036) David, hearing of this, sends
and takes Abigail to wife, [Sa1
25:39-42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#039). He marries also Ahinoam of
Jezreel, Saul having given Michal, David's wife, to Phalti, the son of
Laish, [Sa1 25:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#043), [Sa1
25:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#044).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 25:1</span></span>

And Samuel died - Samuel lived, as is supposed, about ninety-eight
years; was in the government of Israel before Saul from sixteen to
twenty years; and ceased to live, according to the Jews, about four
months before the death of Saul; but according to Calmet and others, two
years. But all this is very uncertain; how long he died before Saul,
cannot be ascertained. For some account of his character, see the end of
the chapter, [Sa1 25:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#044) (note).

Buried him in his house - Probably this means, not his dwelling-house,
but the house or tomb he had made for his sepulture; and thus the Syriac
and Arabic seem to have understood it.

David - went down to the wilderness of Paran - This was either on the
confines of Judea, or in Arabia Petraea, between the mountains of Judah
and Mount Sinai; it is evident from the history that it was not far from
Carmel, on the south confines of Judah.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 25:3</span></span>

The name of the man was Nabal - The word נבל nabal signifies to be
foolish, base, or villanous; and hence the Latin word nebulo, knave, is
supposed to be derived.

The name of his wife Abigail - The joy or exultation of my father. A
woman of sense and beauty, married to the boor mentioned above, probably
because he was rich. Many women have been thus sacrificed.

Of the house of Caleb - והוא כלבי vehu Chalibbi, "he was a Calebite."
But as the word caleb signifies a dog, the Septuagint have understood it
as implying a man of a canine disposition, and translate it thus, και ὁ
ανθρωπος κυνικος, he was a doggish man. It is understood in the same way
by the Syriac and Arabic.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 25:6</span></span>

Peace be both to thee - This is the ancient form of sending greetings to
a friend: Peace to Thee, peace to thy Household, and peace to all that
Thou Hast. That is, May both thyself, thy family, and all that pertain
unto thee, be in continual prosperity!

Perhaps David, by this salutation, wished Nabal to understand that he
had acted so towards him and his property that nothing had been
destroyed, and that all had been protected; see [Sa1
25:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#015).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 25:7</span></span>

Thy shepherds which were with us, we hurt them not - It is most evident
that David had a claim upon Nabal, for very essential services performed
to his herdmen at Carmel. He not only did them no hurt, and took none of
their flocks for the supply of his necessities, but he protected them
from the rapacity of others; they were a Wall unto us, said Nabal's
servants, both by night and day. In those times, and to the present day,
wandering hordes of Arabs, under their several chiefs, think they have a
right to exact contributions of provisions, etc., wherever they come;
David had done nothing of this kind, but protected them against those
who would.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 25:8</span></span>

Whatsoever cometh to thine hand - As thou art making a great feast for
thy servants, and I and my men, as having essentially served thee, would
naturally come in for a share were we present; send a portion by my ten
young men, for me and my men, that we also may rejoice with you.
Certainly this was a very reasonable and a very modest request. This
mode of address is not unfrequent among the Hindoos: "O father, fill the
belly of thy son; he is in distress."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 25:10</span></span>

Who is David? - Nabal's answer shows the surliness of his disposition.
It was unjust to refuse so reasonable a request; and the manner of the
refusal was highly insulting. It is true what his own servants said of
him, He is such a son of Belial that one cannot speak to him, [Sa1
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#017).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 25:18</span></span>

Took two hundred loaves - The Eastern bread is ordinarily both thin and
small; and answers to our cakes.

Two bottles of wine - That is, two goat-skins full. The hide is pulled
off the animal without ripping up; the places where the legs, etc., were
are sewed up, and then the skin appears one large bag. This is properly
the Scripture and Eastern bottle. There is one such before me.

Five sheep - Not one sheep to one hundred men.

Clusters of raisins - Raisins dried in the sun.

Cakes of figs - Figs cured, and then pressed together. We receive the
former in jars, and the latter in small barrels; and both articles
answer the description here given.

Now all this provision was a matter of little worth, and, had it been
granted in the first instance, it would have perfectly satisfied David,
and secured the good offices of him and his men. Abigail showed both her
wisdom and prudence in making this provision. Out of three thousand
sheep Nabal could not have missed five; and as this claim was made only
in the time of sheep-shearing, it could not have been made more than
once in the year: and it certainly was a small price for such important
services.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 25:20</span></span>

She came down - and David - came down - David was coming down Mount
Paran; Abigail was coming down from Carmel. - Calmet.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 25:22</span></span>

So and more also do God - Nothing can justify this part of David's
conduct. Whatever his provocation might have been, he had suffered,
properly speaking, no wrongs; and his resolution to cut off a whole
innocent family, because Nabal had acted ungenerously towards him, was
abominable and cruel, not to say diabolic. He who attempts to vindicate
this conduct of David is, at least constructively, a foe to God and
truth. David himself condemns this most rash and unwarrantable conduct,
and thanks God for having prevented him from doing this evil, [Sa1
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#032), etc.

Any that pisseth against the wall - This expression certainly means
either men or dogs, and should be thus translated, if I leave, any male;
and this will answer both to men and dogs, and the offensive mode of
expression be avoided. I will not enter farther into the subject:
Bochart and Calmet have done enough, and more than enough; and in the
plainest language too.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa1 25:28</span></span>

And evil hath not been found in thee - Thou hast not committed any act
of this kind hitherto.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa1 25:29</span></span>

Shall be bound in the bundle of life - Thy life shall be precious in the
sight of the Lord: it shall be found in the bundle of life; it shall be
supported by Him who is the Spring and Fountain of life, and ever be
found united to those who are most favored by the Almighty.

Them shall he sling out - Far from being bound and kept together in
union with the Fountain of life, he will cast them off from himself as a
stone is cast out from a sling. This betokens both force and violence.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">sa1 25:37</span></span>

His heart died within him, and he became as a stone - He was
thunderstruck, and was so terrified at the apprehension of what he had
escaped, that the fear overcame his mind, he became insensible to all
things around him, probably refused all kinds of nourishment, and died
in ten days.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">sa1 25:39</span></span>

To take her to him to wife - It is likely that he had heard before this
that Saul, to cut off all his pretensions to the throne, had married
Michal to Phalti; and this justified David in taking Abigail or any
other woman; and, according to the then custom, it was not unlawful for
David to take several wives. By his marriage with Abigail, it is
probable he became possessed of all Nabal's property in Carmel and Maon.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">sa1 25:43</span></span>

David also took Ahinoam - Many think that this was his wife before he
took Abigail; she is always mentioned first in the list of his wives,
and she was the mother of his eldest son Ammon.

Of Jezreel - There were two places of this name; one in the tribe of
Issachar, the other in the tribe of Judah.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">sa1 25:44</span></span>

Phalti - Called also Phaltiel, [Sa2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#016).

Of Gallim - Probably a city or town in the tribe of Benjamin; see [Isa
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#030). It is likely therefore that
Saul chose this man because he was of his own tribe.

In this chapter we have the account of the death of Samuel, who from his
infancy had been devoted to God and the service of his people. He was
born at a time in which religion was at a very low ebb in Israel, as
there were but very few prophets, and no open vision - scarcely any
revelation from God. Those who might be called prophets had no regular
ministry of God's word; they were extraordinary messengers sent for a
particular purpose, and not continued in the work any longer than the
time necessary to deliver their extraordinary message.

Samuel is supposed to have been the first who established academies or
schools for prophets, at least we do not hear of them before his time;
and it is granted that they continued till the Babylonish captivity.
This was a wise institution, and no doubt contributed much to the
maintenance of pure religion, and the prevention of idolatry among that
people.

Samuel reformed many abuses in the Jewish state, and raised it to a
pitch of political consequence to which it had been long a stranger. He
was very zealous for the honor of God, and supported the rights of pure
religion, of the king, and of the people, against all encroachments. He
was chief magistrate in Israel before the appointment of a king, and
afterwards he acted as prime minister to Saul, though without being
chosen or formally appointed to that station. Indeed, he seems on the
whole to have been the civil and ecclesiastical governor, Saul being
little more than general of the Israelitish forces.

In his office of minister in the state, he gave the brightest example of
zeal, diligence, inflexible integrity, and uncorruptedness. He reproved
both the people and the king for their transgressions, with a boldness
which nothing but his sense of the Divine authority could inspire, and
yet he tempered it with a sweetness which showed the interest he felt in
their welfare, and the deep and distressing concern he felt for their
back-slidings and infidelities.

He was incorrupt; he received no man's bribe; he had no pension from the
state; he enriched none of his relatives from the public purse; left no
private debts to be discharged by his country. He was among the Hebrews
what Aristides is said to have been among the Greeks, so poor at his
death, though a minister of state, that he did not leave property enough
to bury him. Justice was by him duly and impartially administered, and
oppression and wrong had no existence.

If there ever was a heaven-born minister, it was Samuel; in whose public
and private conduct there was no blemish, and whose parallel cannot be
found in the ancient or modern history of any country in the universe.

Let ministers of state who have sought for nothing but their own glory,
and have increased the public burdens by their improvident expenditure;
who have endeavored, by their wordy representations, to dazzle and elude
the people, and impose false grandeur in the place of true greatness and
solid prosperity; who have oppressed the many, and enriched the
worthless few; fall down at the feet of This heaven-born man, and learn,
from this immaculate judge of Israel, what a faithful servant to his
king, and an incorruptible minister of state, means, and in retiring
from their high station, or in going to appear before the judgment-seat
of God, see whether, in the presence of their king, and in the face of
the thousands of their people, they can boldly say, "Behold, here am I!
Witness against me before the Lord and before his anointed. Whose ox
have I taken? Whose ass have I seized? Whom have I defrauded? Whom have
I oppressed, by the imposition of heavy taxes for the support of
needless expenses, and the payment of venal men? Or of whose hand have I
taken any bribe to blind my eyes? Scrutinize my conduct, examine the
state of my family, compare their present circumstances with what they
were previously to my administration, and see if you can find aught in
my hands." See [Sa1 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001), etc.

O, how seldom in the annals of the world, from the assembled heads of
the great body politic, can the departing prime minister hear, "Thou
hast not defrauded us, thou hast not oppressed us; neither hast thou
taken aught of any man's hand!" This voice call be heard from Gilgal;
but of what other minister can this be spoken but of Samuel the seer,
who was the gift of God's mercy to the people of Israel; whose memory
was too precious to be intrusted to public monuments, but stands, and
alas; almost unique in the Book of God? Of Daniel, and his
administration, I shall have occasion to speak elsewhere.

A prime minister, deeply devoted to God and faithful to his king and to
his country, is so rare a character in the world, that when he does
occur, he should be held up to public admiration. But I have no parallel
for Samuel. See the notes on 1 Samuel 12:1-25 (note) and on [Sa1
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#006) (note).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 26](sa1026)

</div>
