<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1025)  [Next](sa1027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 26:0</span></span>

The Ziphites inform Saul of David's hiding place, [Sa1
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#001). Saul, with three thousand men,
goes in pursuit of him, [Sa1 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#002),
[Sa1 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#003). David sends out spies; and
finds where Saul had pitched his camp; and he and Abishai come to the
camp by night, find all asleep, and bring away Saul's spear, and the
cruse of water that was at his head, [Sa1
26:4-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#004). David goes to the opposite
hill; awakes Abner, captain of Saul's host; chides him for being so
careless of his master's life; and calls on Saul to send one of his
servants for the spear; and severely chides him for his continued
hostility to him, [Sa1 26:13-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#013). Saul
humbles himself to David; promises to persecute him no more; and returns
to his own place, [Sa1 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#025).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 26:1</span></span>

The Ziphites came - This is the second time that these enemies of David
endeavored to throw him into the hands of Saul. See [Sa1
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#019).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 26:2</span></span>

Three thousand chosen men - Though they knew that David was but six
hundred strong, yet Saul thought it was not safe to pursue such an able
general with a less force than that mentioned in the text; and, that he
might the better depend on them, they were all elect or picked men out
of the whole of his army.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 26:5</span></span>

David arose - As David and his men knew the country, they had many
advantages over Saul and his men; and no doubt could often watch them
without being discovered.

Saul lay in the trench - The word במעגל bammaegal, which we translate in
the trench, and in the margin in the midst of his carriages, is rendered
by some in a ring of carriages, and by others in the circle, i.e., which
was formed by his troops. Luther himself translates it wagenburg, a
fortress formed of wagons or carriages.

As עגל agal signifies any thing round, it may here refer to a round
pavilion or tent made for Saul, or else to the form of his camp. The
Arabs, to the present day, always form a circle in their encampments,
and put their principal officers in the center.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 26:6</span></span>

Abishai the son of Zeruiah - She was David's sister; and therefore
Abishai and Joab were nephews to David.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 26:8</span></span>

God hath delivered thine enemy into thine hand - Here Abishai uses the
same language as did David's men, when Saul came into the cave at
En-gedi, (see [Sa1 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004), etc.), and
David uses the same language in reply.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 26:10</span></span>

The Lord shall smite him - He shall die by a stroke of the Divine
judgment; or his day shall come to die - he shall die a natural death;
which in the course of things must be before mine, and thus I shall get
rid of mine enemy; or he shall descend into the battle, and perish - he
shall fall by the enemies of his country. These are the three ordinary
ways by which man accomplishes, as a hireling, his day. Murder David
could not consider to be lawful; this would have been taking the matter
out of God's hand, and this David would not do.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 26:12</span></span>

David took the spear and the cruse - The spear, we have already seen,
was the emblem of power and regal dignity. But it is usual, in Arab
camps, for every man to have his lance stuck in the ground beside him,
that he may be ready for action in a moment. The cruse of water
resembled, in some measure, the canteens of our soldiers. In such a
climate, where water was always scarce, it was necessary for each man to
carry a little with him, to refresh him on his march.

A deep sleep from the Lord - It is the same word which is used, [Gen
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021), to describe the sleep which God
caused to fall upon Adam, when he formed Eve out of his side.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 26:15</span></span>

Art not thou a valiant man? - This is a strong irony. Ye are worthy to
die; ye are sons of death - ye deserve death for this neglect of your
king. And had not Saul been so deeply affected with David's generosity
in preserving his life, he had doubtless put Abner and his chief
officers to death; though they were not to blame, as their apparent
neglect was the effect of a supernatural sleep.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 26:19</span></span>

Let him accept an offering - If God have stirred thee up against me,
why, then, let him deliver my life into thy hand, and accept it as a
sacrifice. But as the word is מנחה minchah, a gratitude-offering,
perhaps the sense may be this: Let God accept a gratitude-offering from
thee, for having purged the land of a worker of iniquity; for, were I
not such, God would never stir thee up against me.

But if they be the children of men - If men have, by false
representations, lies, and slanders, stirred thee up against an innocent
man, then let them be cursed before the Lord. If I am guilty, I deserve
to die; if not, those who seek my life should be destroyed.

Saying, Go, serve other gods - His being obliged to leave the
tabernacle, and the place where the true worship of God was performed,
and take refuge among idolaters, said in effect, Go, serve other gods.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 26:20</span></span>

As when one doth hunt a partridge - It is worthy of remark that the
Arabs, observing that partridges, being put up several times, soon
become so weary as not to be able to fly; they in this manner hunt them
upon the mountains, till at last they can knock them down with their
clubs.

It was in this manner that Saul hunted David, coming hastily upon him,
and putting him up from time to time, in hopes that he should at length,
by frequent repetitions of it, be able to destroy him. See Harmer.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 26:21</span></span>

I have sinned - Perhaps the word חטאתי chatathi, "I have sinned," should
be read, I have erred, or, have been mistaken. I have taken thee to be a
very different man from what I find thee to be. Taken literally it was
strictly true. He often purposed the spilling of David's blood; and
thus, again and again, sinned against his life.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 26:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 26:25</span></span>

Thou shalt both do great things, and also shalt still prevail. - The
Hebrew is גם עשה תעשה וגם יכל תוכל gam asoh thaaseh, vegam yachol
tuchal; "Also in doing thou shalt do, and being able thou shalt be able;
which the Targum translates, also in reigning thou shalt reign, and in
prospering thou shalt prosper; which in all probability is the meaning.

There is a vast deal of dignity in this speech of David, arising from a
consciousness of his own innocence. He neither begs his life from Saul,
nor offers one argument to prevail upon him to desist from his felonious
attempts, but refers the whole matter to God, as the judge and
vindicator of oppressed innocence. Saul himself is speechless, except in
the simple acknowledgment of his sin; and in the behalf of their king
not one of his officers has one word to say! It is strange that none of
them offered now to injure the person of David; but they saw that he was
most evidently under the guardian care of God, and that their master was
apparently abandoned by him. Saul invites David to return, but David
knew the uncertainty of Saul's character too well to trust himself in
the power of this infatuated king. How foolish are the counsels of men
against God! When he undertakes to save, who can destroy? And who can
deliver out of his hands?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 27](sa1027)

</div>
