<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2011)  [Next](sa2013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 12:0</span></span>

The Lord sends Nathan the prophet to reprove David; which he does by
means of a curious parable, [Sa2
12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001). David is led, unknowingly, to
pronounce his on condemnation, [Sa2
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#005), [Sa2
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#006). Nathan charges the guilt home on
his conscience; and predicts a long train of calamities which should
fall on him and his family, [Sa2
12:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#007). David confesses his sin; and
Nathan gives him hope of God's mercy, and foretells the death of the
child born in adultery, [Sa2 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013),
[Sa2 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014). The child is taken ill;
David fasts and prays for its restoration, [Sa2
12:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#015). On the seventh day the child
dies, and David is comforted, [Sa2
12:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#018). Solomon is born of
Bath-sheba, [Sa2 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025), [Sa2
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026). Joab besieges Rabbah of the
Ammonites, takes the city of waters, and sends for David to take Rabbah,
[Sa2 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#027), [Sa2
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#028). He comes, takes it, gets much
spoil, and puts the inhabitants to hard labor, [Sa2
12:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#029).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 12:1</span></span>

There were two men in one city - See a discourse on fables at the end of
[Jdg 9:56](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#056) (note), and a discourse on
parabolic writing at the end of the thirteenth chapter of Matthew.

There is nothing in this parable that requires illustration; its bent is
evident; and it was construed to make David, unwittingly, pass sentence
on himself. It was in David's hand, what his own letters were in the
hands of the brave but unfortunate Uriah.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 12:3</span></span>

And lay in his bosom - This can only mean that this lamb was what we
call a pet or favourite in the family, else the circumstance would be
very unnatural, and most likely would have prevented David from making
the application which he did, as otherwise it would have appeared
absurd. It is the only part of this parable which is at variance with
nature and fact.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 12:5</span></span>

The man - shall surely die - Literally בן מות ben maveth, "he is a son
of death," a very bad man, and one who deserves to die. But the law did
not sentence a sheep-stealer to death; let us hear it: If a man steal an
ox or a sheep, he shall restore Five Oxen for an ox, and Four Sheep for
a sheep, [Exo 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001); and hence David
immediately says, He shall restore the lamb Fourfold.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 12:7</span></span>

Thou art the man - What a terrible word! And by it David appears to have
been transfixed, and brought into the dust before the messenger of God.

Thou Art this son of death, and thou shalt restore this lamb Fourfold.
It is indulging fancy too much to say David was called, in the course of
a just Providence to pay this fourfold debt? to lose four sons by
untimely deaths, viz., this son of Bath-sheba, on whom David had set his
heart, was slain by the Lord; Amnon, murdered by his brother Absalom;
Absalom, slain in the oak by Joab; and Adonijah, slain by the order of
his brother Solomon, even at the altar of the Lord! The sword and
calamity did not depart from his house, from the murder of wretched
Amnon by his brother to the slaughter of the sons of Zedekiah, before
their father's eyes, by the king of Babylon. His daughter was dishonored
by her own brother, and his wives contaminated publicly by his own son!
How dreadfully, then, was David punished for his sin! Who would repeat
his transgression to share in its penalty? Can his conduct ever be an
inducement to, or an encouragement in, sin? Surely, No. It must ever
fill the reader and the hearer with horror. Behold the goodness and
severity of God! Reader, lay all these solemn things to heart.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 12:8</span></span>

Thy master's wives into thy bosom - Perhaps this means no more than that
he had given him absolute power over every thing possessed by Saul; and
as it was the custom for the new king to succeed even to the wives and
concubines, the whole harem of the deceased king, so it was in this
case; and the possession of the wives was a sure proof that he had got
all regal rights. But could David, as the son-in-law of Saul, take the
wives of his father-in-law? However, we find delicacy was seldom
consulted in these cases; and Absalom lay with his own father's wives in
the most public manner, to show that he had seized on the kingdom,
because the wives of the preceding belonged to the succeeding king, and
to none other.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 12:9</span></span>

Thou hast killed Uriah - Thou art the Murderer, as having planned his
death; the sword of the Ammonites was Thy instrument only.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 12:11</span></span>

I will take thy wives - That is, In the course of my providence I will
permit all this to be done. Had David been faithful, God, by his
providence, would have turned all this aside; but now, by his sin, he
has made that providence his enemy which before was his friend.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 12:13</span></span>

The Lord - hath put away thy sin - Many have supposed that David's sin
was now actually pardoned, but this is perfectly erroneous; David, as an
adulterer, was condemned to death by the law of God; and he had
according to that law passed sentence of death upon himself. God alone,
whose law that was could revoke that sentence, or dispense with its
execution; therefore Nathan, who had charged the guilt home upon his
conscience, is authorized to give him the assurance that he should not
die a temporal death for it: The Lord hath put away thy sin; thou shalt
not die. This is all that is contained in the assurance given by Nathan:
Thou shalt not die that temporal death; thou shalt be preserved alive,
that thou mayest have time to repent, turn to God, and find mercy. If
the fifty-first Psalm, as is generally supposed, was written on this
occasion, then it is evident (as the Psalm must have been written after
this interview) that David had not received pardon for his sin from God
at the time he composed it; for in it he confesses the crime in order to
find mercy.

There is something very remarkable in the words of Nathan: The Lord also
hath Put Away thy sin; thou shalt not die; גם יהוה העביר חטאתך לא תמות
gam Yehovah heebir chattathecha lo thamuth, Also Jehovah Hath Caused thy
sin To Pass Over, or transferred thy sin; Thou shalt not die. God has
transferred the legal punishment of this sin to the child; He shall die,
Thou shalt not die; and this is the very point on which the prophet
gives him the most direct information: The child that is born unto thee
shall Surely die; מות ימות moth yamuth, dying he shall die - he shall be
in a dying state seven days, and then he shall die. So God immediately
struck the child, and it was very sick.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 12:16</span></span>

David - besought God for the child - How could he do so, after the
solemn assurance that he had from God that the child should die? The
justice of God absolutely required that the penalty of the law should be
exacted; either the father or the son shall die. This could not be
reversed.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 12:20</span></span>

David arose from the earth, and washed - Bathing, anointing the body,
and changing the apparel, are the first outward signs among the Hindoos
of coming out of a state of mourning or sickness.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 12:22</span></span>

Who can tell - David, and indeed all others under the Mosaic
dispensation, were so satisfied that all God's threatenings and promises
were conditional, that even in the most positive assertions relative to
judgments, etc., they sought for a change of purpose. And
notwithstanding the positive declaration of Nathan, relative to the
death of the child, David sought for its life, not knowing but that
might depend on some unexpressed condition, such as earnest prayer,
fasting, humiliation, etc., and in these he continued while there was
hope. When the child died, he ceased to grieve, as he now saw that this
must be fruitless. This appears to be the sole reason of David's
importunity.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 12:23</span></span>

I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me - It is not clear
whether David by this expressed his faith in the immortality of the
soul; going to him may only mean, I also shall die, and be gathered to
my fathers, as he is. But whether David expressed this or not, we know
that the thing is true; and it is one of the most solid grounds of
consolation to surviving friends that they shall by and by be joined to
them in a state of conscious existence. This doctrine has a very
powerful tendency to alleviate the miseries of human life and reconcile
us to the death of most beloved friends. And were we to admit the
contrary, grief, in many cases, would wear out its subject before it
wore out itself. Even the heathens derived consolation from the
reflection that they should meet their friends in a state of conscious
existence. And a saying in Cicero De Senectute, which he puts in the
mouth of Cato of Utica, has been often quoted, and is universally
admired: -

O praelarum diem, cum ad illud divinum animorum concilium coetumque
proficiscar, cumque ex hac turba et colluvione discedam! Proficiscar
enim non ad eos solum viros de quibus ante dixi; sed etiam ad Catonem
meum quo nemo vir melior natus est, nemo pietate praestantior: cujus a
me corpus crematum est; quod contra decuit ab illo meum. Animus vero non
me deserens, sed respectans, in ea profecto loca discessit, quo mihi
ipsi cernebat esse veniendum: quem ego meum catum fortiter ferre visus
sum: non quod aequo animo ferrem: sed me ipse consolabar, existimans,
non longinquum inter nos digressum et discessum fore. Cato Major, De
Senectute, in fin.

"O happy day, (says he), when I shall quit this impure and corrupt
multitude, and join myself to that divine company and council of souls
who have quitted the earth before me! There I shall find, not only those
illustrious personages to whom I have spoken, but also my Cato, who I
can say was one of the best men ever born, and whom none ever excelled
in virtue and piety. I have placed his body on that funeral pyre whereon
he ought to have laid mine. But his soul has not left me; and, without
losing sight of me, he has only gone before into a country where he saw
I should soon rejoin him. This my lot I seem to bear courageously; not
indeed that I do bear it with resignation, but I shall comfort myself
with the persuasion that the interval between his departure and mine
will not be long."

And we well know who has taught us not to sorrow as those without hope
for departed friends.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 12:24</span></span>

David comforted Bath-sheba - His extraordinary attachment to this
beautiful woman was the cause of all his misfortunes.

He called his name Solomon - This name seems to have been given
prophetically, for שלמה sholomah signifies peaceable, and there was
almost uninterrupted peace during his reign.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 12:25</span></span>

Called - Jedidiah - ידידיה, literally, the beloved of the Lord. This is
the first instance I remember of a minister of God being employed to
give a name to the child of one of his servants. But it is strange that
the name given by the father was that alone which prevailed.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa2 12:26</span></span>

And took the royal city - How can this be, when Joab sent to David to
come to take the city, in consequence of which David did come and take
that city? The explanation seems to be this: Rabbah was composed of a
city and citadel; the former, in which was the king's residence, Joab
had taken, and supposed he could soon render himself master of the
latter, and therefore sends to David to come and take it, lest, he
taking the whole, the city should be called after his name.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa2 12:27</span></span>

And have taken the city of waters - The city where the tank or reservoir
was that supplied the city and suburbs with water. Some think that the
original, לכדתי את עיר המים lachadti eth ir hammayim, should be
translated I have intercepted, or cut off, the waters of the city: and
Houbigant translates the place, et aquas ab urbe jam derivavi; "And I
have already drawn off the waters from the city." This perfectly agrees
with the account in Josephus, who says των τε ὑδατων αυτους
αποτεμνομενος, having cut off their waters, Antiq., lib. vii., cap. 7.
This was the reason why David should come speedily, as the citadel,
deprived of water, could not long hold out.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 12:30</span></span>

The weight whereof was a talent of gold - If this talent was only seven
pounds, as Whiston says, David might have carried it on his head with
little difficulty; but this weight, according to common computation,
would amount to more than one hundred pounds!

If, however, משקלה mishkalah be taken for the value, not the weight then
all is plain as the worth of the crown will be about 5075 15s. 7d.
sterling. Now this seems to be the true sense, because of the added
words with the precious stones; i.e., the gold of the crown, and the
jewels with which it was adorned, were equal in value to a talent of
gold.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 12:31</span></span>

He brought forth the people - And put them under saws. From this
representation a great cry has been raised against "David's
unparalleled, if not diabolic, cruelty." I believe this interpretation
was chiefly taken from the parallel place, [Ch1
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#003), where it is said, he cut them
with saws, and with axes, etc. Instead of וישר vaiyasar, he sawed, we
have here (in Samuel) וישם vaiyasem, he put them; and these two words
differ from each other only in a part of a single letter, ר resh for ם
mem. And it is worthy of remark, that instead of וישר vaiyasar, he
sawed, in [Ch1 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#003), six or seven MSS.
collated by Dr. Kennicott have וישם vaiyasem, he put them; nor is there
found any various reading in all the MSS. yet collated for the text in
this chapter, that favors the common reading in Chronicles. The meaning
therefore is, He made the people slaves, and employed them in sawing,
making iron harrows, or mining, (for the word means both), and in hewing
of wood, and making of brick. Sawing asunder, hacking, chopping, and
hewing human beings, have no place in this text, no more than they had
in David's conduct towards the Ammonites.

It is surprising, and a thing to be deplored, that in this and similar
cases our translators had not been more careful to sift the sense of the
original words by which they would have avoided a profusion of
exceptionable meanings with which they have clothed many passages of the
sacred writings. Though I believe our translation to be by far the best
in any language, ancient or modern, yet I am satisfied it stands much in
need of revision. Most of the advantages which our unbelievers have
appeared to have over certain passages of Scripture, have arisen from an
inaccurate or false translation of the terms in the original; and an
appeal to this has generally silenced the gainsayers. But in the time in
which our translation was made, Biblical criticism was in its infancy,
if indeed it did exist; and we may rather wonder that we find things so
well, than be surprised that they are no better.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 13](sa2013)

</div>
