<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol006)  [Next](sol008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 7:0</span></span>

A farther description of the bride, [Sol
7:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001). Her invitation to the
bridegroom, [Sol 7:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#010).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 7:1</span></span>

How beautiful are thy feet with shoes - "How graceful is thy walking."
In the sixth chapter the bridegroom praises the Shulamite, as we might
express it, from head to foot. Here he begins a new description, taking
her from foot to head.

The shoes, sandals, or slippers of the Eastern ladies are most
beautifully formed, and richly embroidered. The majestic walk of a
beautiful woman in such shoes is peculiarly grand. And to show that such
a walk is intended, he calls her a prince's daughter.

The joints of thy thighs - Must refer to the ornaments on the beautiful
drawers, which are in general use among ladies of quality in most parts
of the East.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 7:2</span></span>

Thy navel is like a round goblet - This may also refer to some
ornamental dress about the loins. These suppositions are rendered very
probable from hundreds of the best finished and highly decorated
drawings of Asiatic ladies in my own collection, where every thing
appears in the drawings, as in nature.

A heap of wheat set about with lilies - This is another instance of the
same kind. The richly embroidered dresses in the above drawings may
amply illustrate this also. Ainsworth supposes the metaphor is taken
from a pregnant woman; the child in the womb being nourished by means of
the umbilical cord or navel string, till it is brought into the world.
After which it is fed by means of the mother's breasts, which are
immediately mentioned. Possibly the whole may allude to the bride's
pregnancy.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 7:3</span></span>

Thy two breasts - Where the hair and breasts are fine, they are the
highest ornaments of the person of a female.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 7:4</span></span>

Thy neck - as a tower of ivory - High, white, and ornamented with
jewellery, as the tower of David was with bucklers. See on [Sol
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004) (note).

The fish - pools in Heshbon - Clear, bright, and serene. These must have
been very beautiful to have been introduced here in comparison. These
two fountains appear to have been situated at the gate that led from
Heshbon to Rabba, or Rabboth Ammon. There is a propriety in this
metaphor, because fountains are considered to be the eyes of the earth.

Thy nose - as the tower of Lebanon - There was doubtless a propriety in
this similitude also, which cannot now be discerned. If we are to
understand the similitude as taken from the projecting form of the nose,
even here I see nothing striking in the metaphor; for surely the tower
of Lebanon did not project from the mountain as the human nose does from
the face. It is better to acknowledge that there was undoubtedly some
fit resemblances; but in what circumstance we know not. But some
commentators are always extolling the correctness of the imagery in
those very difficult places, where no soul sees the similitude but
themselves.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 7:5</span></span>

Shine head - like Carmel - Rising majestically upon thy neck, and above
thy shoulders, as Mount Carmel does in its district. Carmel was the name
of the mountain where Elijah had his contest with the prophets of Baal.
See [Kg1 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019), etc.

The hair of thine head like purple - Ornamented with ribbons and
jewellery of this tint.

The king is held in the galleries - Or is detained in the antechamber.
His heart is captivated by thy person and conduct. Some understand the
ringlets of the bride's hair.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 7:6</span></span>

How fair and how pleasant - Thou art every way beautiful, and in every
respect calculated to inspire pleasure and delight.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 7:7</span></span>

Like to a palm tree - Which is remarkably straight, taper, and elegant.

And thy breasts to clusters of grapes - Dates are the fruit of the palm
tree; they grow in clusters; and it is these, not grapes, which are
intended.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 7:8</span></span>

I will go up to the palm tree - I will take hold on the boughs of this
tree, and climb up by them, in order to gather the clusters of dates at
the top. The rubric here in the old MS. interprets this of the cross of
Christ.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 7:9</span></span>

The roof of thy mouth like the best wine - The voice or conversation of
the spouse is most probably what is meant.

Causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak - As good wine has a
tendency to cause the most backward to speak fluently when taken in
moderation; so a sight of thee, and hearing the charms of thy
conversation, is sufficient to excite the most taciturn to speak, and
even to become eloquent in thy praises.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 7:10</span></span>

I am my beloved's, and his desire is toward me - It is worthy of remark
that the word which we translate his desire is the very same used [Gen
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016) : Thy desire, thy ruling
appetite, תשוקתך teshukathech, shall be to thy husband, and he shall
rule over thee. This was a part of the woman's curse. Now here it seems
to be reversed; for the bride says, I am my beloved's, and his desire or
ruling appetite and affection, תשוקתו teshukatho, is עלי ali, Upon Me.
The old MS. translates this with considerable force: - "I to my leef,
and to me the turnynge of him".

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 7:11</span></span>

Let us go forth into the field - It has been conjectured that the
bridegroom arose early every morning, and left the bride's apartment,
and withdrew to the country; often leaving her asleep, and commanding
her companions not to disturb her till she should awake of herself. Here
the bride wishes to accompany her spouse to the country, and spend a
night at his country house.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sol 7:12</span></span>

Let us get up early to the vineyards - When in the country, we shall
have the better opportunity to contemplate the progress of the spring
vegetation; and there she promises to be peculiarly affectionate to him.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 7:13</span></span>

The mandrakes give a smell - See the note on [Gen
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#014), where the mandrake is
particularly described; from which this passage will receive
considerable light. The reader is requested to consult it.

All manner of pleasant fruits - Fruits new and old; flowers and herbs of
every kind which the season could yield. The literal sense, allowing for
the concealing metaphors, is, I believe, of a widely different nature
from what is generally given. But this must be left to the reader's
sagacity and prudence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 8](sol008)

</div>
