<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol007)  [Next](isa000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 8:0</span></span>

The love of the bride to her spouse, and the nature of that love, [Sol
8:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#001). The younger sister, [Sol
8:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#008). Solomon's vineyard, [Sol
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#011), [Sol
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#012). The confidence of the bride and
bridegroom in each other, [Sol 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#013),
[Sol 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#014).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 8:1</span></span>

O that thou wert as my brother - The bride, fearing that her fondness
for her spouse might be construed into too great a familiarity, wishes
that he were her little brother; and then she might treat him in the
most affectionate manner, and kiss him even in the streets without
suspicion, and without giving offense to any one.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 8:2</span></span>

Would - bring thee into my mother's house, who would instruct me - She
would teach me how to conduct myself towards thee, as she would how to
nurse a young child.

To drink of spiced wine - Wine rendered peculiarly strong and
invigorating. The bride and bridegroom on the wedding day both drank out
of the same cup, to show that they were to enjoy and equally bear
together the comforts and adversities of life.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 8:3</span></span>

His left hand - See on [Sol 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#006)
(note).

With the fourth verse the Sixth night of the marriage week is supposed
to end.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 8:5</span></span>

That cometh up from the wilderness - Perhaps the words of the daughters
of Jerusalem, who, seeing the bride returning from the country, leaning
on the arm of her beloved, are filled with admiration at her excellent
carriage and beauty.

I raised thee up under the apple tree - The original of this clause is
obscure, and has given birth to various translations. The following is
nearly literal: "Under the apple tree I excited thee (to espouse me):
there, thy mother contracted thee; - there, she that brought thee forth
contracted thee (to me). Or it may be understood of the following
circumstance: The bridegroom found her once asleep under an apple tree,
and awoke her; and this happened to be the very place where her mother,
taken in untimely labor, had brought her into the world." And here the
bridegroom, in his fondness and familiarity, recalls these little
adventures to her memory.

The Vulgate gives this an abominable meaning.

Sub arbore malo suscitavi te: ibi corrupta est mater tua; ibi violata
est genetrix tua; "I raised thee up under the apple tree: it was there
that thy mother was corrupted; it was there that she who brought thee
forth was violated." Spiritually, all this is applied to Eve losing her
purity by sin; and Jesus as the promised seed raising her up by the
promise of mercy, through the blood of his cross. But the text says
nothing of this.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 8:6</span></span>

Set me as a seal upon thine heart - It was customary in the Levant and
other places to make impressions of various kinds upon the arms, the
breast, and other parts. I have seen these often: some slight punctures
are made, and the place rubbed over with a sort of blue powder that,
getting between the cuticle and cutis, is never discharged; it continues
in all its distinctness throughout life. The figures of young women are
frequently thus impressed on the arms and on the breasts. If the bride
alludes to any thing of this kind, which is very probable, the
interpretation is easy. Let me be thus depicted upon thine arm, which
being constantly before thy eyes, thou wilt never forget me; and let me
be thus depicted upon thy breast, the emblem of the share I have in thy
heart and affections. Do this as a proof of the love I bear to thee,
which is such as nothing but death can destroy; and do it to prevent any
jealousy I might feel, which is as cruel as the grave, and as deadly as
fiery arrows or poisoned darts shot into the body.

A most vehement flame - שלהבתיה shalhebethyah, "the flame of God;" for
the word is divided שלהבת יה shalhebeth Yah, "the flame of Jehovah," by
one hundred and sixteen of Dr. Kennicott's MSS., and by one hundred and
fourteen of those of De Rossi. It may mean the lightning; or, as our
text understands it, a most vehement or intense fire.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 8:7</span></span>

Many waters - Neither common nor uncommon adversities, even of the most
ruinous nature, can destroy love when it is pure; and pure love is such
that nothing can procure it. If it be not excited naturally, no money
can purchase it, no property can procure it, no arts can persuade it.
How vain is the thought of old rich men hoping to procure the affections
of young women by loading them with presents and wealth! No woman can
command her affections; they are not in her power. Where they do not
rise spontaneously, they can never exist. "If a man would give all the
substance of his house for love, it would be utterly contemned." Let the
old, as well as the gay and the giddy, think of this.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 8:8</span></span>

We have a little sister - This young girl belonged most probably to the
bride.

She hath no breasts - She is not yet marriageable.

What shall we do for our sister - How shall we secure her comfort and
welfare?

In the day when she shall be spoken for? - When any person shall demand
her in marriage.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 8:9</span></span>

If she be a wall - All these expressions, says Calmet, show that it was
necessary to provide a husband for this young sister. For a woman
without a husband is like a wall without towers, and without defense; is
like a gate or door without bar or lock; and like a city without walls.
They must therefore provide for their sister a rich, powerful, and
illustrious man; qualities here figured by towers or palaces of silver,
and doors of cedar. As it is customary to build towers upon a wall, and
to put bolts and bars upon a door in order to secure it, so the
expressions may point out the defense, protection, and guardianship
which they imagined this young woman to require.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 8:10</span></span>

I am a wall, and my breasts like towers - I am become marriageable, and
I stood in need of the defense I have now in my beloved; and as soon as
I was so, and became pleasing in the eyes of my beloved, I was given to
him in marriage, and have ever since found favor in his sight. As soon
then as my sister is in my state, let a proper match be sought out for
her. These expressions show the solicitude which the bride felt for her
sister, and in her favor she wishes to interest her spouse.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 8:11</span></span>

Solomon had a vineyard - Calmet translates and paraphrases the Hebrew of
these two verses thus: "[Sol 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#011) :
Solomon has a vineyard at Baal-hamon: he has let it out to keepers, each
of whom for the fruit of it was to bring a thousand pieces of silver.
[Sol 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#012) : As for me, my vineyard is
before me; that is, it is my own; I am its proprietor. Keep thyself, O
Solomon, thy thousand pieces of silver, and let those who dress (thy
vineyard) have two hundred for their trouble. I neither envy thee thy
vineyard, nor them their profits. I am satisfied with my own. My beloved
is my vineyard - my heritage; I would not change him for all the riches
of the universe."

Some suppose that there is a reference here to some property which
Pharaoh had given to Solomon with his daughter. See Harmer's Outlines,
where this subject is considered at large.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 8:13</span></span>

Thou that dwellest in the gardens - This is supposed to refer to the
bridegroom asking permission of his spouse early in the morning to
retire, as was his usual custom. He intimates the companions were
waiting to hear, and he wished to hear it in the way of permission to
depart.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sol 8:14</span></span>

Make haste, my beloved - These appear to be the words of the bride
giving permission, but entreating him to speed his return. What these
mountains of spices were, we cannot particularly tell; but they must
have been thus named from their producing the trees on which the spices
grew. They might have been the same as the mountains of Bether, [Sol
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017) (note), or the mountains of
myrrh, [Sol 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#006) (note); where see the
notes.

Here ends the seventh night of the marriage week.

Thus ends this most singular book; the oldest pastoral in the world, if
it may be ranked among this species of writing. To whatever species of
composition it belongs, it is, beyond all controversy, the finest, the
most sublime for imagery and colouring, that ever came from the pen of
man.

In the preceding notes I have carefully avoided all attempts to
spiritualize this song. My reasons I have already given in the
introduction; and in the course of writing these short notes I have seen
no cause to alter my opinion. Any man may allegorize it; that is an easy
matter; for when he once considers it to be an allegory, his own creed
will furnish him with enough to say, write, or preach, upon the
spiritual meanings of every part, which will be an exhibition of his own
confession of faith! But when he has finished his work, the question
will recur, By what authority do you give it these meanings? And till
the day of judgment none shall be able to say, "I have the authority of
God for my exposition."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Introduction](isa000)

</div>
