<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol001)  [Next](sol003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 2:0</span></span>

A description of the bridegroom, and his love to the bride, [Sol
2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001). A fine description of spring,
[Sol 2:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#010). The mutual love of both,
[Sol 2:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 2:1</span></span>

I am the rose of Sharon - Sharon was a very fruitful place, where
David's cattle were fed, [Ch1 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#029).
It is mentioned as a place of excellence, [Isa
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#002), and as a place of flocks, [Isa
65:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#010), Perhaps it would be better,
with almost all the versions, to translate, "I am the rose of the
field." The bridegroom had just before called her fair; she with a
becoming modesty, represents her beauty as nothing extraordinary, and
compares herself to a common flower of the field. This, in the warmth of
his affection, he denies, insisting that she as much surpasses all other
maidens as the flower of the lily does the bramble, [Sol
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#002).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 2:3</span></span>

As the apple tree - The bride returns the compliment, and says, As the
apple or citron tree is among the trees of the wood, so is the
bridegroom among all other men.

I sat down under his shadow - I am become his spouse, and my union with
him makes me indescribably happy.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 2:4</span></span>

He brought me to the banqueting house - Literally, the house of wine.
The ancients preserved their wine, not in barrels or dark cellars under
ground, as we do, but in large pitchers, ranged against the wall in some
upper apartment in the house, the place where they kept their most
precious effects. We have a proof of this in Homer: -

Ως φαν· ὁ δ' ὑψοραφον θαλομον κατεβησατο πατρος

Ευρυν, ὁθι νητος χρυσος και χαλκος εκειτο,

Εσθης τ' εν χηλοισιν, ἁλις τ' ευωδες ελαιον.

Εν δε πιθοι οινοιο παλαιου ἡδυποτοιο

Εστασαν, ακρητον θειον ποτον εντος εχοντες,

Ἑξειης ποτε τοιχον αρηροτες· ειποτ' Οδυσσευς

Οικαδε νοστησειε, και αλγεα πολλα μογησας.

Κληΐσται δ' επεσαν σανιδες πυκινως αραρυιαι,

Δικλιδες· εν δε γυνη ταμιη νυκτας τε και ημαρ

Εσχ', κ. τ. λ.. Od. lib. ii., ver. 337.

Meantime the lofty rooms the prince surveys,

Where lay the treasures of th' Ithacian race.

Here, ruddy brass and gold refulgent blazed;

There, polished chests embroider'd gestures graced.

Here, pots of oil breathed forth a rich perfume;

There, jars of wine in rows adorn'd the dome.

(Pure flavorous wine, by gods in bounty given,

And worthy to exalt the feasts of heaven).

Untouch'd they stood, till, his long labors o'er,

The great Ulysses reach'd his native shore.

A double strength of bars secured the gates;

Fast by the door wise Euryclea waits, etc.

Pope.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 2:5</span></span>

Stay me with flagons - I believe the original words mean some kind of
cordials with which we are unacquainted. The versions in general
understand some kind of ointment or perfumes by the first term. I
suppose the good man was perfectly sincere who took this for his text,
and, after having repeated, Stay me with flagons, comfort me with
apples, for I am sick of love sat down, perfectly overwhelmed with his
own feelings, and was not able to proceed! But while we admit such a
person's sincerity, who can help questioning his judgment?

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 2:7</span></span>

I charge you - by the roes - This was probably some rustic mode of
adjuration. The verses themselves require little comment. With this
verse the first night of the first day is supposed to end.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 2:8</span></span>

Behold, he cometh leaping - This appears to be highly characteristic of
the gambols of the shepherds, and points out the ecstasy with which
those who were enamoured ran to their mates. It is supposed that the
second day's eclogue begins at this verse. The author of what was then
called A New Translation of Solomon's Song, observes,

1\. The bride relates how the bridegroom, attended by his companions,
had come under her window, and called upon her to come forth and enjoy
the beauties of the spring, [Sol
2:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#009), etc.

2\. She then returns to her narration, [Sol
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001). The bridegroom did not come
according to her wishes. Night came on; she did not find him in her bed;
she went out to seek him; found him, and brought him to her mother's
pavilion, [Sol 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#004); and then, as
before, conjures the virgins not to disturb his repose, [Sol
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#005).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 2:9</span></span>

He standeth behind our wall - This may refer to the wall by which the
house was surrounded, the space between which and the house constituted
the court. He was seen first behind the wall, and then in the court; and
lastly came to the window of his bride's chamber.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 2:11</span></span>

The winter is past - Mr. Harmer has made some good collections on this
part, from Drs. Shaw and Russet, which I shall transcrilbe. One part of
the winter is distinguished from the rest of it by the people of the
East, on account of the severity of the cold. At Aleppo it lasts about
forty days, and is called by the natives maurbanie. I would propose it
to the consideration of the learned, whether the word here used, and
translated winter, may not be understood to mean what the Aleppines
express by the term maurbanie. It occurs nowhere else in the Old
Testament; and another word is used for the rainy part of the year in
general. If this thought be admitted, it will greatly illustrate the
words of the bridegroom: Lo, the winter is past; the rain is over, and
gone. For then the last clause will not be explanatory of the first, and
signify that the moist part of the year was entirely past; with which,
Dr. Russel assures us, all pleasantness withdraws at Aleppo; but the
words will import: "The maurbanie is past and over; the weather is
become agreeably warm; the rain too is just ceased, and consequently
hath left us the prospect of several days of serenity and undisturbed
pleasantness."

The weather of Judea was in this respect, I presume, like that at
Algiers; where, after two or three days of rain, there is usually,
according to Dr. Shaw, "a week, a fortnight, or more, of fair and good
weather. Of such a sort of cessation of rain alone, the bridegroom,
methinks, is here to be understood; not of the absolute termination of
the rainy season, and the summer droughts being come on. And if so, what
can the time that is past mean but the maurbanie? Indeed, Dr. Russel, in
giving us an account of the excursions of the English merchants at
Aleppo, has undesignedly furnished us with a good comment on this and
the two following verses. These gentlemen, it seems, dine abroad under a
tent, in spring and autumn on Saturdays, and often on Wednesdays. They
do the same during the good weather in winter; but they live at the
gardens in April, and part of May. In the heat of the summer they dine
at the gardens, as once or twice a week they dine under a tent in autumn
and spring." The cold weather is not supposed by Solomon to have been
long over, since it is distinctly mentioned; and the Aleppines make
these incursions very early; the narcissus flowers during the whole of
the maurbanie; the hyacinths and violets at least before it is quite
over. The appearing of flowers, then, doth not mean the appearing of the
first and earliest flowers, but must rather be understood of the earth's
being covered with them; which at Aleppo is not till after the middle of
February, a small crane's bill appearing on the banks of the river there
about the middle of February, quickly after which comes a profusion of
flowers. The nightingales, too, which are there in abundance, not only
afford much pleasure by their songs in the gardens, but are also kept
tame in the houses, and let out at a small rate to divert such as choose
it in the city; so that no entertainments are made in the spring without
a concert of these birds. No wonder, then, that Solomon makes the
bridegroom speak of the singing of birds; and it teaches us what these
birds are, which are expressly distinguished from turtle doves.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 2:13</span></span>

The fig tree putteth forth her green figs - The fig tree in Judea bears
double crops; the first of which is ripe in spring. But the tree, as I
have elsewhere observed, bears figs all the year through, in the climes
congenial to it. That is, the fig tree has always ripe or unripe fruit
on it. I never saw a healthy tree naked. But in the beginning of spring
they grow fast, and become turgid.

The vines with the tender grape - The versions understand this of the
flowers of the vine. These were formerly put into the new wine (2 lbs.
to every cask) to give it a fine flavour.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sol 2:14</span></span>

My dove - in the clefts of the rock - He compares his bride hiding
herself in her secret chambers and closets to a dove in the clefts of
the rock.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sol 2:15</span></span>

Take us the foxes - That these were ruinous to vines all authors allow.
They love the vine, and they are eaten in autumn in some countries,
according to Galen, when they are very fat with eating the grapes. They
abounded in Judea; and did most damage when the clusters were young and
tender. It is likely that these are the words of the bridegroom to his
companions, just as he was entering the apartment of his spouse. "Take
care of the vineyard: set the traps for the foxes, which are spoiling
the vines; and destroy their young as far as possible."

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sol 2:16</span></span>

My beloved is mine - The words of the bride on his entering: "I am thy
own; thou art wholly mine."

He feedeth among the lilies - The odor with which he is surrounded is as
fine as if he passed the night among the sweetest scented flowers.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sol 2:17</span></span>

Until the day break - Literally, until the day breathe; until the first
dawn, which is usually accompanied with the most refreshing breezes.

The shadows flee away - Referring to the evening or setting of the sun,
at which all shadows vanish.

The mountains of Bether - Translated also mountains of division,
supposed to mean the mountains of Beth-horon.

There was a place called Bithron, [Sa2
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#029), on the other side of Jordan; and
as the name signifies Partition, it might have had its name from the
circumstance of its being divided or separated from Judea by the river
Jordan.

With this chapter the second night is supposed to end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 3](sol003)

</div>
