<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol003)  [Next](sol005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 4:0</span></span>

The bridegroom's description of his bride, her person, her
accomplishments, her chastity, and her general excellence, vv. 1-16.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 4:1</span></span>

Thou hast doves' eyes within thy locks - Perhaps this refers rather to a
sort of veil worn by many of the Eastern women, but especially in Egypt.
It is a species of black cloth made of the hair of some animal, probably
the black goat; is suspended from the head by silken cords, one of which
comes from the crown of the head, down the forehead, to the upper part
of the nose, just under the eyes, at which place the veil begins; for
the forehead and the eyes are uncovered, except the cord above
mentioned, which is ornamented with gold, silver, and precious stones,
according to the circumstances of the wearer. This partial veil not only
covers all the face, the eyes and forehead excepted, but the neck also,
and hangs loosely down over the bosom. One of them, lately brought from
Egypt, now lies before me.

But the clause, within thy locks, מבעד למתך mibbaad letsammathech, is
not well translated, either by ourselves or by the versions. Jerome's
translation is an indication of the meaning: Absque eo quod intrinsecus
latet; without that, or independently of that, which lies hidden within.
The Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic have, besides thy silence. Calmet
contends that none of these gives the true meaning, and that the word
tmu tsemath has not the meaning of hair or locks wherever it occurs, and
has quite a different meaning in [Isa
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#002). St. Jerome on this place
expresses himself thus: Nolentibus gui interpretati sunt transferre
nomen quod in Sancta Scriptura sonat turpitudinem - Ergo Ktmu
tsammathech, quod Aquila posuit, verenda mulieris appellanatur cujus
etymologia apud eos sonat sitiens tuus. Calmet translates: Vous etes
toute belle, won amie; vous etes toute belle: vos yeux sont des yeux de
colombe; sans ce que la pudeur et la modestie tiennent cache. I leave
the translation of these to the learned reader. See another description
under [Sol 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#007) (note).

As a flock of goats - Because it was black and sleek, as the hair of the
goats of Arabia and Palestine is known to be; which, with its fine
undulation, is supposed to bear some resemblance to the curls or plaits
of a woman's tresses. The mountains of Gilead were beyond Jordan, on the
frontiers of Arabia Deserta.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 4:2</span></span>

Thy teeth are like a flock - This comparison appears to be founded on
the evenness, neatness, and whiteness of the newly shorn and newly
washed sheep.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 4:3</span></span>

Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet - Both lips and cheeks were ruddy;
sicut fragmen mali punici - Vulgate. Like the section of a pomegranate,
that side cut off on which is the finest blush. This is a good and apt
metaphor. But the inside may be referred to, as it is finely streaked
with red and white melting into each other. She had beautiful hair,
beautiful eyes, beautiful cheeks and lips, and a most pleasing and
dulcet voice.

Within thy locks - See on [Sol 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001)
(note), and [Sol 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#007) (note).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 4:4</span></span>

Thy neck is like the tower of David - It is certain that bucklers were
frequently hung about towers, both for their ornaments, and to have them
at hand when their use was required; see [Eze
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010). But the allusion here may be to
those pillars which are often seen in armouries on which weapons of
various kinds are hung, formed into a great variety of shapes and very
splendid. Whoever has seen the armoury in the tower of London, or such
like places, has most probably seen something very similar to that of
which the poet speaks.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 4:5</span></span>

Thy two breasts are like two young roes - I have met with many attempts
to support this similitude, or rather to show that there is a
similitude; but I judge them unworthy of citation. The poet speaks the
language of nature; and in a case of this kind, where the impassioned
lover attempts to describe the different perfections of his bride,
language often fails him, and his comparisons and similitudes are often
without strict correctness. In love songs we have heard ladies' necks
compared to that of the swan, not only for its whiteness, but also for
its length! The description here shows more of nature than of art, which
I consider a high recommendation.

Feed among the lilies - It may be the nipples especially, which the poet
compares to the two young roes; and the lilies may refer to the
whiteness of the breasts themselves.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 4:6</span></span>

Until the day break - Until the morning breeze. See [Sol
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017).

The shadows flee away - Till the sun sets.

Mountain of myrrh - Probably the same as the mountains of Bether, [Sol
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017). Mountains where the trees grew
from which myrrh and incense were extracted.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 4:7</span></span>

Thou art all fair - there is no spot in thee - "My beloved, every part
of thee is beautiful; thou hast not a single defect." The description
given of the beauties of Daphne, by Ovid, Metam. lib. 1: ver. 497, has
some similarity to the above verses: -

Spectat inornatos collo pend ere capillos.

Et, quid si comantur? ait. Videt igne micantes

Sideribus similes oculos; videt oscula, quae non

Est vidisse satis. Laudat digitosque, manusque,

Brachiaque, et nudos media plus parte lacertos.

Si qua latent meliora putat.

Her well-turn'd neck he view'd, (her neck was bare),

And on her shoulders her disheveled hair.

O, were it comb'd, said he, with what a grace

Would every waving curl become her face!

He view'd her eyes, like heavenly lamps that shone,

He view'd her lips, too sweet to view alone;

Her taper fingers, and her panting breast.

He praises all he sees; and, for the rest,

Believes the beauties yet unseen the best.

Dryden.

Jayadeva describes the beauty of Radha in nearly the same imagery: "Thy
lips, O thou most beautiful among women, are a bandhujiva flower; the
lustre of the madhuca beams upon thy cheek; thine eye outshines the blue
lotos; thy nose is a bud of the tila; the cunda blossom yields to thy
teeth. Surely thou descendedst from heaven, O slender damsel! attended
by a company of youthful goddesses; and all their beauties are collected
in thee." See these poems, and the short notes at the end.

The same poet has a parallel thought to that in [Sol
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#005), "Thy two breasts," etc. The
companions of Radha thus address her: "Ask those two round hillocks
which receive pure dew drops from the garland playing on thy neck, and
the buds on whose tops start aloft with the thought of thy beloved."

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 4:8</span></span>

My spouse - The כלה callah which we translate spouse, seems to have a
peculiar meaning. Mr. Harmer thinks the Jewish princess is intended by
it; and this seems to receive confirmation from the bridegroom calling
her sister, [Sol 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009), that is, one of
the same stock and country; and thus different from the Egyptian bride.

Mr. Harmer's opinion is very probable, that Two Queens are mentioned in
this song: one Pharaoh's daughter, the other a Jewess. See his outlines.
But I contend for no system relative to this song.

Look from the top of Amana, etc. - Solomon, says Calmet, by an admirable
poetic fiction, represents his beloved as a mountain nymph, wholly
occupied in hunting the lion and the leopard on the mountains of
Lebanon, Amana, Shenir, and Hermon. As a bold and undisciplined virgin,
who is unwilling to leave her wild and rural retreats, he invites her to
come from those hills; and promises to deck her with a crown and to make
her his bride. Thus the poets represent their goddess Diana, and even
Venus herself: -

Per juga, per sylvas, dumosaque saxa vagatur

Nuda genu, vestem ritu succincta Dianae;

Hortaturque canes; tutaeque animalia praedae,

Aut pronos lepores, aut celsum in cornua cervum,

Aut agitat damas: at fortibus abstinet apris.

MET. lib. x., ver. 535.

Now buskin'd like the virgin huntress goes

Through woods, and pathless wilds, and mountain snows.

With her own tuneful voice she joys to cheer

The panting hounds that chase the flying deer.

She runs the labyrinth of the fearful hares,

But fearless beasts and dangerous prey forbears.

Mount Libanus separates Phoenicia from Syria. Amanus is between Syria
and Silicia. Shenir and Hermon are beyond Jordan, to the south of
Damascus and Mount Libanus, and northward of the mountains of Gilead.
Hermon and Shenir are but different parts of the same chain of mountains
which separates Trachonitis, or the country of Manasses, from Arabia
Deserta. For these places, see [Kg2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#012), and [Deu
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#009), where they are probably meant.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 4:9</span></span>

Thou hast ravished my heart - לבבתני libbabtini, "Thou hast hearted me,"
i.e., taken away my heart; as we say, "He has barked the tree," i.e., he
has stripped it of its bark; "He has fleeced the flock," i.e., deprived
them of their wool.

With one of thine eyes - באצד מעיניך beachad meeynayich. This has been
thought a harsh expression, and various emendations have been sought.
The Masoretes have put באצת beachath, "at once," in the margin; and this
is confirmed by twenty of Kennicott's MSS. but De Rossi does not notice
it. It is scarceiy necessary; the sense to me is clear and good without
it. "Even one of thine eyes, or one glance of thine eyes, has been
sufficient to deprive me of all power; it has completely overcome me;"
for glance may be understood, and such forms of speech are common in all
languages, when speaking on such subjects. If even taken literally, the
sense is good; for the poet may refer to a side glance, shot in passing
by or turning away, where only one eye could be seen. I think this a
better sense than that which is obtained from the Masoretic emendation.

With one chain of thy neck - Probably referring to the play of the
cervical muscles, rather than to necklaces, or ringlets of hair.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 4:10</span></span>

How much better is thy love - דדיך dodayich; Hebrew. mastoi sou;
Septuagint. Ubera tua; Vulgate. "Thy breasts." And so all the versions,
except the Chaldee.

Smell of thine ointments - Perfumes.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 4:11</span></span>

Thy lips - drop as the honey-comb - Thy words are as delicious to my
heart as the first droppings of the honey-comb are to the palate.

Honey and milk are under thy tongue - Eloquence and persuasive speech
were compared among the ancients to honey and milk.

Thus Homer, Iliad, lib. i., ver. 247: -

Τοισι δε Νεστωρ

Ηδυεπης ανορουσε, λιγυς Πυλιων αγορητης.

Του και απο γλωσσης μελιτος γλυκιων ῥεεν αυδη.

Experienced Nestor, in persuasion skill'd,

Words sweet as honey from his lips distill'd.

But the figure is common to all writers and languages. A similar
expression will be seen in the Gitagovinda.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sol 4:12</span></span>

A garden enclosed - a spring shut up, a fountain sealed - Different
expressions to point out the fidelity of the bride, or of the Jewish
queen. See the outlines. She is unsullied, a chaste, pure virgin. None
has ever entered into this garden; none has yet tasted of this spring;
the seal of this fountain has never been broken. Among the Athenians,
the interior part of the house, called the women's apartment, was not
only locked but sealed; so Aristophan., Thesmoph. ver. 422: -

Ειτα δια τουτον ταις γυναικωνιτισιν

Σφραγιδας εμβαλλουσιν ηδη και μοχλους.

And on this account, to the women's apartment

They place seals as well as bolts.

And seal, as applicable to chaste conduct, is a phrase well known to the
Greeks. Aeschylus, in the Agamemnon, praises a woman, σημαντη ριον ουδεν
διαφψειρασαν, who had not violated her seal of conjugal faith. But
Nonnus, lib. ii., uses the form of speech exactly as Solomon does with
reference to a pure virgin; he says, Αψαυστον ἑης σφρηγιδα κορειης; "She
had preserved the seal of her virginity untouched." All this is plain;
but how many will make metaphors out of metaphors!

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 4:13</span></span>

Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates - This seems to refer to the
fecundity of the bride or Jewish queen; to the former it would be a
prediction; to the latter, a statement of what had already taken place.
The word פרדס pardes, which we translate an orchard, is the same which
has given birth to our paradise, a garden of pleasure. The other
expressions, in this and the following verse, seem to refer wholly to
matters of a connubial nature.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sol 4:16</span></span>

A fountain of gardens - Perhaps גנים gannim, "gardens," was originally
ציים chaiyim, "lives," a living fountain, a continual spring. See
Houbigant. But this is expressed afterwards; though there would be
nothing improper in saying, "a living fountain, a well of living waters,
and streams from Mount Lebanon." A fountain of gardens may mean one so
abundant as to be sufficient to supply nany gardens, to water many plots
of ground, an exuberant fountain. This is the allusion; the reference is
plain enough.

Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south - It is granted that the south
wind in Palestine, in the summer, is extremely hot and troublesome;
therefore, another interpretation of this passage has been proposed by
Mr. Harmer; who thinks בואי boi, which we render come, signifies enter
into thy repositories; and, therefore, supposes the true interpretation
of the words to be as follows: "Arise, thou north wind, (and retire,
thou south), blow upon my garden; let the spices thereof flow forth,
that my beloved may come into his garden, invited by the coolness and
fragrancy of the air, and may eat his pleasant fruits; for, if the south
wind blow, the excessive heat will forbid his taking the air, and oblige
him to shut close the doors and windows of his apartments." Others think
that he wishes the winds from all directions to carry throughout the
land the fume of his spices, virtue, and perfections.

Let my beloved come into his garden - This is the invitation of the
bride: and if we look not for far-fetched meanings, the sense is
sufficiently evident. But commentators on this song sometimes take a
literal sense where the metaphor is evident; at other times they build
an allegory upon a metaphor. The Gitagovinda has an elegant passage
similar to this. See the place, Part VII, beginning with Enter, sweet
Radha.

The whole of this chapter is considered to be unconnected with any
particular time of the marriage ceremonies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 5](sol005)

</div>
