<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](ecc012)  [Next](sol001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to the Canticles,orSong of Solomon

The book before us is called in the Hebrew שיר השירים Shir Hashshirim,
"The Song of Songs;" or, "An Ode of the Odes:" which might be
understood, "An Ode taken or selected from others of a similar kind;"
or, "An Ode the most excellent of all others;" this being an idiom
common to the Hebrew language: e.g., the God of gods is the supreme God;
the Lord of lords, the supreme Lord; the King of kings, the supreme
King; the heaven of heavens, the supreme or highest heaven. It may
therefore be designed to express "a song of the utmost perfection; one
of the best that existed, or had ever been penned." Perhaps the title
may have a reference to the other poetical compositions of Solomon,
which were no less than one thousand and five; and this was considered
the most excellent of the whole, and the only one that remains, unless
we suppose Solomon, with some of the Jews, to be the author of Psalms 72
and [Psa 127:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001) : but this cannot be
proved.

There have been some doubts concerning the author of this book. Some of
the rabbins supposed it to be the work of the prophet Isaiah; but this
sentiment never gained much credit. Most have, without hesitation,
attributed it to Solomon, whose name it bears; and if the book of
Ecclesiastes be his, this will follow in course, as the style is exactly
the same, allowing for the difference of the subject. Both books seem to
have been written about the same time, and to have had the same author.

This book, if written by Solomon, could not have been written in his old
age, as some have supposed the book of Ecclesiastes to have been; which
sentiment is, I think, sufficiently disproved; for we find that long
before Solomon's old age he had three hundred wives, and seven hundred
concubines; but at the time this Song was written, Solomon had only
sixty wives and eighty concubines. And the Song most certainly
celebrates a marriage; whether between Solomon and the daughter of
Pharaoh, or between him and some Jewish princess, has not been fully
agreed on among critics and commentators. It is most likely to have been
a juvenile or comparatively juvenile production; and indeed the high and
glowing colouring, and the strength of the images, are full proofs of
this. Though Anacreon made amatory odes when he was bald-headed, yet
neither he nor any one else, humanly speaking, could have made such odes
as the Canticles when stricken in years.

But to what denomination of writing do the Canticles belong? Are they
mere Odes, or Idyls, or Pastorals; or are they an Epithalamium? Let us
define these terms, and examine the Song of Solomon by them.

1\. The Ode is generally understood to be a species of poetry containing
sublime and important matter, always sung, or accompanied by the harp,
or some proper musical instrument.

2\. The Idyl implies a short poem, containing some adventure.

3\. The Pastoral contains what belongs to shepherds, and their
occupations.

4\. The Epithalamium is the congratulatory song, sung to a new married
pair, wishing them abundant blessings, a numerous and happy offspring,
etc.

Strictly speaking, the Book of Canticles falls under neither of these
descriptions: it is rather a composition sui generis, and seems to
partake more of the nature of what we call a Mask, than any thing else;
an entertainment for the guests who attended the marriage ceremony, with
a dramatic cast throughout the whole, though the persons who speak and
act are not formally introduced. There are so many touches in the form
and manner of this Song like those in the Comus of Milton, that it leads
me to doubt whether the English poet has not taken the idea of his mask
from the Jewish.

As to the persons, chiefly concerned, it is generally believed that
Solomon and Pharaoh's daughter are the bridegroom and bride; with their
proper attendants, viz., companions of the bridegroom, and companions of
the bride, with certain mutes, who only appear, or are mentioned by
others, without taking any particular part in the transactions.

But it is much more easy to be satisfied on the species of composition
to which this book belongs, than on the meaning of the book itself. Is
it to be understood in the obvious manner in which it presents itself?
And are Solomon and his bride, their friends and companions, to be
considered as mere dramatis personae? Or are they typical or
representative persons? Does this marriage represent a celestial union?
Do the speeches of each contain Divine doctrines? Are the metaphors,
taken from earthly things, to be understood of spiritual matters? In a
word, does Solomon here represent Jesus Christ. Is the daughter of
Pharaoh the Christian Church; or, according to some Roman Catholics, the
Virgin Mary? Are watchmen, vineyard-keepers, shepherds, etc., the
ministers of the Gospel? Wine and vartous fruits, the influences and
graces of the Divine Spirit? etc., etc. How multitudinous and positive
are the affirmative answers to these questions! And yet, though the many
agree in the general principle, how various their expositions of the
different parts of the piece! And where, all this time, is the proof
that the principle is not misunderstood? As to conjectures, they are as
uncertain as they are endless; and what one pious or learned man may
think to be the meaning, is no proof to any other that he should make up
his mind in the same way.

Let us for a moment consider the different opinions held on this book,
without entering into the discussion of their propriety or impropriety.
They are the following: -

I. It is a plain epithalamium on the marriage of Solomon with the
daughter of Pharaoh, king of Egypt; and is to be understood in no other
way.

II\. It is an allegory relative to the conduct of God towards the
Hebrews, in bringing them out of Egypt, through the wilderness to the
Promised Land.

III\. It is intended to represent the incarnation of Jesus Christ, or
his marriage with human nature, in reference to its redemption.

IV\. It represents Christ's love to the Church or elected souls, and
their love to him.

V. It is an allegorical poem on the glories of Jesus Christ and the
Virgin Mary.

VI\. It is a collection of sacred idyls; the spiritual meaning of which
is not agreed on.

Now each of these opinions has its powerful supporters, and each of
these has reasons to offer for the support of the opinion which is
espoused; and nothing but a direct revelation from God can show us which
of these opinions is the correct one, or whether any of them are
correct.

The antiquity of an opinion, if that be not founded on a revelation from
God, is no evidence of its truth; for there are many ungodly opinions
which are more than a thousand years old. And as to great men and great
names, we find them enrolled and arranged on each side of all
controversies. It may be asked, What do Christ and his apostles say of
it?

1\. If Jesus Christ or any of his apostles had referred to it as an
allegory, and told us the subject which it pointed out, the matter would
have been plain: we should then have had data, and had only to proceed
in the way of elucidation. But we find nothing of this in the New
Testament.

2\. If they had referred to it as an allegory, without intimating the
meaning, then we should be justified in searching everywhere for that
meaning; and conjecture itself would have been legal, till we had
arrived at some self-testifying issue.

3\. If they had referred to it at all, in connection with spiritual
subjects, then we should have at once seen that it was to be spiritually
understood; and, comparing spiritual things with spiritual, we must have
humbly sought for its spiritual interpretation.

4\. Had the Supreme Being been introduced, or referred to in any of his
essential attributes, or by any of the names which he has been pleased
to assume in his revelations to men, we should have then seen that the
writer was a spiritual man, and wrote probably in reference to a
spiritual end; and, that we should pass by or through his letter, in
order to get to the spirit concealed under it.

But none of these things appear in this book: the name of God is not
found in it; nor is it quoted in the New Testament. As to certain
references which its allegorical expositors suppose are made to it,
either in the Gospels, Epistles, or Apocalypse, they are not express,
and do not, by any thing in or connected with them, appear unequivocally
to point out this book. And after all that has been said, I am fully of
opinion it is not once referred to in the New Testament. But this is no
proof of its not being canonical, as there are other books, on which
there is no doubt, that are in the same predicament. But still, if it
refer so distinctly to Christ and his Church, as some suppose, it
certainly would not have been passed over by both evangelists and
apostles without pointed and especial notice; and particularly if it
points out the love of Christ to his Church, and the whole economy of
God's working in reference to the salvation of the souls of men.

From all this it will appear to the intelligent reader, that the
spiritual meaning of this book cannot easily be made out:

1\. Because we do not know that it is an allegory.

2\. If one, the principles on which such allegory is to be explained do
nowhere appear.

Whom then are we to follow in the interpretation of this very singular
book? The Targumist, who applies it to God and the Hebrews, in their
journeyings from Egypt to the promised land? Origen, who made it a
Christian allegory? Apponius, who spiritualized it? Gregory the Great,
who in the main copied them? The good man, who in 1717, at Paris, so
illustrated it as "to induce men to devote themselves to Jesus Christ
and the Virgin Mary?" Mr. Durham, Mr. Robotham, Mr. Ainsworth, Mr.
Romaine, and Dr. Gill, who endeavored to prove that it concerns Christ
and the elect? Or Mr. Harmer and others who acknowledge it to be an
inimitable composition, and to be understood only of Solomon and
Pharaoh's daughter? Or, finally, Dr. Mason Good, who considers it a
collection of sacred idyls, the spiritual interpretation of which is not
agreed on?

I had for a long time hesitated whether I should say any thing on this
book; not because I did not think I understood its chief design and
general meaning, for of this I really have no doubt, but because I did
not understand it as a spiritual allegory, representing the loves off
Christ and his Church. I must own I see no indubitable ground for this
opinion. And is it of no moment whether the doctrines drawn from it, by
those who allegorize and spiritualize it, be indubitably founded on it
or not? The doctrines may be true in themselves, (which is indeed more
than can be said of those of most of its interpreters), but is it not a
very solemn, and indeed awful thing to say, This is the voice of Christ
to his Church, This is the voice of the Church to Christ, etc., etc.,
when there is no proof from God, nor from any other portion of his word,
that these things are so?

It is much better, therefore, if explained or illustrated at all, to
take it in its literal meaning, and explain it in its general sense. I
say general sense, because there are many passages in it which should
not be explained, if taken literally, the references being too delicate;
and Eastern phraseology on such subjects is too vivid for European
imaginations. Let any sensible and pious medical man read over this
book, and, if at all acquainted with Asiatic phraseology, say whether it
would be proper, even in medical language, to explain all the
descriptions and allusions in this poem.

After what I have said on the difficulty of interpreting this book in a
spiritual way it would not be fair to withhold from the reader the
general arguments on which the theory of its allegorical meaning is
founded. The principal part of the commentators on this book, especially
those who have made it their separate study, have in general taken it
for granted that their mode of interpretation is incontrovertible; and
have proceeded to spiritualize every figure and every verse as if they
had a Divine warrant for all they have said. Their conduct is dangerous;
and the result of their well-intentioned labors has been of very little
service to the cause of Christianity in general, or to the interests of
true morality in particular. By their mode of interpretation an
undignified, not to say mean and carnal, language has been propagated
among many well-meaning religious people, that has associated itself too
much with selfish and animal affections, and created feelings that
accorded little with the dignified spirituality of the religion of the
Lord Jesus. I speak not from report; I speak from observation and
experience, and observation not hastily made. The conviction on my mind
and the conclusion to which I have conscientiously arrived, are the
result of frequent examination, careful reading, and close thinking, at
intervals, for nearly fifty years; and however I may be blamed by some,
and pitied by others, I must say, and I say it as fearlessly as I do
conscientiously, that in this inimitably fine elegant Hebrew ode I see
nothing of Christ and his Church, and nothing that appears to have been
intended to be thus understood; and nothing, if applied in this way,
that, per se, can promote the interests of vital godliness, or cause the
simple and sincere not to "know Christ after the flesh." Here I
conscientiously stand. May God help me!

The most rational view of the subject that I have seen is that taken by
Mr. Harmer, who has indeed detailed and strengthened the arguments of
his predecessors who have declared for the spiritual meaning. In his
"Outlines of a Comment upon Solomon's Song," he supposes that the Song
refers to Solomon's marriage with the daughter of Pharaoh; and that he
had a Jewish queen, who is frequently referred to in the work; and that,
unless this be allowed, there are several important passages in the book
that cannot be understood; and indeed it is on this principle that he
finds his chief ground for a spiritual and allegorical interpretation.

"Whatever was the intention of God," says he, "in bringing about this
marriage, and in causing it to be celebrated in such an extraordinary
manner, by songs that were directed to be placed among the sacred
writings, it is certain there never was any resemblance more striking
between the circumstances and transactions of any of the remarkable
personages of the Old Testament and those of Messiah, than the likeness
we may observe between Solomon marrying a Gentile princess, and making
her equal in honor and privileges with his former Jewish queen, and in
her being frequently mentioned afterwards in history, while the other is
passed over in total silence, and the conduct of the Messiah towards the
Gentile and Jewish Churches.

"The two remarkable things in the conduct of the Messiah towards the two
Churches are the making the Gentiles fellow heirs of the same body and
partakers of the promises, without and difference; and the giving up to
neglect the Jewish Church, while that of the Gentiles has long
flourished in great honor, and been the subject of many a history. St.
Paul takes notice of both these circumstances with particular solemnity;
of the first, in the third chapter of Ephesians, and elsewhere; of the
other, in the eleventh chapter of Romans. They are points, then, that
deserve great attention.

"They are both called mysteries, ([Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025); [Eph
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#003)), that is, things that had been
concealed aforetime; but it by no means follows that there were no
shadowy representations of these events in the preceding ages, only that
they were not clearly and expressly revealed.

"Kingdoms and cities are frequently spoken of in holy writ as women.
Sacred as well as secular bodies of men are represented under that
image. The universal Church is spoken of under the notion of a bride,
and the Messiah as her husband, Ephesians 5: The two Churches of Jews
and Gentiles, or the Church under the Mosaic dispensation and the Church
freed from those ceremonies, are represented as two women - the one
formerly treated as the principal wife; and the second, as having been
for a long time neglected, but afterwards producing a much more numerous
issue than the first-by the prophet Isaiah in his fifty-fourth chapter,
according to the explanation St. Paul has given of that passage in
Galatians 4: Particular Churches are mentioned after the same manner.
So, concerning the Church at Corinth, St. Paul says, "I have espoused
you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to
Christ;" [Co2 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002).

"Since then it is common for the Scriptures to represent the Church of
God under the notion of a woman, and the Messiah under that of a
husband; since the two bodies of men - that which worshipped God
according to the Mosaic rites, and that which observed them not - are
compared to two women; and since the circumstances of these two Churches
are such as I have given an account of from St. Paul, it must be
acknowledged that there is a lively resemblance between Solomon's
espousing the Egyptian princess and the Messiah's admitting the Gentiles
to equal privileges with the Jews, whether it was or was not designed by
God as an emblem and type of it celebrated by his prophets for this
cause, in holy songs; and those songs preserved with care to this day
among writings of the most sacred kind on that account."

This is the whole of Mr. Harmer's argument; see his Outlines, pages
74-77. And what is proved by it? Nothing, in reference to this book. We
know that the Jewish people, not the Church exclusively, are represented
under the notion of a woman addicted, and a wife unfaithful, divorced,
and forsaken, etc.; and that the Corinthians were represented under the
notion of a chaste virgin espoused to Christ. And we know that all this
was done to show, that as the marriage union was the closest, strictest,
and most sacred among men, the union of the soul to God, and its
connection with him, might be most fitly represented by that union, and
unfaithfulness to him by infidelity in the other case. But what has this
to do with the Song of Solomon? Where is the intimation that Solomon
represents Christ; Pharaoh's daughter, the Church of the Gentiles; and
the Jewish queen, the Church of the Israelites? Nowhere. Why then assume
the thing that should be proved; and then build doctrines on it, and
draw inferences from it, as if the assumption had been demonstrated?

Were this mode of interpretation to be applied to the Scriptures in
general, (and why not, if legitimate here?) in what a state would
religion soon be! Who could see any thing certain, determinate, and
fixed in the meaning of the Divine oracles, when fancy and imagination
must be the standard interpreters? God has not left his word to man's
will in this way.

Every attempt, however well-intentioned, to revive this thriftless, not
to say dangerous, Origenian method of seducing the Scriptures to
particular creeds and purposes, should be regarded with jealousy; and
nothing received as the doctrine of the Lord but what may be derived
from those plain words of the Most High which lie most on a level with
the capacities of mankind. Allegory, metaphor, and figures in general,
where the design is clearly indicated, which is the case with all those
employed by the sacred writers, may come in to illustrate and more
forcibly to apply Divine truth; but to extort celestial meanings from a
whole book, where no such indication is given, is most certainly not the
way to arrive at the knowledge of the true God, and of Jesus Christ whom
he has sent.

As the Jewish marriages were celebrated for seven days, it has been
often observed that this Song divides itself into seven periods, and
describes the transactions of each.

I. The First chapter represents the bridegroom and bride as a shepherd
and shepherdess. The bride asks her spouse where he takes his flock at
noon, to preserve them from the excessive heat, lest she, in seeking
him, should go astray into some strange pastures. After this day, the
first night succeeds, which is pointed out [Sol
2:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#004). The bridegroom rises early in
the morning, leaves the bride asleep, and goes hastily to the fields to
his necessary occupations, [Sol 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007).

II\. The Second night is pointed out [Sol
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008), [Sol
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#009), etc. The bridegroom comes to the
window of his spouse. She opens it, and he enters; and on the morrow, he
returns to the fields to his flocks, [Sol
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017).

III\. The Third night, the bridegroom having delayed his coming, the
bride, being uneasy, arises from her bed, and goes out and inquires of
the guards of the city, whether they had seen her beloved. She had not
gone far from them till she met with him; she conducts him to her
apartment, 3:14. Very early in the morning, he retires to the country,
leaving the bride asleep, verse 5. Afterwards she arises, and goes also
to the fields, verse 6.The Fourth chapter is an eulogium on the bride's
beauty; and seems to be a conversation between the parties in the
country. She invites the bridegroom to visit her, [Sol
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001). He leaves his friends, with whom
he was feasting, and comes to the door of his spouse, [Sol
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002). She hesitating to let him in, he
withdraws and goes to his garden. The bride follows; but, not knowing
whither he had retired, asks the guards of the city, by whom she is
maltreated; thence goes to the daughters of Jerusalem, and inquires of
them, [Sol 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003), etc. At last she meets
with him, [Sol 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001), etc., and having
spent some time with him, returns.

IV\. [Sol 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009), points out the Fourth
night of the marriage.

V. The Fifth night is pointed out [Sol
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001), etc. The bridegroom gives his
bride nearly the same praise and commendations which he had received
from her in the preceding chapters; and early in the morning they go out
together to the fields, [Sol 7:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#011).

VI\. The Sixth night they pass at a village in the country, at the house
of a person who is termed the bride's mother, [Sol
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#013); [Sol
8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#001). She invites her spouse thither,
and promises to regale him with excellent fruits and choice wine; and
early in the morning the bridegroom arises, leaves the bride asleep as
formerly, and retires to the country, [Sol
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#004).

VII\. The Seventh night is passed in the gardens. From [Sol
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#005), we have a series of dialogues
between the bride and bridegroom. In the morning the bridegroom, having
perceived that they were overheard, begs the bride to permit him to
retire. She assents, [Sol 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#013), [Sol
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#014), and exhorts him "to make haste,
and be like a roe or a young hart on the mountains of spices."

This is the division, which is in the main most followed, especially by
the best critics. But, besides this, several others have been proposed;
and the reader, who wishes to enter more particularly into the subject,
may consult Bishop Bossuet, Calmet, and Bishop Lowth. For my own part I
doubt the propriety of this technical arrangement, and do not think that
any thing of the kind was intended by the author. The division is not
obvious; and therefore, in my apprehension, not natural. Of Dr. Good's
division I shall speak below.

The dramatis personae have been marked by some of the ancient
interpreters, and the different portions of the whole Song appointed to
several persons who are specified; and this division served for the
basis of a commentary. The most regular division of this kind with which
I have met is in a MS. of my own; the Bible which I have often quoted in
my comment.

This, attributed by some to Wiclif, and by others to an older
translator, I have carefully transcribed, with all the distinction of
parts and speeches. The translation is very simple; and in many cases is
much more faithful to the meaning of the Hebrew text, though in the main
taken from the Vulgate, than our own version. It is a great curiosity,
and certainly was never before printed; and is a fine specimen of our
mother tongue as spoken in these countries in M.CCCLX., which may be
about the date of this translation. On the common mode of interpretation
I venture to assert that my readers will understand this Song ten times
better from this translation and its rubricks, than they have ever done
from all the forms in which it has been presented to them, to the
present time. For this addition, I anticipate the thanks of every
intelligent reader. The indications of the speakers, printed here in
black letter, are all rubrick, in the beautiful original. I have added a
short glossary on some of the more difficult or obsolete words, which
will assist the less experienced reader, under whose notice such remote
specimens of his own tongue seldom fall.

Between twenty and thirty years ago I received from India a part of the
Gitagovinda, or Songs of Jayadeva. This poet, the finest lyric poet of
India, flourished before the Christian era; and the poem above, which
makes the tenth book of the Bhagavet, was written professedly to
celebrate the loves of Chrishna and Radha, or the reciprocal attraction
between the Divine goodness and the human soul. The author leaves us in
no doubt concerning the design of this little pastoral drama; for in the
conclusion he thus speaks: "Whatever is delightful in the modes of
music, whatever is Divine in Meditations on Vishnu, whatever is
exquisite in the sweet art of love, whatever is graceful in the fine
strains of poetry; all that, let the happy and wise learn from the Songs
of Jayadeva, whose soul is united with the foot of Narayan." Vishnu and
Narayan are epithets of Christina, or the supreme incarnated god of the
Hindoos. I found the general phraseology of this work, and its imagery
as well as its subject, to correspond so much with those of the Song of
Solomon, that in the short notes which I wrote on this book in 1798, I
proposed the illustration of many of its passages from the Gitagovinda;
and was pleased to find, several years after, that my view of the
subject had been confirmed by that encyclopedia of learning and science,
Dr. Mason Good, who in his translation of the Song of Songs, with
critical notes, published 1803, 8vo., has illustrated many passages from
the Gitagovinda.

After having made a selection from this ancient poet for the
illustration of the Song of Solomon, I changed in some measure my
purpose, and determined to give the whole work, and leave it to my
readers to apply those passages which they might think best calculated
to throw light upon a book which professedly has the wisest of men for
its author, and according to the opinion of many, the most important
doctrines of the Christian religion for its subject. I have now followed
the metrical version which I received from India, but rather the prose
translation of Sir William Jones; dividing it into parts and verses,
after the model of the metrical version above mentioned; and adding
verbal interpretations of the principal proper names and difficult terms
which are contained in the work.

Having been long convinced that the Chaldee Taryum is at once the oldest
and most valuable comment upon this book, I have also added this. And
here I might say that I have not only followed my own judgment, but that
also of a very learned divine, Dr. John Gill, who, having preached one
hundred and twenty-two sermons on the Song of Solomon, to the Baptist
congregation at Horsleydown, near London, embodied them all in what he
calls "An Exposition" of this book; to which he added a translation of
the Targum, with short explanatory notes, folio, 1728. This was,
however, suppressed in all the later editions of this exposition; but
why, I cannot tell. This piece I give to my readers, and for the same
reasons alleged by this very learned and excellent man himself: -

"At the end of this exposition I have given," says he, "a version of the
Targum or Chaldee paraphrase upon the whole book, with some notes
thereon, induced hereunto by the following reasons:

"First, to gratify the curiosity of some who, observing frequent mention
and use made of it in my exposition, might be desirous of perusing the
whole.

"Secondly, for the profitableness thereof. Our learned countryman, Mr.
Broughton, says, this paraphrase is worth our study both for delight and
profit. It expounds several passages of Scripture, and some in the New
Testament, which I have directed to in my notes upon it; and I am
persuaded that the writings of the Jews, the ancient Jews especially,
would give us much light into the phraseology and sense of abundance of
texts in the New Testament."

It is certain that this paraphrase does very often direct us, or at
least confirm us, as to the persons speaking in this Song, to know which
is of very great use in the explication of it. I shall add another
reason: I believe the Song of Solomon refers more to the Jewish than to
the Christian Church, and I think the Targumist has made a more rational
use of it than any of his successors.

I have thus places within the reach of all my readers Three especial
helps towards a good understanding of this book:

1\. The ancient English translation, with its curious dramatis personae

2\. The Gitagovinda, a most curious poem of the spiritual and
allegorical kind.

3\. The Chaldee Targam, the oldest comment on this Song. And I add my
prayer, May God guide the reader into all truth, through Christ Jesus!
Amen.

On this part of the subject it would be almost criminal not to mention,
still more particularly, Dr. Mason Good's translation and notes on the
Song of Songs. He has done much to elucidate its phraseology, and his
notes are a treasury of critical learning. He considers the book to be a
collection of Sacred Idyls, twelve in number; and his division is as
follows:

Idyl I Royal Bride [Sol 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#002), [Sol
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003), [Sol
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004) Attendant Virgins Part of the
fourth verse, beginning, "We will exult." Royal Bride [Sol
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#005), [Sol
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#006), [Sol
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007) Attendant Virgins [Sol
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#008) Idyl II King Solomon [Sol
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#009), [Sol
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#010), [Sol
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#011) Royal Bride [Sol
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012), [Sol
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#013), [Sol
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#014) King Solomon [Sol
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#015) Royal Bride [Sol
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#016), [Sol
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#017), [Sol
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001) King Solomon [Sol
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#002) Royal Bride [Sol
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#003), [Sol
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#004), [Sol
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#005), [Sol
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#006), [Sol
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007) Idyl III Royal Bride [Sol
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008), [Sol
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#009), [Sol
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#010), [Sol
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#011), [Sol
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#012), [Sol
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#013), [Sol
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014), [Sol
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#015), [Sol
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016), [Sol
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017) Idyl IV Royal Bride [Sol
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001), [Sol
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#002), [Sol
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#003), [Sol
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#004), [Sol
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#005) Idyl VScene, a Chiosk or Pavilion
Attendant Virgins [Sol 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006) Other
Virgins [Sol 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#007), [Sol
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#008), [Sol
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#009), [Sol
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#010) Royal Bride [Sol
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#011) King Solomon [Sol
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001), [Sol
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002), [Sol
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#003), [Sol
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004), [Sol
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#005), [Sol
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#006), [Sol
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#007) Idyl VI King Solomon [Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008), [Sol
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009), [Sol
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#010), [Sol
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011), [Sol
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012), [Sol
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#013), [Sol
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#014), [Sol
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015) Royal Bride [Sol
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016) King Solomon [Sol
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001) Royal Bride Part of the first
verse, beginning, "Eat, O my friends." Idyl VII Royal Bride [Sol
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002), [Sol
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003), [Sol
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#004), [Sol
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#005), [Sol
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#006), [Sol
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#007), [Sol
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#008) Virgins [Sol
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#009) Royal Bride [Sol
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#010), [Sol
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#011), [Sol
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#012), [Sol
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#013), [Sol
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#014), [Sol
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#015), [Sol
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#016) Virgins [Sol
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001) Royal Bride [Sol
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#002), [Sol
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#003) King Solomon [Sol
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#004), [Sol
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#005), [Sol
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#006), [Sol
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#007), [Sol
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008), [Sol
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009), [Sol
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#010) Idyl VIII Royal Bride [Sol
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#011), [Sol
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#012) Virgins [Sol
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#013) Royal Bride Part of the
thirteenth verse, beginning, "What do you expect?" Virgins Latter part
of the thirteenth verse, beginning "Fortitude." Idyl IX Virgins [Sol
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001), [Sol
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#002), [Sol
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#003), [Sol
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#004), [Sol
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#005) King Solomon [Sol
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#006), [Sol
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#007), [Sol
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#008), [Sol
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#009) Idyl X Royal Bride [Sol
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#010), [Sol
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#011), [Sol
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#012), [Sol
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#013), [Sol
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#001), [Sol
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#002), [Sol
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#003), [Sol
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#004) Idyl XI Virgins [Sol
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#005) King Solomon Part of the fifth
verse, beginning, "I excited thee." Royal Bride [Sol
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006) King Solomon [Sol
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#007) Idyl XII Royal Bride [Sol
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#008) King Solomon [Sol
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#009) Royal Bride [Sol
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#010), [Sol
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#011), [Sol
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#012) King Solomon [Sol
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#013) Royal Bride [Sol
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#014) There have been various opinions
on this division; and many will still think that much remains yet to be
done. Dr. Good considers it a spiritual allegory; but he does not
attempt a spiritual application of any part of it. This perhaps is no
mean proof of his good sense and judgment. I have acted in the same way,
though not so convinced of its spirituality as Dr. Good appears to be.
If I took it up in this way, I should explain it according to my own
creed, as others have done according to theirs; and could I lay it down
as a maxim, that it is to be spiritually interpreted in reference to the
Christian Revelation, I might soon show my reader that it points out the
infinite love of God to every human soul, in the incarnation of Christ;
the means he uses to bring all mankind to an acquaintance with himself;
the redemption of true believers from all unrighteousness, through the
inspiration of God's Holy Spirit; their consequent holy life, and godly
conversation; the calling of the Gentiles; the restoration of the Jews;
and the final judgment! And my comment on this plan would have just as
solid a foundation as those of my predecessors, from Origen to the
present day.

To conclude: I advise all young ministers to avoid preaching on
Solomon's Song. If they take a text out of it, to proclaim salvation to
lost sinners, thev must borrow their doctrines from other portions of
Scripture, where all is plain and pointed. And why then leave such, and
go out of their way to find allegorical meanings, taking a whole book by
storm, and leaving the word of God to serve tables?

It is curious to see the manner in which many preachers and commentators
attempt to expound this book. They first assume that the book refers to
Christ and his Church; his union with human nature; his adoption of the
Gentiles; and his everlasting love to elect souls, gathered out of both
people; then take the words bride, bridegroom, spouse, love, watchmen,
shepherds, tents, door, lock, etc., etc., and, finding some words either
similar or parallel, in other parts of the sacred writings, which have
there an allegorical meaning, contend that those here are to be
similarly understood; and what is spoken of those apply to these; and
thus, in fact, are explaining other passages of Scripture in their own
way, while professing to explain the Song of Solomon! What eminent
talents, precious time, great pains, and industry, have been wasted in
this way! One eminent scholar preaches to his congregation one hundred
and twenty-two sermons upon the Song of Solomon, while all this time the
evangelists and apostles have been comparatively forgotten; except only
as they are referred to in illustration of the particular creed which
such writers and preachers found on this book. How can they account to
God for so much time spent on a tract which requires all their ingenuity
and skill to make edifying, even on their own plan; a text of which they
are not permitted to allege, in controversy, to prove the truth of any
disputed doctrine? This, however, is not the fault of any particular
class of ministers exclusively; several of all classes, though of some
more than of others, have been found, less or more, laboring at this
thriftless craft. Some, having preached on it during the whole of their
ministry, have carried it, in a certain way, beyond the grave. An aged
minister once told me, in a very solemn manner, that as God had been
exceedingly merciful to him in saving his soul, and putting him into the
ministry, thus accounting him faithful, he hoped that, when called to
the Church above, if any funeral sermon were preached for him, it should
be from Song of Solomon, [Sol 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#008) :
"Go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids
beside the shepherds' tents." That he could have applied these words to
his own state, and the use which should be made of his life and death, I
have no doubt; but who, from this text, would have chosen to pronounce
the funeral oration?

I repeat it, and I wish to be heard by young ministers in particular,
take the plainest texts when you attempt to convince men of sin, and
build up believers on their most holy faith; and thus show rather your
love for their souls than your dexterity in finding out spiritual
meanings for obscure passages, on the true signification of which few,
either among the learned or pious, are agreed.

I now, according to my promise, lay before my readers a transcript from
my own MS. Bible, which is most probably the first translation of this
Song that was ever made into the English language. I have added, for the
sake of reference, the figures for the present division into verses, in
the margin: these are not in the MS. The dramatic personae, here in
black letter, are in red in the MS. The orthography is scrupulously
followed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 1](sol001)

</div>
