<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1)  
  [Previous](th1000)  [Next](th1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

The inscription by Paul, Silvanus, and Timotheus, to the Church of the
Thessalonians, [Th1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001). St. Paul
gives thanks to God for their good estate, and prays for their
continuance in the faith, [Th1 1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#002).
Shows how the Gospel came to them, and the blessed effects it produced
in their life and conversation, [Th1
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005), How it became published from
them through Macedonia and Achaia, and how their faith was everywhere
celebrated, [Th1 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#008). He shows
farther, that the Thessalonians had turned from idolatry, become
worshippers of the true God, and were waiting for the revelation of
Christ, [Th1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009), [Th1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#010).

[1 Thessalonians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th1 1:1</span></span>

Paul, and: Silvanus, and Timotheus - Though St. Paul himself dictated
this letter, yet he joins the names of Silas and Timothy, because they
had been with him at Thessalonica, and were well known there. See [Act
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004), [Act
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#014).

And Silvanus - This was certainly the same as Silas, who was St. Paul's
companion in all his journeys through Asia Minor and Greece; see [Act
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022); [Act
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#019); [Act
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004), [Act
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#010). Him and Timothy, the apostle
took with him into Macedonia, and they continued at Berea when the
apostle went from thence to Athens; from this place St. Paul sent for
them to come to him speedily, and, though it is not said that they came
while he was at Athens, yet it is most probable that they did; after
which, having sent them to Thessalonica, he proceeded to Corinth, where
they afterwards rejoined him, and from whence he wrote this epistle. See
the preface.

[1 Thessalonians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">th1 1:2</span></span>

We give thanks - See [Phi 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#003), [Phi
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#004), and [Col
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#003); where the same forms of speech
are used.

[1 Thessalonians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th1 1:3</span></span>

Your work of faith - This verse contains a very high character of the
believers at Thessalonica. They had Faith, not speculative and indolent,
but true, sound, and operative; their faith worked. They had Love, not
that gazed at and became enamoured of the perfections of God, but such a
love as labored with faith to fulfill the whole will of God. Faith
worked; but love, because it can do more, did more, and therefore
labored - worked energetically, to promote the glory of God and the
salvation of men. They had Hope; not an idle, cold, heartless
expectation of future good, from which they felt no excitement, and for
which they could give no reason, but such a hope as produced a
satisfying expectation of a future life and state of blessedness, the
reality of which faith had descried, and love anticipated; a hope, not
hasty and impatient to get out of the trials of life and possess the
heavenly inheritance, but one that was as willing to endure hardships as
to enjoy glory itself, when God might be most honored by this patient
endurance. Faith worked, Love labored, and Hope endured patiently.

It is not a mark of much grace to be longing to get to heaven because of
the troubles and difficulties of the present life; they who love Christ
are ever willing to suffer with him; and he may be as much glorified by
patient suffering, as by the most active faith or laborious love. There
are times in which, through affliction or other hinderances, we cannot
do the will of God, but we can suffer it; and in such cases he seeks a
heart that bears submissively, suffers patiently, and endures, as seeing
him who is invisible, without repining or murmuring. This is as full a
proof of Christian perfection as the most intense and ardent love.
Meekness, gentleness, and long-suffering, are in our present state of
more use to ourselves and others, and of more consequence in the sight
of God, than all the ecstasies of the spirits of just men made perfect,
and than all the raptures of an archangel. That Church or Christian
society, the members of which manifest the work of faith, labor of love,
and patience of hope, is most nearly allied to heaven, and is on the
suburbs of glory.

[1 Thessalonians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th1 1:4</span></span>

Knowing your election of God - Being assured, from the doctrine which I
have delivered to you, and which God has confirmed by various miracles,
and gifts of the Holy Spirit, that he has chosen and called the Gentiles
to the same privileges to which he chose and called the Jews; and that,
as they have rejected the offers of the Gospel, God has now elected the
Gentiles in their stead. This is the election which the Thessalonians
knew; and of which the apostle treats at large in his Epistle to the
Romans, and also in his Epistles to the Galatians and Ephesians. No
irrespective, unconditional, eternal, and personal election to
everlasting glory, is meant by the apostle. As God had chosen the Jews,
whom, because of their obstinate unbelief, he had now rejected; so he
had now chosen or elected the Gentiles. And in neither case was there
any thing absolute; all was most specifically conditional, as far as
their final salvation was concerned; without any merit on their side,
they were chosen and called to those blessings which, if rightly used,
would lead them to eternal glory. That these blessings could be abused -
become finally useless and forfeited, they had an ample proof in the
case of the Jews, who, after having been the elect of God for more than
2000 years, were now become reprobates.

[1 Thessalonians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th1 1:5</span></span>

For our Gospel - That is, the glad tidings of salvation by Jesus Christ,
and of your being elected to enjoy all the privileges to which the Jews
were called, without being obliged to submit to circumcision, or fulfill
the rites and ceremonies of the Mosaic law.

Came not unto you in word only - It was not by simple teaching or mere
reasoning that the doctrines which we preached recommended themselves to
you, we did not insist on your using this or the other religious
institution; we insisted on a change of heart and life, and we held out
the energy which was able to effect it.

But also in power - Εν δυναμει· With miraculous manifestations, to your
eyes and to your hearts, which induced you to acknowledge that this
Gospel was the power of God unto salvation.

And in the Holy Ghost - By his influence upon your hearts, in changing
and renewing them; and by the testimony which ye received from him, that
you were accepted through the Beloved, and become the adopted children
of God.

And in much assurance - Εν πληροφοριᾳ πολλῃ. The Holy Spirit which was
given you left no doubt on your mind, either with respect to the general
truth of the doctrine, or the safety of your own state. Ye had the
fullest assurance that the Gospel was true, and the fullest assurance
that ye had received the remission of sins through that Gospel; the
Spirit himself bearing witness with your spirit, that you are the sons
and daughters of God Almighty.

What manner of men we were - How we preached, and how we lived; our
doctrines and our practices ever corresponding. And for your sakes we
sustained difficulties, endured hardships, and were incessant in our
labors.

[1 Thessalonians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th1 1:6</span></span>

Ye became followers of us - Ye became imitators, μιμηται, of us-ye
believed the same truths, walked in the same way, and minded the same
thing; knowing that our doctrine was of the Lord, and that the way in
which we walked was prescribed by himself, and that he also suffered the
contradictions of ungodly men.

Having received the word in much affliction - That they received the
doctrine of the Gospel in the midst of much persecution we may learn
from the history in general, and from [Act
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005), [Act
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006).

With joy of the Holy Ghost - The consolations which they received, in
consequence of believing in Christ, more than counterbalanced all the
afflictions which they suffered from their persecutors.

[1 Thessalonians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th1 1:7</span></span>

Ye were ensamples - Τοπους· Types, models, or patterns; according to
which all the Churches in Macedonia and Achaia formed both their creed
and their conduct.

[1 Thessalonians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th1 1:8</span></span>

From you sounded out - As Thessalonica vas very conveniently situated
for traffic, many merchants from thence traded through Macedonia,
Achaia, and different parts of Greece. By these, the fame of the
Thessalonians having received the doctrine of the Gospel was doubtless
carried far and wide. And it appears that they had walked so
conscientiously before God and man, that their friends could speak of
them without a blush, and their adversaries could say nothing to their
disgrace.

[1 Thessalonians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th1 1:9</span></span>

How ye turned to God from idols - This could not be spoken either of the
Jews or of the devout persons, but of the heathen Greeks, and of such it
appears that the majority of the Church was formed. See what is said on
this subject in the preface to this epistle.

To serve the living and true God - The living God; in opposition to the
idols, which were either inanimate stocks or stones, or the
representations of dead men.

The true God - In opposition to the whole system of idolatry, which was
false in the objects of its adoration, false in its pretensions, false
in its promises, and false in all its prospects.

[1 Thessalonians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">th1 1:10</span></span>

And to wait for his Son from heaven - To expect a future state of glory,
and resurrection of the body, according to the Gospel doctrine, after
the example of Jesus Christ, who was raised from the dead, and ascended
unto heaven, ever to appear in the presence of God for us.

Delivered us from the wrath to come - From all the punishment due to us
for our sins, and from the destruction which is about to come on the
unbelieving and impenitent Jews.

This was the news, the sounding out, that went abroad concerning the
converted Thessalonians. Every where it was said: They have believed the
Gospel; they have renounced idolatry; they worship the living and true
God; they have received the gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit; they
are happy in their souls, unspotted in their lives, and full of joy;
expecting an eternal glory through that Christ who had died for and
purged their sins, and who shall fashion their degraded bodies and make
them like to his glorious body, and give them an eternal residence with
himself in a state of blessedness.

These were glorious news; and, wherever they were told, prepared the way
of the Gospel among the heathen. The mere preaching of the Gospel has
done much to convince and convert sinners, but the lives of the sincere
followers of Christ, as illustrative of the truth of these doctrines,
have done much more: Truth represented in action seems to assume a body,
and thus renders itself palpable. In heathen countries, which are under
the dominion of Christian powers, the Gospel, though established there,
does little good, because of the profane and irreligious lives of those
who profess it. Why has not the whole peninsula of India been long since
evangelized? The Gospel has been preached there; but the lives of the
Europeans professing Christianity there have been, in general,
profligate, sordid, and base. From them sounded out no good report of
the Gospel; and therefore the Mohammedans continue to prefer their
Koran, and the Hindoos their Vedas and Shasters, to the Bible. It should
now ever be acknowledged, to the glory of God, that of late years a few
apostolic men in that country are turning the tide in favor of the
Gospel; and several eminent Europeans have warmly espoused the doctrine
of Christ, and are labouring to circulate the word of God through the
whole of British India.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 2](th1002)

</div>
