<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1)  
  [Previous](th1004)  [Next](th2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 5:0</span></span>

The apostle continues to speak of Christ's coming to judgment, and the
uncertainty of the time in which it shall take place, and the careless
state of sinners, [Th1 5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001). Shows
the Thessalonians that they are children of the light; that they should
watch and pray, and put on the armor of God, being called to obtain
salvation by Christ, who died for them; that whether dead or alive, when
the day of judgment comes, they may live for ever with him; and that
they should comfort and edify each other with these considerations, [Th1
5:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#004). He exhorts them to remember
those who labor among them, and are over them in the Lord; and to esteem
such highly for their work's sake, [Th1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#012), [Th1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#013). He charges them to warn,
comfort, and support those who stood in need of such assistance, and to
be patient and beneficent towards all, [Th1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#014), [Th1
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#015). He points out their high
spiritual privileges; warns them against neglecting or misimproving the
gifts of the Spirit, and the means of grace, [Th1
5:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#016). They are also exhorted to
prove all things; to abstain from all evil; and to expect to be
sanctified, through spirit, soul, and body, by him who has promised
this, and who is faithful to his promises, [Th1
5:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021). Recommends himself and
brethren to their prayers; shows them how they are to greet each other;
charges them to read this epistle to all the brethren; and concludes
with the usual apostolical benediction, [Th1
5:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#025).

[1 Thessalonians 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th1 5:1</span></span>

But of the times and the seasons - It is natural to suppose, after what
he had said in the conclusion of the preceding chapter concerning the
coming of Christ, the raising of the dead, and rendering those immortal
who should then be found alive, without obliging them to pass through
the empire of death, that the Thessalonians would feel an innocent
curiosity to know, as the disciples did concerning the destruction of
Jerusalem, when those things should take place, and what should be the
signs of those times, and of the coming of the Son of man. And it is
remarkable that the apostle answers, here, to these anticipated
questions as our Lord did, in the above case, to the direct question of
his disciples; and he seems to refer in these words, Of the times and
the seasons ye have no need that I write unto you, for yourselves know
that the day of the Lord cometh as a thief in the night, to what our
Lord said, [Mat 24:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#044); [Mat
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#013); and the apostle takes it for
granted that they were acquainted with our Lord's prediction on the
subject: For you yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so
cometh as a thief in the night. It is very likely therefore, that the
apostle, like our Lord, couples these two grand events-the destruction
of Jerusalem and the final judgment. And it appears most probable that
it is of the former event chiefly that he speaks here, as it was
certainly of the latter that he treated in the conclusion of the
preceding chapter. In the notes on [Act
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006), [Act
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007), it has already been shown that
the χρονους η καιρους, times or seasons, (the very same terms which are
used here), refer to the destruction of the Jewish commonwealth; and we
may fairly presume that they have the same meaning in this place.

[1 Thessalonians 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th1 5:3</span></span>

For when they shall say, Peace and safety - This points out, very
particularly, the state of the Jewish people when the Romans came
against them; and so fully persuaded were they that God would not
deliver the city and temple to their enemies, that they refused every
overture that was made to them.

Sudden destruction - In the storming of their city and the burning of
their temple, and the massacre of several hundreds of thousands of
themselves; the rest being sold for slaves, and the whole of them
dispersed over the face of the earth.

As travail upon a woman - This figure is perfectly consistent with what
the apostle had said before, viz.: that the times and seasons were not
known: though the thing itself was expected, our Lord having predicted
it in the most positive manner. So, a woman with child knows that, if
she be spared, she will have a bearing time; but the week, the day, the
hour, she cannot tell. In a great majority of cases the time is
accelerated or retarded much before or beyond the time that the woman
expected; so, with respect to the Jews, neither the day, week, month,
nor year was known. All that was specifically known was this: their
destruction was coming, and it should be sudden, and they should not
escape.

[1 Thessalonians 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th1 5:4</span></span>

But ye, brethren, are not in darkness - Probably St. Paul refers to a
notion that was very prevalent among the Jews, viz.: that God would
judge the Gentiles in the night time, when utterly secure and careless;
but he would judge the Jews in the day time, when employed in reading
and performing the words of the law. The words in Midrash Tehillim, on
[Psa 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008), are the following: When the
holy blessed God shall judge the Gentiles, it shall be in the night
season, in which they shall be asleep in their transgressions; but when
he shall judge the Israelites, it shall be in the day time, when they
are occupied in the study of the law. This maxim the apostle appears to
have in view in the 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th verses. ([Th1
5:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#004))

[1 Thessalonians 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th1 5:5</span></span>

Ye are all the children of light - Ye are children of God, and enjoy
both his light and life. Ye are Christians - ye belong to him who has
brought life and immortality to light by his Gospel. This dispensation,
under which ye are, has illustrated all the preceding dispensations; in
its light all is become luminous; and ye, who walked formerly in heathen
ignorance, or in the darkness of Jewish prejudices, are now light in the
Lord, because ye have believed in him who is the light to lighten the
Gentiles, and the glory and splendor of his people Israel.

We are not of the night, nor of darkness - Our actions are such as we
are not afraid to expose to the fullest and clearest light. Sinners hate
the light; they are enemies to knowledge; they love darkness; they will
not receive instructions; and their deeds are such as cannot bear the
light.

[1 Thessalonians 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th1 5:6</span></span>

Let us not sleep, as do others - Let us who are of the day - who believe
the Gospel and belong to Christ, not give way to a careless, unconcerned
state of mind, like to the Gentiles and sinners in general, who are
stupefied and blinded by sin, so that they neither think nor feel; but
live in time as if it were eternity; or rather, live as if there were no
eternity, no future state of existence, rewards, or punishments.

Let us watch - Be always on the alert; and be sober, making a moderate
use of all things.

[1 Thessalonians 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th1 5:7</span></span>

For they that sleep - Sleepers and drunkards seek the night season; so
the careless and the profligate persons indulge their evil propensities,
and avoid all means of instruction; they prefer their ignorance to the
word of God's grace, and to the light of life. There seems to be here an
allusion to the opinion mentioned under [Th1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#004) (note), to which the reader is
requested to refer. It may be remarked, also, that it was accounted
doubly scandalous, even among the heathen, to be drunk in the day time.
They who were drunken were drunken in the night.

[1 Thessalonians 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th1 5:8</span></span>

Putting on the breastplate - We are not only called to Work, but we are
called also to fight; and that we may not be surprised, we must watch;
and that we may be in a condition to defend ourselves, we must be sober;
and that we may be enabled to conquer, we must be armed: and what the
breastplate and helmet are to a soldier's heart and head, such are
faith, love, and hope to us. Faith enables us to endure, as seeing him
who is invisible; love excites us to diligence and activity, and makes
us bear our troubles and difficulties pleasantly; hope helps us to
anticipate the great end, the glory that shall be revealed, and which we
know we shall in due time obtain, if we faint not. For an explanation of
the different parts of the Grecian armor, as illustrating that of the
Christian, see the notes on Ephesians 6 (note), where the subject is
largely explained.

[1 Thessalonians 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th1 5:9</span></span>

For God hath not appointed us to wrath - So then it appears that some
were appointed to wrath, εις οργην, to punishment; on this subject there
can be no dispute. But who are they? When did this appointment take
place? And for what cause? These are supposed to be "very difficult
questions, and such as cannot receive a satisfactory answer; and the
whole must be referred to the sovereignty of God." If we look carefully
at the apostle's words, we shall find all these difficulties vanish. It
is very obvious that, in the preceding verses, the apostle refers simply
to the destruction of the Jewish polity, and to the terrible judgments
which were about to fall on the Jews as a nation; therefore, they are
the people who were appointed to wrath; and they were thus appointed,
not from eternity, nor from any indefinite or remote time, but from that
time in which they utterly rejected the offers of salvation made to them
by Jesus Christ and his apostles; the privileges of their election were
still continued to them, even after they had crucified the Lord of
glory; for, when he gave commandment to his disciples to go into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, he bade them begin at
Jerusalem. They did so, and continued to offer salvation to them, till
at last, being everywhere persecuted, and the whole nation appearing
with one consent to reject the Gospel, the kingdom of God was wholly
taken away from them, and the apostles turned to the Gentiles. Then God
appointed them to wrath; and the cause of that appointment was their
final and determined rejection of Christ and his Gospel. But even this
appointment to wrath does not signify eternal damnation; nothing of the
kind is intended in the word. Though we are sure that those who die in
their sins can never see God, yet it is possible that many of those
wretched Jews, during their calamities, and especially during the siege
of their city, did turn unto the Lord who smote them, and found that
salvation which he never denies to the sincere penitent.

When the Jews were rejected, and appointed to wrath, then the Gentiles
were elected, and appointed to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus
Christ, whose Gospel they gladly received, and continue to prize; while
the remnant of the Jews continue, in all places of their dispersion, the
same irreconcilable and blasphemous opponents of the Gospel of Christ.
On these accounts the election of the Gentiles and the reprobation of
the Jews still continue.

[1 Thessalonians 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">th1 5:10</span></span>

Who died for us - His death was an atoning sacrifice for the Gentiles as
well as for the Jews.

Whether we wake or sleep - Whether we live or die, whether we are in
this state or in the other world, we shall live together with him-shall
enjoy his life, and the consolations of his Spirit, while here; and
shall be glorified together with him in the eternal world. The words
show that every where and in all circumstances genuine believers, who
walk after God, have life and communion with him, and are continually
happy, and constantly safe.

The apostle, however, may refer to the doctrine he has delivered, [Th1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015), concerning the dead in Christ
rising first; and the last generation of men not dying, but undergoing
such a change as shall render them immortal. On that great day, all the
followers of God, both those who had long slept in the dust of the
earth, and all those who shall be found living, shall be acknowledged by
Christ as his own, and live together for ever with him.

[1 Thessalonians 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th1 5:11</span></span>

Comfort - one another - Rest assured that, in all times and
circumstances, it shall be well with the righteous; let every man lay
this to heart; and with this consideration comfort and edify each other
in all trials and difficulties.

[1 Thessalonians 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">th1 5:12</span></span>

Know them - Act kindly towards them; acknowledge them as the messengers
of Christ; and treat them with tenderness and respect. This is a
frequent meaning of the word γινωσκω. See on [Joh
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010) (note).

Them which labor among you - The words τους κοπιωντας have appeared to
some as expressing those who had labored among them; but as it is the
participle of the present tense, there is no need to consider it in this
light. Both it and the word προΐσταμενους, the superintendents, refer to
persons then actually employed in the work of God. These were all
admonishers, teachers, and instructers of the people, devoting their
time and talents to this important work.

[1 Thessalonians 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th1 5:13</span></span>

Esteem them very highly in love - Christian ministers, who preach the
whole truth, and labor in the word and doctrine, are entitled to more
than respect; the apostle commands them to be esteemed ὑπερεκπερισσου,
abundantly, and superabundantly; and this is to be done in love; and as
men delight to serve those whom they love, it necessarily follows that
they should provide for them, and see that they want neither the
necessaries nor conveniences of life; I do not say comforts, though
these also should be furnished; but of these the genuine messengers of
Christ are frequently destitute. However, they should have food,
raiment, and lodging for themselves and their household. This they ought
to have for their work's sake; those who do not work should not eat. As
ministers of Christ, such as labor not are unworthy either of respect or
support.

[1 Thessalonians 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">th1 5:14</span></span>

Warn them that are unruly - The whole phraseology of this verse is
military; I shall consider the import of each term. Ατακτους· Those who
are out of their ranks, and are neither in a disposition nor situation
to perform the work and duty of a soldier; those who will not do the
work prescribed, and who will meddle with what is not commanded. There
are many such in every Church that is of considerable magnitude.

Comfort the feeble-minded - Τους ολιγοψυχους· Those of little souls; the
faint-hearted; those who, on the eve of a battle, are dispirited,
because of the number of the enemy, and their own feeble and unprovided
state. Let them know that the battle is not theirs, but the Lord's; and
that those who trust in him shall conquer.

Support the weak - Αντεχεσθε των ασθενων· Shore up, prop them that are
weak; strengthen those wings and companies that are likely to be most
exposed, that they be not overpowered and broken in the day of battle.

Be patient toward all - Μακροθυμειτε προς παντας· The disorderly, the
feeble-minded, and the weak, will exercise your patience, and try your
temper. If the troops be irregular, and cannot in every respect be
reduced to proper order and discipline, let not the officers lose their
temper nor courage; let them do the best they can; God will be with
them, and a victory will give confidence to their troops. We have often
seen that the Christian life is compared to a warfare, and that the
directions given to soldiers are, mutatis mutandis; allowing for the
different systems, suitable to Christians. This subject has been largely
treated on, Ephesians 6. The ministers of Christ, being considered as
officers, should acquaint themselves with the officers' duty. He who has
the direction and management of a Church of God will need all the skill
and prudence he can acquire.

[1 Thessalonians 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">th1 5:15</span></span>

See that none render evil for evil - Every temper contrary to love is
contrary to Christianity. A peevish, fretful, vindictive man may be a
child of Satan; he certainly is not a child of God.

Follow that which is good - That by which ye may profit your brethren
and your neighbors of every description, whether Jews or Gentiles.

[1 Thessalonians 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">th1 5:16</span></span>

Rejoice evermore - Be always happy; the religion of Christ was intended
to remove misery. He that has God for his portion may constantly exult.
Four MSS. of good note add εν τῳ Κυριῳ, in the Lord: Rejoice in the Lord
evermore.

[1 Thessalonians 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">th1 5:17</span></span>

Pray without ceasing - Ye are dependent on God for every good; without
him ye can do nothing; feel that dependence at all times, and ye will
always be in the spirit of prayer; and those who feel this spirit will,
as frequently as possible, be found in the exercise of prayer.

[1 Thessalonians 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">th1 5:18</span></span>

In every thing give thanks - For this reason, that all things work
together for good to them that love God; therefore, every occurrence may
be a subject of gratitude and thankfulness. While ye live to God,
prosperity and adversity will be equally helpful to you.

For this is the will of God - That ye should be always happy; that ye
should ever be in the spirit of prayer; and that ye should profit by
every occurrence in life, and be continually grateful and obedient; for
gratitude and obedience are inseparably connected.

[1 Thessalonians 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">th1 5:19</span></span>

Quench not the Spirit - The Holy Spirit is represented as a fire,
because it is his province to enlighten and quicken the soul; and to
purge, purify, and refine it. This Spirit is represented as being
quenched when any act is done, word spoken, or temper indulged, contrary
to its dictates. It is the Spirit of love, and therefore anger, malice,
revenge, or any unkind or unholy temper, will quench it so that it will
withdraw its influences; and then the heart is left in a state of
hardness and darkness. It has been observed that fire may be quenched as
well by heaping earth on it as by throwing water on it; and so the love
of the world will as effectually grieve and quench the Spirit as any
ordinary act of transgression.

Every genuine Christian is made a partaker of the Spirit of God; and he
who has not the spirit of Christ is none of his. It cannot be the
miraculous gifts of the Spirit which the apostle means, for these were
given to few, and not always; for even apostles could not work miracles
when they pleased; but the direction in the text is general, and refers
to a gift of which they were generally partakers.

[1 Thessalonians 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">th1 5:20</span></span>

Despise not prophesyings - Do not suppose that ye have no need of
continual instruction; without it ye cannot preserve the Christian life,
nor go on to perfection. God will ever send a message of salvation by
each of his ministers to every faithful, attentive hearer. Do not
suppose that ye are already wise enough; you are no more wise enough
than you are holy enough. They who slight or neglect the means of grace,
and especially the preaching of God's holy word, are generally vain,
empty, self-conceited people, and exceedingly superficial both in
knowledge and piety.

[1 Thessalonians 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">th1 5:21</span></span>

Prove all things - Whatever ye hear in these prophesyings or preachings,
examine by the words of Christ, and by the doctrines which, from time to
time, we have delivered unto you in our preaching and writings. Try the
spirits - the different teachers, by the word of God.

Hold fast that which is good - Whatever in these prophesyings has a
tendency to increase your faith, love, holiness, and usefulness, that
receive and hold fast. There were prophets or teachers even at that time
who professed to be of God, and yet were not.

[1 Thessalonians 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">th1 5:22</span></span>

Abstain from all appearance of evil - Sin not, and avoid even the
appearance of it. Do not drive your morality so near the bounds of evil
as to lead even weak persons to believe that ye actually touch, taste,
or handle it. Let not the form of it, ειδος, appear with or among you,
much less the substance. Ye are called to holiness; be ye holy, for God
is holy.

[1 Thessalonians 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">th1 5:23</span></span>

And the very God of peace - That same God who is the author of peace,
the giver of peace; and who has sent, for the redemption of the world,
the Prince of peace; may that very God sanctify you wholly; leave no
more evil in your hearts than his precepts tolerate evil in your
conduct. The word wholly, ὁλοτελεις means precisely the same as our
phrase, to all intents and purposes. May he sanctify you to the end and
to the uttermost, that, as sin hath reigned unto death, even so may
grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Your whole spirit and soul and body - Some think that the apostle
alludes to the Pythagorean and Platonic doctrine, which was acknowledged
among the Thessalonians. I should rather believe that he refers simply
to the fact, that the creature called man is a compound being,
consisting,

1\. Of a body, σωμα, an organized system, formed by the creative energy
of God out of the dust of the earth; composed of bones, muscles, and
nerves; of arteries, veins, and a variety of other vessels, in which the
blood and other fluids circulate.

2\. Of a soul, ψυχη, which is the seat of the different affections and
passions, such as love, hatred, anger, etc., with sensations, appetites,
and propensities of different kinds.

3\. Of spirit, πνευμα, the immortal principle, the source of life to the
body and soul, without which the animal functions cannot be performed,
how perfect soever the bodily organs may be; and which alone possesses
the faculty of intelligence, understanding, thinking, and reasoning, and
produces the faculty of speech wherever it resides, if accident have not
impaired the organs of speech.

The apostle prays that this compound being, in all its parts, powers,
and faculties, which he terms ὁλοκληρον, their whole, comprehending all
parts, every thing that constitutes man and manhood, may be sanctified
and preserved blameless till the coming of Christ; hence we learn,

1\. That body, soul, and spirit are debased and polluted by sin.

2\. That each is capable of being sanctified, consecrated in all its
powers to God, and made holy.

3\. That the whole man is to be preserved to the coming of Christ, that
body, soul, and spirit may be then glorified for ever with him.

4\. That in this state the whole man may be so sanctified as to be
preserved blameless till the coming of Christ. And thus we learn that
the sanctification is not to take place in, at, or after death. On the
pollution and sanctification of flesh and spirit, see the note on [Co2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001).

[1 Thessalonians 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">th1 5:24</span></span>

Faithful is he that calleth you - In a great variety of places in his
word God has promised to sanctify his followers, and his faithfulness
binds him to fulfill his promises; therefore he will do it. He who can
believe will find this thing also possible to him.

[1 Thessalonians 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">th1 5:25</span></span>

Pray for me - Even apostles, while acting under an extraordinary
mission, and enjoying the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, felt the
necessity of the prayers of the faithful. God requires that his people
should pray for his ministers; and it is not to be wondered at, if they
who pray not for their preachers should receive no benefit from their
teaching. How can they expect God to send a message by him, for whom
they, who are the most interested, have not prayed? If the grace and
Spirit of Christ be not worth the most earnest prayers which a man can
offer, they, and the heaven to which they lead, are not worth having.

[1 Thessalonians 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">th1 5:26</span></span>

Greet all the brethren - See the note on [Rom
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#016). Instead of all the brethren,
the Coptic has, greet one another; a reading not noticed by either
Griesbach or Wetstein.

[1 Thessalonians 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">th1 5:27</span></span>

I charge you by the Lord, that this epistle be read - There must have
been some particular reason for this solemn charge; he certainly had
some cause to suspect that the epistle would be suppressed in some way
or other, and that the whole Church would not be permitted to hear it;
or he may refer to the smaller Churches contiguous to Thessalonica, or
the Churches in Macedonia in general, whom he wished to hear it, as well
as those to whom it was more immediately directed. There is no doubt
that the apostles designed that their epistles should be copied, and
sent to all the Churches in the vicinity of that to which they were
directed. Had this not been the case, a great number of Churches would
have known scarcely any thing of the New Testament. As every Jewish
synagogue had a copy of the law and the prophets, so every Christian
Church had a copy of the gospels and the epistles, which were daily, or
at least every Sabbath, read for the instruction of the people. This the
apostle deemed so necessary, that he adjured them by the Lord to read
this epistle to all the brethren; i.e. to all the Christians in that
district. Other Churches might get copies of it; and thus, no doubt, it
soon became general. In this way other parts of the sacred writings were
disseminated through all the Churches of the Gentiles; and the errors of
the different scribes, employed to take copies, constituted what are now
called the various readings.

[1 Thessalonians 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">th1 5:28</span></span>

The grace of our Lord Jesus - As the epistle began so it ends; for the
grace of Christ must be at the beginning and end of every work, in order
to complete it, and bring it to good effect.

Amen - This is wanting in BD\*FG and some others. It was probably not
written by St. Paul.

The subscriptions are, as in other cases, various and contradictory. The
chief MSS. conclude as follows: The first to the Thessalonians is
completed; the second to the Thessalonians begins - DFG. The first to
the Thessalonians written from Athens - AB, and others. From Laodicea -
Cod. Claromont. The first to the Thessalonians, written from Athens -
Common Greek text.

The Versions conclude thus: -

The First Epistle to the Thessalonians was written at Athens, and sent
by the hands of Timotheus. - Syriac.

To the Thessalonians. - Aethiopic.

Nothing in the Vulgate.

The end of the epistle: it was written from a city of the Athenians, and
sent by the hand of Timotheus.

And to the Lord be praise for ever and ever. Amen. - Arabic.

Written from Athens, and sent by Silvanus and Timotheus. - Coptic.

That it was not sent by either Silvanus or Timothy is evident enough
from the inscription, for St. Paul associates these two with himself, in
directing it to the Thessalonian Church. Others say that it was sent by
Tychicus and Onesimus, but this also is absurd; for Onesimus was not
converted till a considerable time after the writing of this epistle.
That it was written by St. Paul, there is no doubt; and that it was
written at Corinth, and not at Athens, has been shown in the preface.

1\. The two preceding chapters are certainly among the most important
and the most sublime in the New Testament. The general judgment, the
resurrection of the body, and the states of the quick and dead, the
unrighteous and the just, are described, concisely indeed, but they are
exhibited in the most striking and affecting points of view. I have
attempted little else than verbal illustrations; the subject is too vast
for my comprehension; I cannot order my speech by reason of darkness.
Though there are some topics handled here which do not appear in other
parts of the sacred writings, yet the main of what we learn is this.
"Our God will come, and will not keep silence; a fire shall burn before
him, and it shall be very tempestuous round about him; he shall call to
the heavens above, and to the earth beneath, that he may judge his
people. "The day of judgment! what an awful word is this! what a truly
terrific time! when the heavens shall be shrivelled as a scroll, and the
elements melt with fervent heat; when the earth and its appendages shall
be burnt up, and the fury of that conflagration be such that there shall
be no more sea! A time when the noble and ignoble dead, the small and
the great, shall stand before God, and all be judged according to the
deeds done in the body; yea, a time when the thoughts of the heart and
every secret thing shall be brought to light; when the innumerable
millions of transgressions, and embryo and abortive sins, shall be
exhibited in all their purposes and intents; a time when Justice,
eternal Justice, shall sit alone upon the throne, and pronounce a
sentence as impartial as irrevocable, and as awful as eternal! There is
a term of human life; and every human being is rapidly gliding to it as
fast as the wings of time, in their onward motion, incomprehensibly
swift, can carry him! And shall not the living lay this to heart? Should
we not live in order to die? Should we not die in order to be judged?
And should we not live and die so as to live again to all eternity, not
with Satan and his angels, but with God and his saints? O thou man of
God! thou Christian! thou immortal spirit! think of these things.

2\. The subject in [Th1 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#027) of the
last chapter I have but slightly noticed: I charge you, by the Lord,
that this epistle be read unto all the holy brethren. This is
exceedingly strange; the Epistles to the Romans, the Corinthians,
Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and Thessalonians, were
directed to the whole Church in each of those places; why, then, after
directing this, as he did all the rest, to the whole Church, should he
at the conclusion adjure them, by the Lord, that it should be read to
all the holy brethren; that is, to the very persons to whom it was
addressed? Is there not some mystery here? Has it not been the endeavor
of Satan, from the beginning, to keep men from consulting the oracles of
God; and has he not used even the authority of the Church to accomplish
this his purpose! Was not the prohibiting the use of the Scriptures to
the people at large the mystery of iniquity which then began to work,
and against which the adjuration of the apostle is directed? see second
epistle, chap. 2; this mystery, which was the grand agent in the hands
of Mystery, Babylon the Great, to keep the people in darkness, that the
unauthorized and wicked pretensions of this mother of the abominations
of the earth might not be brought to the test; but that she might
continue to wear her crown, sit on her scarlet beast, and subject the
Christian world to her empire. Was it not the Christian world's total
ignorance of God's book which the Romish Church took care to keep from
the people at large, that induced them patiently, yet with terror, to
bow down to all her usurpations, and to swallow down monstrous doctrines
which she imposed upon them as Christian verities? Was it not this
deplorable ignorance which induced kings and emperors to put their
necks, literally, under the feet of this usurped and antichristian
power? This mystery of iniquity continues still to work; and with all
the pretensions of the Romish Church, the Scriptures are in general
withheld from the people, or suffered to be read under such restrictions
and with such notes as totally subvert the sense of those passages on
which this Church endeavors to build her unscriptural pretensions. It is
generally allowed that the Vulgate version is the most favorable to
these pretensions, and yet even that version the rulers of the Church
dare not trust in the hands of any of their people, even under their
general ecclesiastical restrictions, without their counteracting notes
and comments. How strange is this! and yet in this Church there have
been, and still are, many enlightened and eminent men; surely truth has
nothing to fear from the Bible. When the Romish Church permits the free
use of this book, she may be stripped, indeed, of some of her
appendages, but she will lose nothing but her dross and tin, and become
what the original Church at Rome was, beloved of God, called to be
saints; and have her faith, once more, spoken of throughout all the
world, [Rom 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007), [Rom
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008). She has, in her own hands the
means of her own regeneration; and a genuine Protestant will wish, not
her destruction, but her reformation; and if she consent not to be
reformed, her total destruction is inevitable.

Finished correcting for a new edition, on the shortest day of 1831. - A.
C.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Introduction](th2000)

</div>
