<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2)  
  [Previous](th2002)  [Next](ti1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001)

[2 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th2 3:0</span></span>

The apostle recommends himself and his brethren to the prayers of the
Church, that their preaching might be successful, and that they might be
delivered from wicked men, [Th2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001),
[Th2 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#002). Expresses his confidence in
God and them, and prays that they may patiently wait for the coming of
Christ, [Th2 3:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#003). Gives them
directions concerning strict discipline in the Church; and shows how he
and his fellow laborers had behaved among them, not availing themselves
of their own power and authority, [Th2
3:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006). Shows them how to treat
disorderly and idle people, and not to get weary in well doing, [Th2
3:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010). Directs them not to associate
with those who obey not the orders contained in this epistle, [Th2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#014), [Th2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#015), Prays that they may have
increasing peace, 16, And concludes with his salutation and benediction,
[Th2 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017), [Th2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#018).

[2 Thessalonians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th2 3:1</span></span>

Finally, brethren - The words το λοιπον do not mean finally, but,
furthermore - to come to a conclusion - what remains is this - I shall
only add - any of these phrases expresses the sense of the original.

Pray for us - God, in the order of his grace and providence, has made
even the success of his Gospel dependent, in a certain measure, on the
prayers of his followers. Why he should do so we cannot tell, but that
he has done so we know; and they are not a little criminal who neglect
to make fervent supplications for the prosperity of the cause of God.

May have free course - They were to pray that the doctrine of the Lord,
ὁ λογος του Κυριου, might run, τρεχῃ, an allusion to the races in the
Olympic games: that, as it had already got into the stadium or race
course, and had started fairly, so it might run on, get to the goal, and
be glorified; i.e., gain the crown, appointed for him that should get
first to the end of the course.

[2 Thessalonians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">th2 3:2</span></span>

Unreasonable and wicked men - The word ατοπων, which we translate
unreasonable, signifies rather disorderly, unmanageable; persons out of
their place - under no discipline, regardless of law and restraint, and
ever acting agreeably to the disorderly and unreasonable impulse of
their own minds.

For all men have not faith - The word πιστις is without doubt, to be
taken here for fidelity or trustworthiness, and not for faith; and this
is agreeable to the meaning given to it in the very next verse: But the
Lord is faithful, πιστος δε εστιν ὁ Κυριος.

There are many, even of those who have received a measure of the Divine
light, in whom we cannot confide; they are irregular, disorderly, and
cannot be brought under regular discipline: to these we cannot trust
either ourselves or any thing that concerns the cause of God. But the
Lord is worthy of your whole confidence; doubt him not; he will
establish you, and keep you from any evil to which you may be exposed by
these or such like persons.

[2 Thessalonians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th2 3:3</span></span>

From evil - Απο του πονηρου may be translated, from the devil or from
the evil one. They had disorderly men, wicked men, and the evil one or
the devil, to contend with; God alone could support and give them the
victory; he had promised to do it, and he might ever be confided in as
being invariably faithful.

[2 Thessalonians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th2 3:4</span></span>

And we have confidence - We have no doubt of God's kindness towards you;
he loves you, and will support you: and we can confide in you, that ye
are now acting as we have desired you, and will continue so to do.

[2 Thessalonians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th2 3:5</span></span>

The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God - The love of God is
the grand motive and principle of obedience; this must occupy your
hearts: the heart is irregular in all its workings; God alone, by his
Spirit, can direct it into his love, and keep it right; κατευθυναι, give
a proper direction to all its passions, and keep them in order,
regularity and purity.

The patience of Christ - Such patience, under all your sufferings and
persecutions, as Christ manifested under his. He bore meekly the
contradiction of sinners against himself; and when he was reviled, he
reviled not again.

[2 Thessalonians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th2 3:6</span></span>

That ye withdraw yourselves - Have no fellowship with those who will not
submit to proper discipline; who do not keep their place; ατακτως, such
as are out of their rank, and act according to their own wills and
caprices; and particularly such as are idle and busybodies. These he had
ordered, [Th1 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#011), [Th1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#012), that they should study to be
quiet, mind their own business, and work with their hands; but it
appears that they had paid no attention to this order, and now he
desires the Church to exclude such from their communion.

And not after the tradition - This evidently refers to the orders
contained in the first epistle; and that first epistle was the tradition
which they had received from him. It was, therefore, no unwritten word,
no uncertain saying, handed about from one to another; but a part of the
revelation which God had given, and which they found in the body of his
epistle. These are the only traditions which the Church of God is called
to regard.

[2 Thessalonians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th2 3:7</span></span>

We behaved not ourselves disorderly - Ουκ ητακτησαμεν· We did not go out
of our rank - we kept our place, and discharged all its duties.

[2 Thessalonians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th2 3:8</span></span>

Neither did we eat any man's bread for naught - We paid for what we
bought, and worked with our hands that we might have money to buy what
was necessary.

Labour and travail night and day - We were incessantly employed, either
in preaching the Gospel, visiting from house to house, or working at our
calling. As it is very evident that the Church at Thessalonica was very
pious, and most affectionately attached to the apostle, they must have
been very poor, seeing he was obliged to work hard to gain himself the
necessaries of life. Had they been able to support him he would not have
worked with labor and travail night and day, that he might not be
burdensome to them; and, as we may presume that they were very poor, he
could not have got his support among them without adding to their
burdens. To this his generous mind could not submit; it is no wonder,
therefore, that he is so severe against those who would not labor, but
were a burden to the poor followers of God.

[2 Thessalonians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th2 3:9</span></span>

Not because we have not power - We have the power, εξουσιαν, the right,
to be maintained by those in whose behalf we labor. The laborer is
worthy of his hire, is a maxim universally acknowledged and respected;
and they who preach the Gospel should live by the Gospel: the apostle
did not claim his privilege, but labored for his own support, that he
might be an example to those whom he found otherwise disposed, and that
he might spare the poor. See [Co1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001),
etc.

[2 Thessalonians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">th2 3:10</span></span>

If any would not work, neither should he eat - This is a just maxim, and
universal nature inculcates it to man. If man will work, he may eat; if
he do not work, he neither can eat, nor should he eat. The maxim is
founded on these words of the Lord: In the sweat of thy brow thou shall
eat bread. Industry is crowned with God's blessing; idleness is loaded
with his curse. This maxim was a proverb among the Jews. Men who can
work, and will rather support themselves by begging, should not get one
morsel of bread. It is a sin to minister to necessities that are merely
artificial.

[2 Thessalonians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th2 3:11</span></span>

For we hear that there are some - It is very likely that St. Paul kept
up some sort of correspondence with the Thessalonian Church; for he had
heard every thing that concerned their state, and it was from this
information that he wrote his second epistle.

Disorderly - Ατακτως· Out of their rank - not keeping their own place.

Working not at all - Either lounging at home, or becoming religious
gossips; μηδεν εργαζομενους, doing nothing.

Busybodies - Περιεργαζομενους· Doing every thing they should not do -
impertinent meddlers with other people's business; prying into other
people's circumstances and domestic affairs; magnifying or minifying,
mistaking or underrating, every thing; newsmongers and telltales; an
abominable race, the curse of every neighborhood where they live, and a
pest to religious society. There is a fine paronomasia in the above
words, and evidently intended by the apostle.

[2 Thessalonians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">th2 3:12</span></span>

With quietness they work - Μετα ἡσυχιας· With silence; leaving their
tale-bearing and officious intermeddling. Less noise and more work!

That - they work, and eat their own bread - Their own bread, because
earned by their own honest industry. What a degrading thing to live on
the bounty or mercy of another, while a man is able to acquire his own
livelihood! He who can submit to this has lost the spirit of
independence; and has in him a beggar's heart, and is capable of nothing
but base and beggarly actions. Witness the great mass of the people of
England, who by their dependence on the poor rates are, from being
laborious, independent, and respect able, become idle, profligate, and
knavish; the propagators and perpetrators of crime; a discredit to the
nation, and a curse to society. The apostle's command is a cure for
such; and the Church of God should discountenance such, and disown them.

[2 Thessalonians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th2 3:13</span></span>

Be not weary in well-doing - While ye stretch out no hand of relief to
the indolent and lazy, do not forget the real poor - the genuine
representatives of an impoverished Christ; and rather relieve a hundred
undeserving objects, than pass by one who is a real object of charity.

[2 Thessalonians 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">th2 3:14</span></span>

If any man obey not - They had disobeyed his word in the first epistle,
and the Church still continued to bear with them; now he tells the
Church, if they still continue to disregard what is said to them, and
particularly his word by this second epistle, they are to mark them as
being totally incorrigible, and have no fellowship with them.

Some construe the words δια της επιστολης with τουτον σημειουσθε· Give
me information of that man by a letter - let me hear of his continued
obstinacy, and send me his name. This was probably in order to
excommunicate him, and deliver him over to Satan for the destruction of
the body, that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
The words of the original will bear either construction, that in the
text, or that given above.

[2 Thessalonians 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">th2 3:15</span></span>

Count him not as an enemy - Consider him still more an enemy to himself
than to you; and admonish him as a brother, though you have ceased to
hold religious communion with him. His soul is still of infinite value;
labor to get it saved.

[2 Thessalonians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">th2 3:16</span></span>

The Lord of peace - Jesus Christ, who is called our peace, [Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014); and The Prince of peace, [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006). May he give you peace, for he is
the Fountain and Dispenser of it.

Always - Both in your own consciences, and among yourselves.

By all means - Παντι τροπῳ· By all means, methods, occasions,
instruments, and occurrences; peace or prosperity in every form and
shape.

Instead of εν παντι τροπῳ, in every way, etc., εν παντι τοπῳ, in every
place, is the reading of A\*D\*FG, some others; with the Vulgate and
Itala. Chrysostom, Ambrosiaster, Augustine, and others, have the same
reading: May God grant you prosperity always, and everywhere.

The Lord be with you all - This is agreeable to the promise of our Lord:
Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world; [Mat
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020). May the Lord, who has promised
to be always with his true disciples, be with you! Christians are the
temple of God, and the temple of God has the Divine presence in it. May
you ever continue to be his Church, that the Lord God may dwell among
you!

[2 Thessalonians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">th2 3:17</span></span>

The salutation of Paul with mine own hand - It is very likely that Paul
employed an amanuensis generally, either to write what he dictated, or
to make a fair copy of what he wrote. In either case the apostle always
subscribed it, and wrote the salutation and benediction with his own
hand; and this was what authenticated all his epistles. A measure of
this kind would be very necessary if forged epistles were carried about
in those times. See the note on [Co1
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#021), and see [Col
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#018) (note).

[2 Thessalonians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">th2 3:18</span></span>

The grace - The favor, blessing, and influence of our Lord Jesus Christ,
be with you all - be your constant companion. May you ever feel his
presence, and enjoy his benediction!

Amen - So let be! God grant it! This word in this place, has more
evidence in favor of its genuineness than it has in most other places;
and was probably added here by the apostle himself, or by the Church of
the Thessalonians.

The subscriptions to this epistle are various in the MSS. and Versions.
The latter are as follows: -

The Second Epistle to the Thessalonians was written from Athens. -
Common Greek text.

The Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, which was written at Laodicea
in Pisidia, was sent by the hands of Tychicus. - Syriac.

The end of the Epistle; and it was written at Athens. - Arabic.

To the Thessalonians. - Aethiopic.

Written from Athens, and sent by Silvanus and Timotheus. - Coptic.

No subscription in the Vulgate.

Written at Corinth. - Author of the Synopsis.

\- sent by Titus and Onesimus. - Latin Prologue.

The Second Epistle to the Thessalonians, written from Rome. - No. 71, a
MS. of the Vatican library, written about the eleventh century.

The chief of the MSS. either have no subscription, or agree with some of
the above versions.

That the epistle was neither written at Athens, Laodicea, nor Rome, has
been sufficiently proved; and that it was written, as well as the first,
at Corinth, is extremely probable. See the preface, and what has been
said on the preceding epistle.

I have often had occasion to observe that the subscriptions at the end
of the sacred books are not of Divine origin; they are generally false;
and yet some have quoted them as making a part of the sacred test, and
have adduced them in support of some favourite opinions.

Finished correcting this epistle for a new edition, the shortest day in
1831. - A. C.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Introduction](ti1000)

</div>
