<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1004)  [Next](ti1006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#001)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 5:0</span></span>

Rules to be observed in giving reproofs to the old and to the young,
[Ti1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#001), [Ti1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#002). Directions concerning widows,
[Ti1 5:3-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#003). Of elders that rule well,
[Ti1 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017), [Ti1
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#018). How to proceed against elders
when accused, and against notorious offenders, [Ti1
5:10-21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010). Directions concerning
imposition of hands, [Ti1 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022).
Concerning Timothy's health, [Ti1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023). Reasons why no person should be
hastily appointed to sacred offices, [Ti1
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#024), [Ti1
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#025).

[1 Timothy 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 5:1</span></span>

Rebuke not an elder - That is, an elderly person; for the word
πρεσβυτερος is here taken in its natural sense, and signifies one
advanced in years. At [Ti1 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017), it is
taken in what may be termed its ecclesiastical meaning, and signifies,
an officer in the Church, what we commonly call a presbyter or bishop;
for sometimes these terms were confounded. There are but few cases in
which it at all becomes a young man to reprove an old man, and
especially one who is a father in the Church. If such a one does wrong,
or gets out of the way, he should be entreated as a father, with great
caution and respect. To this at least his age entitles him. The word
επιπληξῃς signifies, do not smite; i.e. do not treat them harshly, nor
with magisterial austerity.

The younger men as brethren - Showing humility, and arrogating nothing
to thyself on account of thy office. Feel for them as thou oughtest to
feel for thy own brethren.

[1 Timothy 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 5:2</span></span>

The elder women as mothers - Treating them with the respect due to their
age.

The younger as sisters - Feel for every member of the Church, old and
young, male and female; consider them as fathers, mothers, brothers, and
sisters; treat them all with gentleness; and labor to keep them in, not
to expel them from, the Church.

With all purity - Εν πασῃ ἁγνειᾳ· With all chastity. See the note on
[Ti1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012).

There are some who seem to take a barbarous pleasure in expelling
members from, the Church. They should be continued in as long as
possible; while they are in the Church - under its ordinances and
discipline, there is some hope that their errors may be corrected; but
when once driven out again into the world, that hope must necessarily
become extinct. As judgment is God's strange work, so excommunication
should be the strange, the last, and the most reluctantly performed work
of every Christian minister.

[1 Timothy 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 5:3</span></span>

Honor widows that are widows indeed - One meaning of the word τιμαω, to
honor, is to support, sustain, etc., [Mat
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#004), [Mat
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#005); and here it is most obviously to
be taken in this sense. Provide for those widows especially which are
widows indeed - persons truly destitute, being aged and helpless, and
having neither children nor friends to take care of them, and who behave
as becometh their destitute state. But see the note on [Ti1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010).

[1 Timothy 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 5:4</span></span>

But if any widow have children or nephews - This shows that widows
indeed are those that have neither children nor nephews, i.e. no
relatives that either will or can help them, or no near relatives alive.

Let them learn first to show piety at home - Let these children and
nephews provide for their aged or helpless parents or relatives, and not
burden the Church with them while they are able to support them.

And to requite their parents - Και αμοιβας αποδιδοναι τοις προγονοις·
Let them learn to give benefit for benefit. Your parents supported and
nourished you when you were young and helpless; you ought therefore to
support them when they are old and destitute. This is called showing
piety; and there is doubtless an allusion to the fifth commandment:
Honour thy father and thy mother - provide for them in their old age and
afflictions; God commands this.

[1 Timothy 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 5:5</span></span>

And desolate - Και μεμονωμενη· Left entirely alone - having neither
children nor relatives to take care of her.

Trusteth in God - Finding she has no other helper, she continues in
prayer and supplication, that she may derive that from God which, in the
course of his providence, he has deprived her of among men.

[1 Timothy 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 5:6</span></span>

But she that liveth in pleasure - Ἡ δε σπαταλωσα· She that liveth
delicately - voluptuously indulging herself with dainties; it does not
indicate grossly criminal pleasures; but simply means one who indulges
herself in good eating and drinking, pampering her body at the expense
of her mind. The word is used in reference to what we term petted and
spoiled children; and a remarkable passage, is produced by Kypke, from
an epistle of Theanus to Eubulus, found in Opusc. Myth. Galaei, page
741, where he says: "What can be done with that boy, who, if he have not
food when and as he pleases, bursts out into weeping; and, if he eats,
must have dainties and sweetmeats? If the weather be hot he complains of
fatigue; if it be cold, he trembles; if he be reproved, he scolds; if
every thing be not provided for him according to his wish, he is
enraged. If he eats not, he breaks out into fits of anger. He basely
indulges himself in pleasure; and in every respect acts voluptuously and
effeminately. Knowing then, O friend, ὁτι τα σπαταλωντα των παιδιων,
ὁταν ακμασῃ προς ανδρας, ανδραποδα γινεται, τας τοιαυτας ἡδονας αφαιρει·
that boys living thus voluptuously, when they grow up are wont to become
slaves; take away, therefore, such pleasures from them." I have
introduced this long quotation, the better to fix the meaning of the
apostle, and to show that the life of pleasure mentioned here does not
mean prostitution or uncleanness of any kind, though such a life may
naturally lead to dissolute manners.

Is dead while she liveth - No purpose of life is answered by the
existence of such a person. Seneca, in Epist. 60, says of
pleasure-takers, and those who live a voluptuous life: Hos itaque
animalium loco numeremus, non hominum: quosdam vero ne animalium quidem,
sed mortuorum - mortem antecesserunt. "We rank such persons with brutes,
not with men; and some of them not even with brutes, but with dead
carcasses. They anticipate their own death." Such persons are, as the
apostle says elsewhere, dead in trespasses, and dead in sins.

[1 Timothy 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 5:7</span></span>

That they may be blameless - Charge the whole Church to attend to these
things, that they may be blameless. The words are not spoken of the
widows only, but of the Church or its officers; it cannot be restricted
to the widows, for the adjective ανεπιληπτοι is both of the masculine
and feminine gender.

[1 Timothy 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 5:8</span></span>

But if any provide not for his own - His own people or relatives.

Those of his own house - That is, his own family, or a poor widow or
relative that lives under his roof.

Hath denied the faith - The Christian religion, which strongly
inculcates love and benevolence to all mankind.

Is worse than an infidel - For what are called the dictates of nature
lead men to feel for and provide for their own families. Heathen writers
are full of maxims of this kind; Tacitus says: Liberos cuique ac
propinquos Natura carissimos esse voluit. "Nature dictates that to every
one his own children and relatives should be most dear." And Cicero, in
Epist. ad Caption: Suos quisque debet tueri. "Every man should take care
of his own family."

[1 Timothy 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 5:9</span></span>

Taken into the number - Let her not be taken into the list of those for
which the Church must provide. But some think that the apostle means the
list of those who were deaconesses in the Church; and that no widow was
to be admitted into that rank who did not answer to the following
character. See on [Ti1 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010) (note).

Under threescore years - As it might be supposed that, previously to
this age, they might be able to do something towards their own support.
See on [Ti1 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010) (note).

Having been the wife of one man - Having lived in conjugal fidelity with
her husband; or having had but one husband at a time; or, according to
others, having never been but once married. But the former is the
opinion of some of the most eminent of the Greek fathers, and appears to
be that most consistent with the scope of the place, and with truth.

[1 Timothy 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 5:10</span></span>

Well reported of for good works - Numbers being able to bear testimony,
as the word implies, that she has not only avoided all sin, but that she
has walked according to the testimony of God.

Brought up children - It was customary among the Gentiles to expose
their children, when so poor that they were not able to provide for
them. Pious and humane people took these up; and fed, clothed, and
educated them. The words brought up may refer to the children of others,
who were educated in the Christian faith by pious Christian women.

Lodged strangers - If she have been given to hospitality, freely
contributing to the necessitous, when she had it in her power.

Washed the saints' feet - This was an office of humanity shown to all
strangers and travelers in the eastern countries, who, either walking
barefoot, or having only a sort of sole to defend the foot, needed
washing when they came to their journey's end. Pious women generally did
this act of kindness.

Relieved the afflicted - Visited and ministered to the sick.

Diligently followed every good work - In a word, if she have been
altogether a Christian, living according to the precepts of the Gospel,
and doing the Lord's work with all her heart, soul, and strength.

From the character given here of the widow indeed, it may be doubted
whether χηρα, widow, was not in some cases the name of an office, which
name it might have from being ordinarily filled by widows. It can hardly
be supposed that any widow, unless she had considerable property, could
have done the things enumerated in this verse, some of which would
occasion no small expense. The widow indeed may mean a person who was to
be employed in some office in the Church; and Timothy is enjoined not to
take any into that office unless she had been before remarkable for
piety and humanity. Some think that the widows of whom the apostle
speaks had been deaconesses, and wished now to be taken on what might be
termed the superannuated list; and the apostle lays down rules for the
admission of such, the sum of which is: Let none come on this
superannuated list unless she be at least sixty years of age, and can
bring proof of her having conscientiously discharged the office and duty
of a deaconess.

[1 Timothy 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 5:11</span></span>

But the younger widows refuse - Do not admit those into this office who
are under sixty years of age. Probably those who were received into such
a list promised to abide in their widowhood. But as young or
comparatively young women might have both occasion and temptations to
remarry, and so break their engagement to Christ, they should not be
admitted. Not that the apostle condemns their remarrying as a crime in
itself, but because it was contrary to their engagement. See on [Ti1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014) (note).

Wax wanton - Καταστρηνιασωσι· From κατα, intensive, and στρηνιαω, to act
in a luxurious or wanton manner. The word is supposed to be derived from
στερειν, to remove, and ἡνια, the rein; and is a metaphor taken from a
pampered horse, from whose mouth the rein has been removed, so that
there is nothing to check or confine him. The metaphor is plain enough,
and the application easy.

[1 Timothy 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 5:12</span></span>

Having damnation - In the sense in which we use this word I am satisfied
the apostle never intended it. It is likely that he refers here to some
promise or engagement which they made when taken on the list already
mentioned, and now they have the guilt of having violated that promise;
this is the κριμα, or condemnation, of which the apostle speaks.

They have cast off their first faith - By pledging their fidelity to a
husband they have cast off their fidelity to Christ, as a married life
and their previous engagement are incompatible. Dr. Macknight translates
these two verses thus: But the younger widows reject, for when they
cannot endure Christ's rein, they will marry; incurring condemnation,
because they have put away their first fidelity.

[1 Timothy 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 5:13</span></span>

And withal they learn to be idle - They do not love work, and they will
not work.

Wandering about from house to house - Gadding, gossiping; never
contented with home; always visiting.

And not only idle - If it went no farther, this would be intolerable;
but they are tattlers - tale-bearers; whisperers; light, trifling
persons; all noise and no work.

Busybodies - Persons who meddle with the concerns of others; who mind
every one's business but their own.

Speaking things which they ought not - Lies, slanders, calumnies;
backbiting their neighbors, and everywhere sowing the seed of
dissension.

[1 Timothy 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 5:14</span></span>

I will therefore that the younger women marry - As the preceding
discourse has been about the younger widows, and this is an inference
from it; it is most evident that by the younger women the apostle means
the young widows. These he considers unfit for the office of the female
diaconate, and therefore wills them to marry, educate children, and give
themselves wholly up to domestic affairs. Here the apostle, so far from
forbidding second marriages, positively enjoins or at least recommends
them. And what man of sense could have done otherwise in the cases he
mentions? It is no sin in any case to marry, bear children, and take
care of a family; but it is a sin in every case to be idle persons,
gadders about, tattlers, busybodies, sifting out and detailing family
secrets, etc., etc. The good sentiment, put by an able poet and pious
divine into the mouths of little children, cannot be ill applied to
multitudes of women, mothers, and grandmothers: - "See how the little
busy bee Improves each shining hour, And gathers honey all the day From
every opening flower! In works of labor or of skill, We should be busy
too; For Satan finds some mischief, still, For idle hands to do." Dr.
Watts.

The adversary - Any person, whether Jew or Gentile, who might be
watching for an occasion to reproach, through the misconduct of its
professors, the cause of Christianity.

[1 Timothy 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 5:15</span></span>

For some are already turned aside - Some of these young widows, for he
appears to be still treating of them, are turned aside to idolatry, to
follow Satan instead of Christ. Slight deviations, in the first
instance, from a right line, may lead at last to an infinite distance
from Christ.

[1 Timothy 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti1 5:16</span></span>

If any man or woman that believeth - If any Christian man or woman have
poor widows, which are their relatives, let them relieve them - provide
them with the necessaries of life, and not burden the Church with their
maintenance, that the funds may be spared for the support of those
widows who were employed in its service, teaching children, visiting the
sick, etc., etc. For the performing of such offices it is very likely
that none but widows were employed; and these were chosen, other things
being equal, out of the most indigent of the widows, and therefore
called by the apostle, here and in [Ti1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#003), αἱς οντως χηραι, widows indeed -
widows desolate, without support, and without relatives. See on [Ti1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#010) (note).

[1 Timothy 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ti1 5:17</span></span>

Let the elders that rule well - Elder is probably here the name of an
ecclesiastical officer, similar to what we now term presbyter. See on
[Ti1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#001) (note). Dr. Macknight has
remarked that, "in the first age, the name πρεσβυτερος, elder, was given
to all who exercised any sacred office in the Church, as is plain from
[Act 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028), where the persons are
called επισκοποι, bishops, who, [Act
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017), were called πρεσβυτεροι,
elders. The same thing appears from [Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005), where those are called elders
who, [Tit 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007), are named bishops; and
from [Ti1 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014), where, collectively,
all who held sacred offices in Lystra are called πρεσβυτεριον, the
presbytery or eldership, and are said to have concurred with St. Paul in
setting Timothy apart to the ministry."

Double honor - Διπλης τιμης. Almost every critic of note allows that
τιμη here signifies reward, stipend, wages. Let him have a double or a
larger salary who rules well; and why? Because in the discharge of his
office he must be at expense, in proportion to his diligence, in
visiting and relieving the sick, in lodging and providing for strangers;
in a word, in his being given to hospitality, which was required of
every bishop or presbyter.

Especially they who labor in the word and doctrine - Those who not only
preach publicly, but instruct privately, catechize, etc. Some think this
refers to distinct ecclesiastical orders; but these technical
distinctions were, in my opinion, a work of later times.

[1 Timothy 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ti1 5:18</span></span>

The Scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox - This is a manifest
proof that by τιμη, honor, in the preceding verse, the apostle means
salary or wages: "Let the elders that rule well be accounted worthy of
double honor," a larger salary than any of the official widows mentioned
before, for "the laborer is worthy of his hire." The maintenance of
every man in the Church should be in proportion to his own labor, and
the necessities of his family. He that does no work should have no
wages. In the Church of Christ there never can be a sinecure. They who
minister at the altar should live by the altar; the ox that treadeth out
the corn should not be muzzled; the laborer is worthy of his hire: but
the altar should not support him who does not minister at it; if the ox
won't tread out the corn, let him go to the common or be muzzled; if the
man will not labor, let him have no hire.

[1 Timothy 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ti1 5:19</span></span>

Against an elder - Be very cautious of receiving evil reports against
those whose business it is to preach to others, and correct their vices.
Do not consider an elder as guilty of any alleged crime, unless it be
proved by two or three witnesses. This the law of Moses required in
respect to all. Among the Romans, a plebeian might be condemned on the
deposition of one credible witness; but it required two to convict a
senator. The reason of this difference is evident: those whose business
it is to correct others will usually have many enemies; great caution,
therefore, should be used in admitting accusations against such persons.

[1 Timothy 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ti1 5:20</span></span>

Them that sin rebuke before all - That is, before the members of the
Church; which was the custom of the Jews in their synagogues. But, if
the words refer to the elders alone, then the transgressing elder is to
be reproved before his fellows, and be tried by them.

That others also may fear - This is the grand object of Church censures,
to reclaim the transgressors, and to give warning to others.

[1 Timothy 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ti1 5:21</span></span>

I charge thee before God - The apostle would have Timothy to consider
that all he did should be done as in the sight of God, the Father of the
spirits of all flesh; in the sight of Christ, the Savior of sinners, who
purchased the Church with his own blood; and in the sight of the most
holy, approved, and eminent angels, whose office it was to minister to
the heirs of salvation. The word εκλεκτοι, elect, applied to the angels
here, is supposed to distinguish those who stood, when others fell from
their first estate. The former were elect, or approved; the latter
reprobate, or disapproved. This is not an unfrequent sense of the word
εκλεκτος, elect. Perhaps there is nothing else meant than the angels
that are chosen out from among others, by the Lord himself, to be
ministering servants to the Church.

Without preferring one before another - Χωρις προκριματος· Without
prejudice. Promote no man's cause; make not up thy mind on any case,
till thou hast weighed both sides, and heard both parties, with their
respective witnesses; and then act impartially, as the matter may appear
to be proved. Do not treat any man, in religious matters, according to
the rank he holds in life, or according to any personal attachment thou
mayest have for him. Every man should be dealt with in the Church as he
will be dealt with at the judgment-seat of Christ. A minister of the
Gospel, who, in the exercise of discipline in the Church, is swayed and
warped by secular considerations, will be a curse rather than a blessing
to the people of God. Accepting the persons of the rich, in
ecclesiastical matters, has been a source of corruption in Christianity.
With some ministers the show of piety in a rich man goes farther than
the soundest Christian experience in the poor. What account can such
persons give of their stewardship?

[1 Timothy 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ti1 5:22</span></span>

Lay hands suddenly on no man - Do not hastily appoint any person to the
sacred ministry: let the person be well proved before he receives the
imposition of hands. Some understand this of laying hands on the sick.

Neither be partaker of other men's sins - It is a sin for any improper
person to thrust himself into the sacred office; and he partakes of that
sin who introduces, helps him forward, or sanctions him in it. O, what
an account will rash, undiscerning, and prejudiced bishops, presbyters,
and others, have to render to God for their ordinations! Their laying
rash or careless hands "on skulls that cannot teach, and will not
learn;" while probably they refuse inducting others well qualified for
the Christian ministry.

Keep thyself pure - From this and every other evil.

[1 Timothy 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ti1 5:23</span></span>

Drink no longer water, but use a little wine - The whole of this verse
seems, to several learned critics and divines, strangely inserted in
this place; it might have been, according to them, a note which the
apostle inserted in the margin of his letter, on recollecting the
precarious state of Timothy's health, and his great abstemiousness and
self-denial. I believe the verse to be in its proper place; and, for
reasons which I shall adduce, not less necessary than the directions
which precede and follow it. But it may be necessary to inquire a little
into the reasons of the advice itself. The priests under the Mosaic law,
while performing sacred rites, were forbidden to drink wine: Do not
drink wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go
into the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: it shall be a
statute for ever through your generations; [Lev
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009); [Eze
44:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#021). It was the same with the
Egyptian priests. It was forbidden also among the Romans, and
particularly to women and young persons. Plato, De Legibus, lib. ii.,
edit. Bip., vol. viii., page 86, speaks thus: Αρ' ου νομοθετησομεν,
πρωτον μεν, τους παιδας μεχρις ετων οκτωκαιδεκα τοπαραπαν οινου μη
γευεσται; - μετα δε τουτο, οινου μεν δη γευεσθαι του μετριου, μεχρι
τριακοντα ετων· - τετταρακοντα δε επιβαινοντα ετων, εν τοις ξυσσιτιοις
ευωχηθεντα, κ. τ. λ. "Shall we not ordain by law, in the first place,
that boys shall not, on any account, taste wine till they are eighteen
years old? In the next place, we should inform them that wine is to be
used moderately till they are thirty years old. But when they have
attained the fortieth year, then they may attend feasts; for Bacchus has
bestowed wine upon men as a remedy against the austerity of old age, της
του γηρως αυστηροτητος εδωρησατο τον οινον φαρμακον, ὡστ' ανηβᾳν ἡμας,
και δυσθυμιας ληθην γιγνεσθαι, μαλακωτερον εκ σκληροτερου το της ψυχης
ηθος, καθαπερ εις πυρ σιδηρον εντεθεντα, γιγνομενον· that through this
we might acquire a second youth, forget sorrow, and the manners of the
mind be rendered softer, as iron is softened by the action of the fire."
But wine, according to the assertions of some, was given to men as a
punishment, that they might be rendered insane: Ὁ δε νυν λεγομενος ὑφ'
ἡμων, φαρμακον επι τουναντιον φησιν αιδους μεν ψυχης κτησεως ἑνεκα
δεδοσθαι, σωματος δε ὑγιειας τε και ισχυος· page 100. "But we have now
said that it is, on the contrary, medicine; and was given that the soul
might acquire modesty, and the body health and vigor."

From Athenaeus we learn that the Greeks often mingled their wine with
water; sometimes one part of wine to two of water; three parts of water
to one of wine; and at other times three parts of water to two of wine.
See his Deipnosophistae, lib. ix. "Among the Locrians, if any one was
found to have drunk unmixed wine, unless prescribed by a physician, he
was punished with death; the laws of Zaleucus so requiring. And among
the Romans, no servant, nor free woman, ουτε των ελευθερων οἱ εφηβοι
μεχρι τριακοντα ετων, nor youths of quality, drank any wine till they
were thirty years of age." Deipnosoph., lib. x. c. 7, p. 429. And it was
a maxim among all, that continued water-drinking injured the stomach.
Thus Libanius, Epist. 1578. Πεπτωκε και ἡμιν ὁ στομαχος ταις συνεχεσιν
ὑδροποσιαις· "Our stomach is weakened by continual water-drinking."

From [Ti1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012), we learn that Timothy
was a young man; but as among the Greeks and Roman the state of youth or
adolescence was extended to thirty years, and no respectable young men
were permitted to drink wine before that time; allowing that Timothy was
about twenty when Paul had him circumcised, which was, according to
Calmet, in the year of our Lord 51, and that this epistle was written
about a.d. 64 or 65, then Timothy must have been about thirty-five when
he received this epistle; and as that was on the borders of adolescence,
and as the Scripture generally calls that youth that is not old age,
Timothy might be treated as a young man by St. Paul, as in the above
text, and might still feel himself under the custom of his country
relative to drinking wine, (for his father was a Greek, [Act
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001)), and, through the influence of
his Christian profession, still continue to abstain from wine, drinking
water only; which must have been very prejudicial to him, his weak state
of health considered, the delicacy of his stomach, and the excess of his
ecclesiastical labors.

As Timothy's life was of great consequence to the Church of God at
Ephesus, it was not unworthy of the Spirit of God to give the direction
in the text, and to mingle it immediately with what some have called
more solemn and important advice.

1\. It was necessary that the work should be done in the Church at
Ephesus which the apostle appointed to Timothy.

2\. There was no person at Ephesus fit to do this work but Timothy.

3\. Timothy could not continue to do it if he followed his present mode
of abstemiousness.

4\. It was necessary, therefore, that he should receive direction from
Divine authority relative to the preservation of his life, and
consequently the continuation of his usefulness, as it is not likely
that a minor authority would have weighed with him.

[1 Timothy 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ti1 5:24</span></span>

Some men's sins are open beforehand - In appointing men to sacred
offices in the Church, among the candidates Timothy would find,

1\. Some of whom he knew nothing, but only that they professed
Christianity; let such be tried before they are appointed.

2\. Some of whose faith and piety he had the fullest knowledge, and
whose usefulness in the Church was well known.

3\. Some whose lives were not at all or but partially reformed, who were
still unchanged in their hearts, and unholy in their lives.

The sins of these latter were known to all; they go before to judgment;
with them he could have no difficulty. With the first class he must have
more difficulty; there might have been hypocrites among them, whose sins
could not be known till after they were brought into the sacred office.
The characters of all should be fully investigated. The sins of some,
before this investigation, might be so manifest as to lead at once εις
κρισιν to condemnation. The sins of others might be found out after, or
in consequence of, this investigation; and those that were otherwise
could not be long hid from his knowledge, or the knowledge of the
Church. On all these accounts the exhortation is necessary: Lay hands
suddenly on no man.

[1 Timothy 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ti1 5:25</span></span>

Likewise also the good works of some - Though those who are very holy
and very useful in the Church cannot be unknown, yet there are others
not less holy who need to be brought forward; who do much good in
private; and their character and good works are not fully known till
after diligent inquiry. These are they who do not let their left hand
know what their right doeth.

1\. After so long and minute an examination of the subjects in this
chapter, little remains to be said in the way of farther and more
satisfactory explanation. The whole account concerning the widows, who
they were, and what their provision, and what their occupation, and how
supported, are to me questions of considerable difficulty. In the notes
I have given the best account of the different subjects in my power. If
the reader be satisfied and edified, I have gained my end.

2\. On the subject of the imposition of hands, or what is vulgarly but
improperly called ordination, I have not said much here, having given my
views of the subject elsewhere in these notes. See on [Ti1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001) (note), etc. I must again state my
conviction that what is said on this subject in this chapter, and indeed
in the epistle, is rather to be understood prophetically; and to have
been intended for a much lower age of the Christian Church. That any
person should, from impure or secular motives, desire to be appointed to
the ministerial office at such a time, when poverty and persecution were
the least they would reasonably expect, to me seems altogether
inexplicable. But that many, after the Church got accredited and
established, and an ample revenue appointed for its ministers by
emperors and kings, should wish to get into the priesthood for its
emoluments, is a melancholy truth, which every year's experience
testifies. To those who have the authority from the state to appoint
ministers for the Church, this chapter reads a solemn and awful lesson.
And not to them only, but to all who have the appointment of ministers
or preachers in every sect and party. How few are there who would kindle
a fire on God's altar were there not secular emoluments attending it! I
am afraid the Scottish poet spoke the truth who said: -

"'Tis gow'd maks sogers feight the fiercer,

Without it, preaching wad be scarcer."

Gold or money is the primum mobile through every department of life.
Proh dolor!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 6](ti1006)

</div>
