<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Titus Index](tit)  
  [Previous](ti2004)  [Next](tit001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Titus Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

[Titus](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">tit 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the Epistle of Paul the Apostle to Titus

It is strange, that of a person who must have attained considerable
eminence in the Christian Church, and one to whom a canonical epistle
has been written by the great apostle of the Gentiles, we should know so
very little. That Titus was a frequent companion of St. Paul in his
journeys we have evidence from his epistles; and although this was the
case, he is not once mentioned in the book of the Acts of the Apostles!

That he was a Greek, and brought up in heathenism, we learn from [Gal
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003) : "But neither Titus, who was with
me, being a Greek, was compelled to be Circumcised." As he was
uncircumcised, he was neither a Jew nor a proselyte of justice, and
probably was a mere heathen till he heard the Gospel preached by St.
Paul, by whose ministry he was converted to the Christian faith; [Tit
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#004) : "To Titus, my own son, (γνησιῳ
τεκνῳ, my genuine son), after the common faith;" which words
sufficiently indicate that St. Paul alone had the honor of his
conversion. That he was very highly, and consequently deservedly,
esteemed by St. Paul, is evident from the manner in which he mentions
him in different places: "I had no rest in my spirit till I found Titus,
my brother;" [Co2 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013). "Nevertheless,
God, that comforteth those who are cast down, comforted us by the coming
of Titus; and not by his coming only, but by the consolation wherewith
he was comforted in you: therefore, we were comforted in your comfort:
yea, and exceedingly the more joyed we for the joy of Titus, because his
spirit was refreshed by you all; and his inward affection is more
abundant toward you whilst he remembereth how with fear and trembling ye
received him;" [Co2 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#006), [Co2
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#007), [Co2
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#013), [Co2
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#015). "But thanks be to God, who put
the same earnest care into the heart of Titus for you. Whether any do
inquire of Titus, he is my partner and fellow helper concerning you;"
[Co2 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#016), [Co2
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#023). "Did Titus make a gain of you?
Walked we not in the same spirit? walked we not in the same steps? [Co2
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#018).

Though St. Paul's preaching the Gospel in Crete is not expressly
mentioned anywhere, yet it may be plainly inferred from [Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005) : "For this cause left I thee in
Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that are wanting, and
ordain elders in every city." It is supposed that this was some time in
the year 62, after the apostle was released from his first imprisonment
in Rome. But not being able to spend much time in that island, he left
the care of the Churches to Titus, and sailed into Judea in the
beginning of 63, taking Timothy with him. Having spent some time in
Jerusalem, he proceeded to Antioch, comforting and establishing the
Churches whithersoever they went. From Antioch he set out on his fifth
and last apostolical journey, in which he and Timothy traveled through
Syria and Cilicia, and came to Colosse in Phrygia, early in the year 64.
On this occasion it is supposed he wrote his Epistle to Titus, in which
he desires him to meet him in Nicopolis, as he had intended to spend the
winter there; [Tit 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012). From Colosse
he went with Timothy to Ephesus, where he left him to regulate and
govern the Church; from thence he passed into Macedonia, and probably
visited Philippi, and different Churches in that province, according to
his intention, [Phi 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#024); and thence
to Nicopolis, where he intended to spend the winter, and where he had
desired Titus to meet him. See above.

Whether Titus ever left Crete we know not; nor how, nor where, he died.
Some traditions, on which little dependence can be placed, say he lived
till he was 94 years of age, and died and was buried in Crete. He
appears to have been a young man when intrusted with the care of the
Churches in this island. In such an extensive district, an aged or
infirm man would have been of little service.

Crete, where Titus was resident, to whom this epistle was sent, is the
largest island in the Mediterranean Sea; it lies between 22 and 27 long.
E., and between 35 and 36 lat. N. According to Strabo, it is 287 miles
in length; Pliny makes it 270, and Scylax 312. Pliny also states that
its greatest breadth is 55 miles; and, as its length was so
disproportionate to its breadth, it is called, by Stephanus Byzantinus,
the long island. It has the Archipelago to the north, the African sea to
the south, the Carpathian to the east, and the Ionian to the west. It is
now generally computed to be about 250 miles long, about 50 broad, and
600 in circumference. It was anciently called Aeria, Cthonia, Curete,
Idaea, and Macaris; but its most common name was Crete. Of it Homer
gives us the following description. Odyss., lib. xix. v. 172-179: -

Κρητη τις γαι' εστι, μεσῳ ενι οινοπι ποντῳ,

Καλη και πιειρα, περιρῥυτος· εν δ' ανθρωποι

Πολλοι, απειρεσιοι, και εννηκοντα ποληες.

Αλλη δ' αλλων γλωσσα μεμιγμενη· εν μεν Αχαιοι,

Εν δ' Ετεοκρητες μεγαλητορες, εν δε Κυδωνες,

Δωριεες τε τριχαικες, διοι τε Πελασγοι.

Τοισι δ' ενι Κνωσσος μεγαλη πολις· ενθα τε Μινως

Εννεωρος βασιλευς Διος μεγαλου οαριστης.

Crete awes the circling waves, a fruitful soil;

And ninety cities crown the sea-born isle.

Mix'd with her genuine sons, adopted names

In various tongues avow their various claims.

Cidonians, dreadful with the bended yew,

And bold Pelasgi, boast a native's due:

The Dorians plumed amidst the files of war,

Her foodful glebe, with fierce Achaians, share.

Cnossus, her capital of high command,

Where sceptred Minos, with impartial hand,

Divided right; each ninth revolving year

By Jove received in council to confer.

Pope.

Though in the above quotation Homer attributes to this island only
ninety cities, εννηκοντα ποληες , yet In other places he gives it the
epithet of ἑκατομπολις, hundred cities. And this number it is generally
allowed to have had originally; but we must not let the term city
deceive us, as in ancient times places were thus named which would rate
with villages or hamlets only in these modern times. Few places in
antiquity have been more celebrated than Crete: it was not only famous
for its hundred cities, but for the arrival of Europa on a bull, or in
the ship Taurus, from Phoenicia; for the Labyrinth, the work of
Daedalus; for the destruction of the Minotaur, by Theseus; for Mount
Ida, where Jupiter was preserved from the jealousy of his father Saturn;
for Jupiter's sepulchre; and above all, for its king, Minos, and the
laws which he gave to his people; the most pure, wholesome, and equal,
of which antiquity can boast.

Their lawgiver, Minos, is said by Homer to have held a conference every
ninth year with Jupiter, from whom he is reported to have received
directions for the farther improvement of his code of laws; though this
be fable, it probably states a fact in disguise. Minos probably revised
his laws every ninth year, and, to procure due respect and obedience to
them, told the people that he received these improvements from Jupiter
himself. This was customary with ancient legislators who had to deal
with an ignorant and gross people, and has been practised from the days
of Minos to those of Mohammed.

According to ancient authors, Crete was originally peopled from
Palestine. Bochart has shown, Canaan, lib. i. c. 15, col. 420, that that
part of Palestine which lies on the Mediterranean was by the Arabs
called Keritha, and by the Syrians, Creth; and the Hebrews called its
inhabitants Kerethi כרתי or Kerethim כרתים which the Septuagint have
translated Κρητας. Thus [Eze 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#016), we
find והכרתי את כרתים vehicratti eth Kerethim, which we translate I will
cut off the Cherethims, translated by the Septuagint και εξολοθρευσω
Κρητας, I will destroy the Cretans; and [Zep
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005) : "Wo unto the inhabitants of the
seacoast, the nation of the Cherethites, (גוי כרתים goi Kerethim, The
nation of the Kerethim;") παροικοι Κρητων, Sept., The sojourners of the
Cretans. That these prophets do not speak of the island of Crete is
plain from their joining the Kerethim with the Pelishtim as one and the
same people. "Thus saith the Lord God, Behold I will stretch out my hand
upon the Philistines, and will cut off the Cherethims, and destroy the
remnant of the seacoast;" [Eze 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#016).
"Wo unto the inhabitants of the seacoasts, the nation of the
Cherethites; the word of the Lord is against you: O Canaan, the land of
the Philistines, I will even destroy thee;" [Zep
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005). Accordingly it appears that the
Kerethim were a part of the Philistines. The Kerethim in Palestine were
noted for archery; and we find that some of them were employed by David
as his life guards, [Sa2 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#018); [Sa2
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#018); [Sa2
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#023); [Kg1
1:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#038); [Ch1
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#017); in all which places they are
called, in our translation, Cherethites; but the Hebrew is כרתי Kerethi,
which the Chaldee paraphrase renders קשתיא kashtia, or קשתייה
kashtaiyah, archers. See the Targum of Rab. Joseph. It is very likely
that the Kerethi or Kerethim of Palestine had their name from their
successful use of their favourite instrument the bow, as by it they
destroyed many; for כרת carath, in Hebrew, signifies to destroy or lay
waste; and hence the paronomasia of the prophet, quoted above, [Eze
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#016) : "I will cut off the Cherethims
(והכרתי את כרתים literally, I will destroy the destroyers.")

Idomeneus, who assisted Agamemnon in the Trojan war, was the last king
of Crete. He left the regency of the island to his adopted son Leucus,
who, in the absence of the king, usurped the empire; the usurper was
however soon expelled, and Crete became one of the most celebrated
republics in antiquity. The Romans at last, under Quintus Metellus,
after an immense expenditure of blood and treasure, succeeded in
subduing the island, on which he abolished the laws of Minos, and
introduced the code of Numa Pompilius. Crete, with the small kingdom of
Cyrene, became a Roman province; this was at first governed by
proconsul, next by a quaestor and assistant, and lastly by a consul.
Constantine the Great, in the new division he made of the provinces of
the empire, separated Crete from Cyrene, and left it, with Africa and
Illyria, to his third son Constans. In the ninth century, in the reign
of Michael II., it was attacked and conquered by the Saracens. About
965, the Emperor Nicephorus Phocas, in the following century, defeated
and expelled the Saracens, and reunited the island to the empire, after
it had been under the power of the infidels upwards of 100 years. It
remained with the empire until the time of Baldwin, earl of Flanders,
who, being raised to the throne, rewarded the services of Boniface,
marquis of Montferrat, by making him king of Thessalonica, and adding to
it the island of Crete. Baldwin, preferring a sum of gold to the
government of the island, sold it to the Venetians, a.d. 1194, under
whose government it was called Candia, from the Arabic Kandak, a
fortification, the name which the Saracens gave to the metropolis which
they had built and strongly fortified. In 1645, in the midst of a
profound peace, it was attacked by the Turks with a fleet of 400 sail,
which had on board an army of 60,000 men, under the command of four
pachas, to oppose whom the whole island could only muster 3, 500
infantry, and a small number of cavalry; yet with these they held out
against a numerous and continually recruited army, disputing every inch
of ground, so that the whole Ottoman power was employed for nearly
thirty years before they got the entire dominion of the island. In this
long campaign against this brave people the Turks lost about 200,000
men! Since about the year 1675, the whole island has been under the
government of the Turks.

The island of Crete is perhaps one of the most salubrious in the world.
The soil is rich, and it produces no ferocious or poisonous animal. The
present number of its inhabitants may amount to about 350, 200, of whom
about 200 are Jews, 150,000 Greeks, and 200,000 Turks. This is a large
population for a place under Turkish despotism; but had it the blessings
of a free government, it could support at least treble the number.

The island is divided into twelve bishops' sees, under the patriarch of
Constantinople; but though the execrable Turks profess to allow to the
Christians the free exercise of their religion, yet they will not permit
them to repair their churches. It is only by the influence of large sums
of gold, paid to the pachas, that they can keep their religious houses
from total dilapidation. The Mohammedans have indeed converted most of
the Christian temples into mosques. In Candia, the metropolis, they have
left two churches to the Greeks, one to the Armenians, and a synagogue
to the Jews. Candia is about five hundred miles from Constantinople. Is
it not strange that the maritime powers of Europe have not driven those
oppressors of the human race from this and every inch of Christian
ground which they have usurped by treachery and violence, and which they
continue to govern by despotism and cruelty?

Many have observed the affinity that subsists between the First Epistle
to Timothy and this to Titus. Both epistles are directed to persons left
by the writer to preside in their respective Churches during his
absence. Both epistles are principally occupied in describing the
qualifications of those who should be appointed to ecclesiastical
offices; and the ingredients in this description are nearly the same in
both epistles. Timothy and Titus are both cautioned against the same
prevailing corruptions; the phrases and expressions in both letters are
nearly the same; and the writer accosts his two disciples with the same
salutations, and passes on to the business of his epistle with the same
transition.

For example: -

Unto Timothy, my own son in the faith - as I besought thee to abide
still at Ephesus, etc.; [Ti1 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001).

To Titus, my own son after the common faith - for this cause left I thee
in Crete; [Tit 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#004), [Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005).

If Timothy was not to give heed to fables and endless genealogies which
minister questions, [Ti1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004);

Titus was also to avoid foolish questions and genealogies, [Tit
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009); not giving heed to Jewish fables,
[Tit 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#014).

If Timothy was to be a pattern, (τυπος), [Ti1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012); so was Titus, [Tit
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#007).

If Timothy was to let no man despise his youth, [Ti1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012); Titus was also to let no man
despise him, [Tit 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#015).

This verbal consent is also observable in some very peculiar
expressions, which have no relation to the particular character of
Timothy or Titus.

The phrase πιστος ὁ λογος, it is a faithful saying, occurs thrice in the
First Epistle to Timothy, once in the second, and once in that to Titus;
and in no other part of St. Paul's writings. These three epistles were
probably written towards the close of his life, and are the only
epistles written after his first imprisonment at Rome.

The same observation belongs to another singularity of expression, viz.
the epithet sound, (ὑγιαινων), as applied to words or doctrine. It is
thus used twice in the First Epistle to Timothy, twice in the second,
and thrice in the Epistle to Titus; besides two cognate expressions,
ὑγιαινοντας τῃ πιστει, sound in the faith, and λογον ὑγιη, sound speech.
And the word is not found in the same sense in any other part of the New
Testament.

The phrase God our Savior stands in the same predicament. It is repeated
three times in the First Epistle to Timothy, and thrice in the Epistle
to Titus; but does not occur in any other book of the New Testament,
except once in the Epistle of Jude.

Similar terms, though intermixed with others, are employed in the two
epistles, in enumerating the qualifications required in those who should
be advanced to the station of authority in the Church; compare [Ti1
3:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002) with [Tit
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#006).

The most natural accounts which can be given of these resemblances, is
to suppose that the two epistles were written nearly at the same time,
and whilst the same ideas and phrases dwelt in the writer's mind.

The journey of St. Paul to Crete, alluded to in this epistle, in which
Titus was left in Crete to set in order the things which were wanting,
must be carried to the period which intervened between his first and
second imprisonment. For the history of the Acts, which reaches to the
time of St. Paul's imprisonment, contains no account of his going to
Crete, except upon his voyage as a prisoner to Rome; and that this could
not be the occasion referred to in this epistle, is evident from hence,
that when St. Paul wrote this epistle he appears to have been at
liberty; whereas, after that voyage, he continued at least two years in
confinement.

It is agreed that St. Paul wrote his First Epistle to Timothy from
Macedonia; and that he was in these parts, i.e. in the Peninsula, when
he wrote the Epistle to Titus, is rendered probable by his directing
Titus to come to him in Nicopolis. The most noted city of that name was
in Epirus, near to Actium; but the form of speaking, as well as the
nature of the case, renders it probable that the writer was in the
neighborhood of this city when he dictated this direction to Titus.

Upon the whole, if we be allowed to suppose that St. Paul, after his
liberation at Rome, sailed into Asia, taking Crete in his way; and that
from Asia, and from Ephesus its capital, he proceeded to Macedonia, and,
crossing the Peninsula in his progress, came into the neighborhood of
Nicopolis; we have a route which falls in with every thing. It executes
the intention expressed by the apostle of visiting Colosse and Philippi,
as soon as he should be set at liberty at Rome. It allows him to leave
"Titus at Crete," and "Timothy at Ephesus, as he went into Macedonia;"
and he wrote to both not long after from the Peninsula of Greece, and
probably the neighborhood of Nicopolis; thus bringing together the dates
of these two epistles, and thereby accounting for that affinity between
them, both in subject and language, which has been above pointed out.
Though the journey thus traced out for St. Paul be in a great measure
hypothetical, yet it is a species of consistency which seldom belongs to
falsehood, to admit of an hypothesis which includes a great number of
independent circumstances without contradiction. See Paley's Horae
Paulinae, p. 321

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus Chapter 1](tit001)

</div>
