<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac010)  [Next](zac012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 11:0</span></span>

The commencement of this chapter relates to the destruction of Jerusalem
and the Jewish polity, probably by the Babylonians; at least in the
first instance, as the fourth verse speaks of the people thus threatened
as the prophet's charge, [Zac 11:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001).
The prophet then gives an account of the manner in which he discharged
his office, and the little value that was put on his labors. And this he
does by symbolical actions, a common mode of instruction with the
ancient prophets, [Zac 11:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007). After
the prophet, on account of the unsuccessfulness of his labors, had
broken the two crooks which were the true badges of his pastoral office,
(to denote the annulling of God's covenant with them, and their
consequent divisions and dispersions), he is directed to take
instruments calculated to hurt and destroy, perhaps an iron crook,
scrip, and stones, to express by these symbols the judgments which God
was about to inflict on them by wicked rulers and guides, who should
first destroy the flock, and in the end be destroyed themselves, [Zac
11:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015). Let us now view this
prophecy in another light, as we are authorized to do by Scripture, [Mat
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#007). In this view the prophet, in the
person of the Messiah, sets forth the ungrateful returns made to him by
the Jews, when he undertook the office of shepherd in guiding and
governing them; how they rejected him, and valued him and his labors at
the mean and contemptible price of thirty pieces of silver, the paltry
sum for which Judas betrayed him. Upon which he threatens to destroy
their city and temple; and to give them up to the hands of such guides
and governors as should have no regard to their welfare.

[Zechariah 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 11:1</span></span>

Open thy doors, O Lebanon - I will give Mr. Joseph Mede's note upon this
verse: -

"That which moveth me more than the rest, is in chap. 11, which contains
a prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem, and a description of the
wickedness of the inhabitants, for which God would give them to the
sword, and have no more pity upon them. It is expounded of the
destruction by Titus; but methinks such a prophecy was nothing
seasonable for Zachary's time, (when the city yet for a great part lay
in her ruins, and the temple had not yet recovered hers), nor agreeable
to the scope. Zachary's commission, who, together with his colleague
Haggai, was sent to encourage the people, lately returned from
captivity, to build their temple, and to instaurate their commonwealth.
Was this a fit time to foretell the destruction of both, while they were
yet but a-building? And by Zachary too, who was to encourage them? Would
not this better befit the desolation by Nebuchadnezzar?" I really think
so. See Mr. J. Mede's 61. Epistle.

Lebanon signifies the temple, because built of materials principally
brought from that place.

[Zechariah 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 11:2</span></span>

Howl, fir tree - This seems to point out the fall and destruction of all
the mighty men.

[Zechariah 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 11:3</span></span>

Young lions - Princes and rulers. By shepherds, kings or priests may be
intended.

[Zechariah 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 11:4</span></span>

Feed the flock of the slaughter - This people resemble a flock of sheep
fattened for the shambles; feed, instruct, this people who are about to
be slaughtered.

[Zechariah 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 11:5</span></span>

Whose possessors - Governors and false prophets, slay them, by leading
them to those things that will bring them to destruction.

And they that sell them - Give them up to idolatry; and bless God,
strange to tell, that they get secular advantage by the establishment of
this false religion.

[Zechariah 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 11:6</span></span>

For I will no more pity - I have determined to deliver them into the
hands of the Chaldeans.

[Zechariah 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 11:7</span></span>

And I wilt feed the flock of slaughter - I showed them what God had
revealed to me relative to the evils coming upon the land; and I did
this the more especially for the sake of the poor of the flock.

Two staves - Two shepherd's crooks. One I called Beauty - that probably
by which they marked the sheep; dipping the end into vermillion, or some
red liquid. And this was done when they were to mark every tenth sheep,
as it came out of the field, when the tithe was to be set apart for the
Lord.

The other I called Bands - Probably that with the hook or crook at the
head of it, by which the shepherd was wont to catch the sheep by the
horns or legs when he wished to bring any to hand.

And I fed the flock - These two rods show the beauty and union of the
people, while under God as their Shepherd. It was the delight of God to
see them in a state of peace and harmony.

[Zechariah 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 11:8</span></span>

Three shepherds also I cut off in one month - Taking this literally,
some think the three shepherds mean the three Maccabees, Judas,
Jonathan, and Simon; others, the three wicked high priests, Jason,
Alcimus, and Menelaus; others, the three last princes of the Asmonean
race, Alexander, Hyrcanus, and Antigonus.

Perhaps three orders may be intended:

1\. The priesthood.

2\. The dictatorship, including the Scribes, Pharisees, etc.

3\. The magistracy, the great sanhedrin, and the smaller councils.

These were all annihilated by the Roman conquest.

[Zechariah 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 11:9</span></span>

I will not feed you - I shall instruct you no longer: some of you are
appointed to death by famine; others, to be cut off by the sword; and
others of you, to such desperation that ye shall destroy one another.

[Zechariah 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 11:10</span></span>

I took my staff - Beauty, and cut it asunder - And thus I showed that I
determined no longer to preserve them in their free and glorious state.
And thus I brake my covenant with them, which they had broken on their
part already.

[Zechariah 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 11:11</span></span>

So the poor of the flock - The pious, who attended to my teaching, saw
that this was the word - the design, of God.

[Zechariah 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 11:12</span></span>

If ye think good, give me my price - "Give me my hire." And we find they
rated it contemptuously; thirty pieces of silver being the price of a
slave, [Exo 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#032).

[Zechariah 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 11:13</span></span>

And the Lord said unto me, Cast it unto the potter - Jehovah calls the
price of his prophet his own price; and commands that it should not be
accepted, but given to a potter, to foreshadow the transaction related
[Mat 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#007).

"Earthen vessels were used in the temple; and we may suppose that some
Levites were employed within the sacred precincts to furnish them. To
these, the humblest of his ministers in the temple, God commands that
the degrading price should be cast." This is the substance of the notes
on these two verses, given by Abp. Newcome.

We may look at it in another light, Give me my price! הבו שכרי habu
sichri, bring my price, or give him any price; that is, Give the money
to Judas which you have agreed to give him; for he can neither betray me
nor you crucify me, but my own permission. But if not, forbear; take
time to consider this bloody business, and in time forbear. For though I
permit you to do it, yet remember that the permission does not
necessitate you to do it; and the salvation of the world may be effected
without this treachery and murder.

See my notes on this place, [Mat 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009),
where I have examined the evidence for the reading of "Zechariah the
prophet," instead of "Jeremiah."

[Zechariah 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 11:14</span></span>

That I might break the brotherhood - I cannot, says Newcome, explain
this passage, without supposing that the kingdom of Israel subsisted
when the prophet wrote it; and that either the wars between Judah and
Israel are referred to, (see [Kg2
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#005)), or the captivity of the ten
tribes, when the brotherly connection between these kingdoms ceased.

[Zechariah 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 11:15</span></span>

The instruments of a foolish shepherd - Such as a bag without bread, a
scrip without measure, and a staff without a hook, etc., things that
were needless or of no use; to point out to the Jewish pastors, who took
no care of the flock, but devoured them, or ruled them with force and
with cruelty.

[Zechariah 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 11:16</span></span>

I will raise up a shepherd in the land - Some wicked king; and Newcome
supposes Hoshea may be meant. See [Kg2
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001), [Kg2
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#002), and to such an abominable
sovereign the prophecy may well apply.

[Zechariah 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zac 11:17</span></span>

Wo to the idol shepherd - רעי האליל roi haelil, "the worthless," or
"good for nothing shepherd." The shepherd in name and office, but not
performing the work of one. See [Joh
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011).

The sword shall be upon his arm - Punishment shall be executed upon the
wicked Jews, and especially their wicked kings and priests. See [Zac
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#016).

Arm - the secular power; right eye - the ecclesiastical state.

His arm shall be clean dried up - The secular power shall be broken, and
become utterly inefficient.

His right eye shall be utterly darkened - Prophecy shall be restrained;
and the whole state, ecclesiastical and civil, shall be so completely
eclipsed, that none of their functions shall be performed. This may
refer to the worthless and wicked governor mentioned in the preceding
verse.

There are several things in this chapter that are very obscure, and we
can hardly say what opinion is right; nor is it at all clear whether
they refer to a very early or late period of the Jewish history.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 12](zac012)

</div>
