<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac013)  [Next](mal001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 14:0</span></span>

The commencement of this chapter relates to the destruction of Jerusalem
by the Romans, and to the calamities consequent on that event. From this
great Jewish tragedy the prophet immediately passes to the utter
extermination of the enemies of Christianity in the latter days. God
will display his power in behalf of his people in a manner so
astonishing and miraculous, that even they themselves, and much more
their enemies, shall be struck with terror, [Zac
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004), [Zac
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005). The national prosperity of the
Jews shall then be permanent and unmixed, [Zac
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#006), [Zac
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#007); and these people shall be made
the instruments of converting many to the faith of the Messiah, [Zac
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008), [Zac
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009). The great increase and
prosperity of the Christian Church, the New Jerusalem, is then described
in terms accommodated to Jewish ideas; and the most signal vengeance
denounced against all her enemies, [Zac
14:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010). From that happy period God's
name will be honored in every thing, and his worship every where most
reverently observe, [Zac 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#020), [Zac
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#021).

[Zechariah 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 14:1</span></span>

Behold, the day of the Lord cometh - This appears to be a prediction of
that war in which Jerusalem was finally destroyed, and the Jews
scattered all over the face of the earth; and of the effects produced by
it.

[Zechariah 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 14:2</span></span>

I will gather all nations - The Romans, whose armies were composed of
all the nations of the world. In this verse there is a pitiful account
given of the horrible outrages which should be committed during the
siege of Jerusalem, and at its capture.

The residue of the people shad not be cut off - Many were preserved for
slaves, and for exhibition in the provincial theatres.

[Zechariah 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 14:3</span></span>

Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations - Against
the Romans, by means of the northern nations; who shall destroy the
whole empire of this once mistress of the world. But this is an obscure
place.

[Zechariah 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 14:4</span></span>

And his feet shall stand - He shall appear in full possession of the
place, as a mighty conqueror.

And the mount of Olives shall cleave - God shall display his miraculous
power as fully in the final restoration of the Jews, as he did when he
divided the Red Sea that their forefathers might pass through dry-shod.
Some refer this to the destruction of the city by the Romans. It was on
the mount of Olives that Titus posted his army to batter Jerusalem. Here
the tenth legion that came to him from Jericho was placed. Joseph. De
Bello, lib. 6 c. 3. It was from this mountain that our Lord beheld
Jerusalem, and predicted its future destruction, [Luk
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041), with [Mat
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023); and it was from this mountain
that he ascended to heaven, ([Act
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#012)), utterly leaving an ungrateful
and condemned city.

And half of the mountain shall remove - I really think that these words
refer to the lines of circumvallation, to intrenchments, redoubts, etc.,
which the Romans made while carrying on the siege of this city; and
particularly the lines or trenches which the army made on Mount Olivet
itself.

[Zechariah 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 14:5</span></span>

Ye shall flee to the valley - Some think this refers to the valley
through which Zedekiah and others endeavored to escape when
Nebuchadnezzar pressed the siege of Jerusalem: but it appears to speak
only of the Jewish wars of the Romans.

Azal - This, as a place, is not known. If a place, it was most probably
near to Jerusalem; and had its name from that circumstance.

[Zechariah 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 14:6</span></span>

The light shall not be clear, nor dark - Metaphorically, there will be a
mixture of justice and mercy in all this; or a bright light and
darkness. Mercy shall triumph over judgment. There shall be darkness -
distress, etc.; but there shall be more light - joy and prosperity -
than darkness.

[Zechariah 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 14:7</span></span>

At evening time it shall be light - At the close of this awful
visitation, there shall be light. The light of the glorious Gospel shall
go forth from Jerusalem; and next, from the Roman empire to every part
of the earth.

[Zechariah 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 14:8</span></span>

Living waters shall go out - There shall be a wide diffusion of Divine
knowledge, and of the plan of human salvation, which shall go out by
apostles and preachers, first from Jerusalem, then to Syria, Asia Minor,
Greece, Italy, the isles of the sea, Britain, etc.

The former sea, and - the hinder sea - The Dead Sea and the
Mediterranean; see on [Joe 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#020)
(note). These are metaphors.

In summer - In time of drought; or in the countries where there was no
knowledge of God, there shall these waters flow. The stream shall never
cease; it shall run in summer as well as winter. These are living waters
- perennial, incessant, and waters that shall preserve life. See [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037).

[Zechariah 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 14:9</span></span>

And the Lord shall be King - When this universal diffusion of Divine
knowledge shall take place. Wherever it goes, the laws of God shall be
acknowledged; and, consequently, he shall be King over the whole earth.

One Lord, and his name one - There shall be in those blessed days, only
one religion, and one form of religion. There shall not be gods many,
and lords many. All mankind shall be of one religion, the essence of
which is, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul,
mind, and strength; and thy Neighbor as thyself."

[Zechariah 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 14:10</span></span>

All the land shall be turned as a plain - Or rather, "He shall encompass
the whole land as a plain." He shall cast his defence all around it;
from Geba, in Benjamin, north of Jerusalem, ([Jos
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#017)), to Rimmon in Judah, to the
south of Jerusalem, [Jos 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#032).

It shall be lifted up - The city shall be exalted.

And inhabited in her place - Jerusalem, shall be rebuilt In the very
place in which it originally stood. From Benjamin's gate, which was
probably on the north side of Jerusalem, unto the place of the first
gate, supposed to be that called the old gate, [Neh
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#006); [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039), placed by Lightfoot towards the
southwest.

Unto the corner gate - See [Kg2 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013).

The tower of Hananeel - This tower and the corner gate seem to be placed
as two extremities of the city.

Unto the king's wine-presses - Near to the king's gardens, southward. -
See Newcome.

[Zechariah 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 14:11</span></span>

There shall be no more utter destruction - After this final restoration
of Jerusalem it shall never more be destroyed; but as this was the first
city of the living God upon earth, so shall it be the last; it shall be
safely inhabited. It shall see war no more.

[Zechariah 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 14:12</span></span>

And this shall be the plague - All her enemies shall be destroyed.

Their flesh shall consume away - These are the effects of famine which
are described in this verse.

[Zechariah 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 14:13</span></span>

A great tumult from the Lord - Among those enemies of his Church, who
shall engage and destroy each other.

[Zechariah 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 14:14</span></span>

And Judah also shall fight - They shall have little else to do than take
the spoil, the wealth of all the heathen round about; gold, silver, and
apparel.

[Zechariah 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 14:15</span></span>

So shall be the plague of the horse, and the mule - There shall be
plagues on the substance of the enemies of the Church, as there were on
the cattle and goods of the Egyptians.

[Zechariah 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 14:16</span></span>

Shall even go up from year to year - The Jews had three grand original
festivals, which characterized different epochs in their history, viz.:
-

1\. The feast of the passover, in commemoration of their departure from
Egypt.

2\. The feast of pentecost, in commemoration of the giving of the law
upon Mount Sinai.

3\. The feast of tabernacles, in commemoration of their wandering forty
years in the wilderness.

This last feast is very properly brought in here to point out the final
restoration of the Jews, and their establishment in the light and
liberty of the Gospel of Christ, after their long wandering in vice and
error.

[Zechariah 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zac 14:17</span></span>

Upon them shall be no rain - Those who do not worship God shall not have
his blessing; and those who do not attend Divine ordinances cannot have
the graces and blessings which God usually dispenses by them. On such
slothful, idle Christians, there shall be no rain!

[Zechariah 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">zac 14:18</span></span>

If the family of Egypt - This may allude to those Jews who, flying from
the persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes, settled in Egypt, and built a
temple at Heliopolis, under the direction of Onias, son of the high
priest. Josephus Antiq. lib. xiii., c. 6, and War, lib. vii., c. 36. If
these do not rejoin their brethren, they shall have no rain, no interest
in the favor of God.

[Zechariah 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">zac 14:19</span></span>

This shall be the punishment - of all nations that come not up - God
will have his public worship established everywhere, and those who do
not worship him shall lie under his curse.

[Zechariah 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">zac 14:20</span></span>

Upon the bells of the horses - They appear, formerly, to have had bells
on horses, camels, etc., as we have now, to amuse the animals, and
encourage them in their work. In some very fine Asiatic paintings now
before me, I see bells both on horses, mules, and camels; little bells
tied to their legs, and larger ones about their necks, particularly in
the representation of a caravan passing through the valley of serpents,
in the island of Serendib, now Ceylon. The margin reads bridles.

Holiness Unto The Lord - As the Gospel is a holy system, preaching
holiness and producing holiness in those who believe, so all without, as
well as within, shall bear this impress; and even a man's labor shall be
begun and continued, and ended in the Lord; yea, and the animals he
uses, and the instruments he works with, shall be all consecrated to God
through Christ.

The pots - "The meanest utensil in the house of God, [Neh
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#029), shall be as the vessels of
silver, and gold used in solemn sacrifice; they shall be like the bowls
before the altar." - See Newcome.

[Zechariah 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">zac 14:21</span></span>

Yea, every pot in Jerusalem - "The utensils of the Jews shall be treated
as holy, and the worshippers shall use them reverently. The idea of
preparing food in them (they that - seethe therein) is taken from the
custom of feasting after sacrifice. And no trafficker (see [Eze
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004)) shall pollute the house of God,
as was the custom when our blessed Lord cleansed the temple." - See
Newcome. This is what is called the Canaanite in the house of God. The
Canaanite is the merchant; and where such are tolerated in a place
dedicated to Divine worship, that is not the house of the Lord of hosts.
In churches and chapels, collections may be made for the simple purpose
of supporting and extending the worship of Jehovah; but for no other
purpose, especially on the Lord's day. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 1](mal001)

</div>
