<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac001)  [Next](zac003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 2:0</span></span>

The vision with which this chapter opens, portended great increase and
prosperity to Jerusalem. Accordingly Josephus tells us, (Wars 5:4: 2),
that "the city, overflowing with inhabitants, extended beyond its
walls," as predicted in the fourth verse, and acquired much glory during
the time of the Maccabees; although these promises, and particularly the
sublime image in the fifth verse, has certainly a still more pointed
reference to the glory and prosperity of the Christian Church in the
latter days, [Zac 2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001). See
Revelation 21, 22. In consequence of these promises, the Jews, still
inhabiting Babylon and the regions round about, are called upon to
hasten home, that they might not be involved in the fate of their
enemies, who were destined to fall a prey to the nations which they had
formerly subdued; God's great love and zeal for his people moving him to
glorify them by humbling all their adversaries, [Zac
2:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#006). The most gracious promises of
God's presence with his Church, and her consequent increase and
prosperity, set forth in the remaining verses, [Zac
2:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#010), were to a certain extent
fulfilled in the great number of proselytes made to Judaism after the
return from the captivity; but shall be more fully accomplished after
the restoration of the Jews to the favor of God under the Gospel. "For
if the casting away of the natural Israel be the reconciling of the
world, what shall the receiving of them be but life from the dead?"

[Zechariah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 2:1</span></span>

A man with a measuring-line in his hand - Probably a representation of
Nehemiah, who got a commission from Artaxerxes Longimanus to build up
the walls of Jerusalem; for hitherto it had remained without being
enclosed.

[Zechariah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 2:4</span></span>

Run, speak to this young man - Nehemiah must have been a young man when
he was sakee, or cup-bearer, to Artaxerxes.

As towns without walls - It shall be so numerously inhabited as not to
be contained within its ancient limits. Josephus, speaking of this time,
says, Wars 5:4:2, "The city, overflowing with inhabitants, by degrees
extended itself beyond its walls."

[Zechariah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 2:5</span></span>

I - will be unto her a wall of fire - Her safety shall consist in my
defense. I shall be as fire round about her. No adversary shall be
permitted to touch her. Much of this must refer to the New Jerusalem.

[Zechariah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 2:6</span></span>

Flee from the land of the north - From Chaldee, Persia, and Babylon,
where several of the Jews still remained. See [Zac
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#007).

[Zechariah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 2:8</span></span>

After the glory - After your glorious deliverance from the different
places of your dispersion; He hath sent me unto the nations which
spoiled you, that they may fall under grievous calamities, and be
punished in their turn. On Babylon a great calamity fell, when besieged
and taken by the Persians.

The following note I received from a sensible and pious correspondent: -

[Zac 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005). "For I, saith the Lord, will
be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the
midst of her.

[Zac 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008). "For thus saith the Lord of
hosts, who hath sent me, the future glory (or the glory which is to
come) unto the nations which spoiled you; for he that toucheth you
toucheth the apple of his eye. Behold, I will shake mine hand upon them,
and they shall be a spoil to their servants; and ye shall know that the
Lord of hosts hath sent me. Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion; for
lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the Lord. And
many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall be my
people; and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know that
the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto thee. And the Lord shall inherit
Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.

"If in the eighth verse אחר כבוד may be rendered the future, or the
glory that is to come, it will harmonize with the context as a prophecy
of the Messiah, whereas in our English translation the words after the
glory are unintelligible. And so the Seventy.

"It is evident the person speaking is distinguished from the Lord of
hosts, as being sent by him; yet this person sent is also called
Jehovah; and the nations who shall be joined to Jehovah in that day are
called his people; and he (the person sent) will dwell in the midst of
thee, (i.e., Zion), and shall inherit Judah his portion, etc.

"In confirmation of my view of the eighth verse, I think Exodus 33 may
be compared with it. Moses besought God that he would show him his
glory; upon which it was said to him, "Whilst my glory passeth by,' I
will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand
whilst I pass by; and I will take away my hand, and thou shalt see my
אחר achar. Now as this was a fulfillment of Moses's request, who
entreated to behold the glory, it follows that this אחר was the Divine
glory, which alone he was capable of seeing.

"'No man hath seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, (the Lord
Jesus Christ), which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared
him.'" - M. A. B.

Toucheth the apple of his eye - בבבת עינו bebabath eyno, the babet of
his eye. This is a remarkable expression. Any person, by looking into
the eye of another, will see his own image perfectly expressed, though
in extreme miniature, in the pupil. Does our English word babbet or baby
come from this? And does not the expression mean that the eye of God is
ever on his follower, and that his person is ever impressed on the eye,
the notice, attention, providence, and mercy of God?

[Zechariah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 2:9</span></span>

I will shake mine hand upon them - I will threaten first, and then
stretch out my hand of judgment against them.

A spoil to their servants - To those whom they had formerly subjected to
their sway. As the Babylonians to the Medes and Persians; and so of the
rest in the subversion of empires.

[Zechariah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 2:10</span></span>

I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the Lord - This must chiefly
refer to the Christian church, in which God ever dwells by the power of
his Spirit, as he had done by the symbol of his presence in the first
Jewish temple.

[Zechariah 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 2:11</span></span>

Many nations shall be joined to the Lord - This most certainly belongs
to the Christian church. No nation or people ever became converts to the
Jewish religion, but whole nations have embraced the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

[Zechariah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 2:12</span></span>

The Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land - This is a
promise of the final restoration of the Jews, and that they should be
God's portion in their own land.

[Zechariah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 2:13</span></span>

Be silent, O all flesh - Let all the nations of the world be astonished
at this. God will arise, and deliver this ancient people, and bring them
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 3](zac003)

</div>
