<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac004)  [Next](zac006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 5:0</span></span>

The vision of the large flying roll, with the angel's explanation, [Zac
5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001). The vision of the ephah, and of
the woman sitting on it, with the signification, [Zac
5:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#005).

[Zechariah 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 5:1</span></span>

Behold a flying roll - This was twenty cubits long, and ten cubits
broad; the prophet saw it expanded, and flying. Itself was the catalogue
of the crimes of the people, and the punishment threatened by the Lord.
Some think the crimes were those of the Jews; others, those of the
Chaldeans. The roll is mentioned in allusion to those large rolls on
which the Jews write the Pentateuch. One now lying before me is one
hundred and fifty-three feet long, by twenty-one inches wide, written on
fine brown Basle goat-skin; some time since brought from Jerusalem,
supposed to be four hundred years old.

[Zechariah 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 5:3</span></span>

Every one that stealeth - and every one that sweareth - It seems that
the roll was written both on the front and back: stealing and swearing
are supposed to be two general heads of crimes; the former, comprising
sins against men; the latter, sins against God. It is supposed that the
roll contained the sins and punishments of the Chaldeans.

[Zechariah 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 5:4</span></span>

Into the house of him - Babylon, the house or city of Nebuchadnezzar,
who was a public plunderer, and a most glaring idolater.

[Zechariah 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 5:6</span></span>

This is an ephah that goeth forth - This, among the Jews, was the
ordinary measure of grain. The woman in the ephah is supposed to
represent Judea, which shall be visited for its sins; the talent of lead
on the ephah, within which the woman was enclosed, the wrath of God,
bending down this culprit nation, in the measure of its sins; for the
angel said, "This is wickedness;" that is, the woman represents the mass
of iniquity of this nation.

[Zechariah 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 5:9</span></span>

There came out two women - As the one woman represented the impiety of
the Jewish nation; so these two women who were to carry the ephah, in
which the woman Iniquity was shut up, under the weight of a talent of
lead, may mean the desperate Unbelief of the Jews in rejecting the
Messiah; and that Impiety, or universal corruption of manners, which was
the consequence of their unbelief, and brought down the wrath of God
upon them. The strong wings, like those of a stork, may point out the
power and swiftness with which Judea was carried on to fill up the
measure of her iniquity, and to meet the punishment which she deserved.

Between the earth and the heaven - Sins against God and Man, sins which
heaven and earth contemplated with horror.

Or the Babylonians and Romans may be intended by the two women who
carried the Jewish ephah to its final punishment. The Chaldeans ruined
Judea before the advent of our Lord; the Romans, shortly after.

[Zechariah 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 5:11</span></span>

To build it a house in the land of Shinar - The land of Shinar means
Babylon; and Babylon means Rome, in the Apocalypse. The building the
house for the woman imprisoned in the ephah may signify, that there
should be a long captivity under the Romans, as there was under that of
Shinar or Babylon, by which Rome may here be represented. That house
remains to the present day: the Jewish woman is still in the ephah; it
is set on its own base - continues still as a distinct nation; and the
talent of lead - God's displeasure - is still on the top. O Lord, save
thy people, the remnant of Israel!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 6](zac006)

</div>
