[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](vbwi19)  [Next](vbwi21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Witches and Wizards and Irish Folk-Lore (W.B. Yeats)

Ireland was not separated from general European speculation when much of
that was concerned with the supernatural. Dr. Adam Clarke tells in his
unfinished autobiography how) when he was at school in Antrim towards
the end of the eighteenth century, a schoolfellow told him of Cornelius
Agrippa's book on Magic and that it had to be chained or it would fly
away of itself. Presently he heard of a farmer who had a copy and after
that made friends with a wandering tinker who had another. Lady Gregory
and I spoke of a friend's visions to an old countryman. He said "he must
belong to a society"; and the people often attribute magical powers to
Orangemen and to Freemasons, and I have heard a shepherd at Doneraile
speak of a magic wand with Tetragramaton Agla written upon it. The
visions and speculations of Ireland differ much from those of England
and France, for in Ireland, as in Highland Scotland, we are never far
from the old Celtic mythology; but there is more likeness than
difference. Lady Gregory's story of the witch who in semblance of a
hare, leads the hounds such a dance, is the best remembered of all witch
stories. It is told, I should imagine, in every countryside where there
is even a fading memory of witchcraft. One finds it in a sworn testimony
given at the trial of Julian Cox, an old woman indicted for witchcraft
at Taunton in Somersetshire in 1663 and quoted by Joseph Glanvill. "The
first witness was a huntsman, who swore that he went out with a pack of
hounds to hunt a hare, and not far from Julian Cox her house he at last
started a hare: the dogs hunted her very close, and the third ring
hunted her in view, till at last the huntsman perceiving the hare almost
spent and making towards a great bush, he ran on the other side of the
bush to take her up and preserve her from the dogs; but as soon as he
laid hands on her, it proved to be Julian Cox, who had her head
grovelling on the ground, and her globes (as he expressed it) upward. He
knowing her, was so affrighted that his hair on his head stood on end;
and yet spake to her, and ask'd her what brought her there; but she was
so far out of breath that she could not make him any answer; his dogs
also came up full cry to recover the game, and smelled at her and so
left off hunting any *further.* And the huntsman with his dogs went home
presently sadly affrighted." Dr. Henry More, the Platonist, who
considers the story in a letter to Glanvill, explains that Julian Cox
was not turned into a hare, but that "Ludicrous Daemons exhibited to the
sight of this huntsman and his dogs, the shape of a hare, one of them
turning himself into such a form, another hurrying on the body of Julian
near the same place," making her invisible till the right moment had
come. "As I have heard of some painters that have drawn the sky in a
huge landscape, so lively, that the birds have flown against it,
thinking it free air, and so have fallen down. And if painters and
jugglers, by the tricks of legerdemain can do such strange feats to the
deceiving of the sight, it is no wonder that these aerie invisible
spirits have far surpassed them in all such prestigious doings, as the
air surpasses the earth for subtlety." Glanvill has given his own
explanation of such cases elsewhere. He thinks that the sidereal or airy
body is the foundation of the marvel, and Albert de Rochas has found a
like foundation for the marvels of spiritism. "The transformation of
witches," writes Glanvill, "into the shapes of other animals … is very
conceivable; since then, 'tis easy enough to imagine that the power of
imagination may form those passive and pliable vehicles into those
shapes," and then goes on to account for the stories where an injury,
say to the witch hare. is found afterwards upon the witch's body
precisely as a French hypnotist would account for the stigmata of a
saint. "When they feel the hurts in their gross bodies, that they
receive in their airy vehicles, they must be supposed to have been
really present, at least in these latter, and 'tis no more difficult to
apprehend, how the hurts of those should be translated upon their other
bodies, than how diseases should be inflicted by the imagination, or how
the fancy of the mother should wound the foettis, as several credible
relations do attest."

All magical or Platonic writers of the times speak much of the
transformation or projection of the sidereal body of witch or wizard.
Once the soul escapes from the natural body, though but for a moment, it
passes into the body of air and can transform itself as it please or
even dream itself into some shape it has not willed.

"Chameleon-like thus they their colour change,  
And size contract and then dilate again."

One of their favourite stories is of some famous man, John Haydon says
Socrates, falling asleep among his friends, who presently see a mouse
running from his mouth and towards a little stream. Somebody lays a
sword across the stream that it may pass, and after a little while it
returns across the sword and to the sleeper's mouth again. When he
awakes he tells them that he has dreamed of himself crossing a wide
river by a great iron bridge.

But the witch's wandering and disguised double was not the worst shape
one might meet in the fields or roads about a witch's house. She was not
a true witch unless there was a compact (or so it seems) between her and
an evil spirit who called himself the devil, though Bodin believes that
he was often, and Glanvill always, "some human soul forsaken of God,"
for "the devil is a body politic." The ghost or devil promised revenge
on her enemies and that she would never want, and she upon her side let
the devil suck her blood nightly or at need.

When Elizabeth Style made a confession of witchcraft before the Justice
of Somerset in 1664, the Justice appointed three men, William Thick and
William Read and Nicholas Lambert, to watch her, and Glanvill publishes
an affidavit of the evidence of Nicholas Lambert. "About three of the
clock in the morning there came from her head a glistering bright fly,
about an inch in length which pitched at first in the chimney and then
vanished." Then two smaller flies came and vanished. "H; looking
steadfastly then on Style, perceived her countenance to change, and to
become very black and ghastly and the fire also at the same time
changing its colour; whereupon the Examinant, Thick and Read, conceiving
that her familiar was then about her, looked to her poll, and seeing her
hair shake very strangely, took it up and then a fly like a great miller
flew out from the place and pitched on the table board and then vanished
away. Upon this the Examinant and the other two persons, looking again
in Style's poll found it very red and like raw beef. The Examinant ask'd
her what it was that went out of her poll, she said it was a butterfly,
and asked them why they had not caught it. Lambert said, they could not.
I think so too, answered she. A little while after the informant and the
others, looking again into her poll found the place to be of its former
colour. The Examinant asked again what the fly was, she confessed it was
her familiar and that she felt it tickle in her poll, and that was the
usual time for her familiar to come to her." These sucking devils alike
when at their meal, or when they went here and there to do her will or
about their own business, had the shapes of pole-cat or cat or greyhound
or of some moth or bird. At the trials of certain witches in Essex in
*1645* reported in the English state trials a principal witness was one
"Matthew Hopkins, gent." Bishop Hutchinson, writing in 1730, describes
him as he appeared to those who laughed at witchcraft and had brought
the witch trials to an end. "Hopkins went on searching and swimming poor
creatures till some gentlemen, out of indignation of the barbarity, took
him, and tied his own thumbs and toes as he used to tie others, and when
he was put into the water he himself swam as they did. That cleared the
country of him and it was a great pity that they did not think of the
experiment sooner." Floating when thrown into the water was taken for a
sign of witchcraft. Matthew Hopkins's testimony, however, is uncommonly
like that of the countryman who told Lady Gregory that he had seen his
dog and some shadow fighting. A certain Mrs. Edwards of Manintree in
Essex had her hogs killed by witchcraft, and "going from the house of
the said Mrs. Edwards to his own house, about nine or ten of the clock
that night, with his greyhound with him, he saw the greyhound suddenly
give a jump, and run as she had been in full course after a hare; and
that when this informant made haste to see what his greyhound so eagerly
pursued, he espied a white thing, about the bigness of a kitlyn, and the
greyhound standing aloof from it; and that by and by the said white imp
or kitlyn danced about the grey-hound, and by all likelihood bit off a
piece of the flesh of the shoulder of the said greyhound; for the
greyhound came shrieking and crying to the informant, with a piece of
flesh torn from her shoulder. And the informant further saith, that
coming into his own yard that night, he espied a black thing
proportioned like a cat, only it was thrice as big, sitting on a
strawberry bed, and fixing the eyes on this informant, and when he went
to-wards it, it leaped over the pale towards this informant, as he
thought, but ran through the yard, with his greyhound after it, to a
great gate, which was underset with a pair of tumble strings, and did
throw the said gate wide open, and then vanished; and 'he said greyhound
returned again to this informant, shaking and trembling exceedingly." At
the same trial Sir Thomas Bowes, Knight, affirmed "that a very honest
man of Manintree, whom he knew would not speak an untruth affirmed unto
him, 'hat very early one morning, as he passed by the said Anne West's
door" (this is the witch on trial) "about four o'clock, it being a
moonlight night, and perceiving her door to be open so early in the
morning, looked into the house and presently there came three or four
little things, in the shape of black rabbits, leaping and skipping about
him, who, having a good stick in his hand, struck at them, thinking to
kill them, but could not; but at last caught one of them in his hand,
and holding it by the body of it, he beat the head of it against his
stick, intending to beat out the brains of it; but when he could not
kill it that way, he took the body of it in one hand and the head of it
in another, and endeavoured to wring off the head; and as he wrung and
stretched the neck of it, it came out between his hands like a lock of
wool; yet he would not give over his intended purpose, but knowing of a
spring not far off, he went to drown it; but still as he went he fell
down and could not go, but down he fell again, so that he at last crept
upon his hands and knees till he came at the water, and holding it fast
in his hand, he put his hand down into the water up to the elbow, and
held it under water a good space till he conceived it was drowned, and
then letting go his hand, it sprung out of the water up into the air,
and so vanished away." However, the sucking imps were not always
invulnerable for Glanvill tells how one John Monpesson, whose house was
haunted by such a familiar, "seeing some wood move that was in the
chimney of a room, where he was, as if of itself, discharged a pistol
into it after which they found several drops of blood on the hearth and
in divers places of the stairs." I remember the old Aran man who heard
fighting in the air and found blood in a fish-box and scattered through
the room, and I remember the measure of blood Odysseus poured out for
the shades.

The English witch trials are like the popular poetry of England,
matter-of-fact and unimaginative. The witch desires to kill some one and
when she takes the devil for her husband he as likely as not will seem
dull and domestic. Rebecca West told Matthew Hopkins that the devil
appeared to her as she was going to bed and told her he would marry her.
He kissed her but was as cold as clay, and he promised to be "her loving
husband till death," although she had, as it seems, but one leg. But the
Scotch trials are as wild and passionate as is the Scottish poetry, and
we find ourselves in the presence of a mythology that differs little, if
at all, from that of Ireland. There are orgies of lust and of hatred and
there is a wild shamelessness that would be fine material for poets and
romance writers if the world should come once more to half-believe the
tale. They are divided into troops of thirteen, with the youngest witch
for leader in every troop, and though they complain that the embraces of
the devil are as cold as ice, the young witches prefer him to their
husbands. He gives them money, but they must spend it quickly, for it
will be but dry cow dung in two circles of the clock. They go often to
Elfhame or Faeryland and the mountains open before them and as they go
out and in they are terrified by the "rowtling and skoylling" of the
great "elf bulls." They sometimes confess to trooping in the shape of
cats and to finding upon their terrestrial bodies when they awake in the
morning the scratches they had made upon one another in the night's
wandering, or should they have wandered in the images of hares the bites
of dogs. Isobell Godie who was tried at Loclilay in 1662 confessed that
"We put besoms in our beds with our husbands till we return again to
them... and then we would fly away where we would be, even as straws
would fly upon a highway. We will fly like straws when we please; wild
straws and corn straws will be horses to us, and we put them betwixt our
feet and say horse and hillock in the devil's name. And when any see
these straws in a whirlwind and do not sanctify themselves, we may shoot
them dead at our pleasure." When they kill people, she goes on to say,
the souls escape them "but their bodies remain with us and will fly as
horses to us all as small as straws." It is plain that it is the "airy
body" they take possession of; those "animal spirits" perhaps which
Henry More thought to be the link between soul and body and the seat of
all vital function. The trials were more unjust than those of England,
where there was a continual criticism from sceptics; torture was used
again and again to distort confessions, and innocent people certainly
suffered; some who had but believed too much in their own dreams and
some who had but cured the sick at some vision's prompting. Alison
Pearson who was burnt in 1588 might have been Biddy Early or any other
knowledge-able woman in Ireland today. She was convicted "for haunting
and repairing with the Good Neighbours and queen of Elfhame, these
divers years and bypast, as she had confessed in her depositions,
declaring that she could not say readily how long She was with them; and
that she had friends in that court who were of her own blood and who had
great acquaintance of the queen of Elfhame. That when she went to bed
she never knew where she would be carried before dawn." When they worked
cures they had the same doctrine of the penalty that one finds in Lady
Gregory's stories. One who made her confession before James I. was
convicted for "taking the sick party's pains and sicknesses upon herself
for a time and then translating them to a third person."

II

There are more women than men mediums today; and there have been or seem
to have been more witches than wizards. The wizards of the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries relied more upon their conjuring book than the
witches whose visions and experiences seem but half voluntary, and when
voluntary called up by some childish rhyme:

Hare, hare, God send thee care;  
I am in a hare's likeness now,  
But I shall be a woman even now;  
Hare, hare, God send thee care.

More often than not the wizards were learned men, alchemists or mystics,
and if they dealt with the devil at times, or some spirit they called by
that name, they had amongst them ascetics and heretical saints. Our
chemistry, our metallurgy, and our medicine are often but accidents that
befell in their pursuit or the philosopher's stone, the elixir of life.
They were bound together in secret societies and had, it may be, some
forgotten practice for liberating the soul from the body and sending it
to fetch and carry them divine knowledge. Cornelius Agrippa in a letter
quoted by Beaumont, has hints of such a practice. Yet like the witches,
they worked many wonders by the power of the imagination, perhaps one
should say by their power of up vivid pictures in the mind's eye. The
Arabian philosophers have taught, writes Beaumont, "that the soul by the
power the imagination can perform what it pleases; as penetrate heavens,
force the elements, demolish mountains, raise valleys to mountains, and
do with all material forms as it pleases."

He shewed hym, er he wente to sopeer,  
Pores tes, parkes ful of wilde deer;  
Ther saugh he hertes with hir hornes hye,  
The gretteste that evere were seyn with ye.

                  \*\*\*

Tho saugh he knyghtes justing in a playn;  
And after this, he dide hym swich plaisaunce,  
That he hym shewed his lady on a daunce  
On which hymself he daunced, as hym thoughte.  
And whan this maister, that this magyk wroughte,  
Saugh it was tyme, he clapte his handes two,  
And, farewel! al our revel was ago.

One has not as careful a record as one has of the works of witches, for
but few English wizards came before the court, the only society for
psychical research in those days. The translation, however, of Cornelius
Agrippa's *De Occulta Philosophia* in the seventeenth century, with the
addition of a spurious fourth book full of conjurations, seems to have
filled England and Ireland with whole or half wizards. In 1703, the
Reverend Arthur Bedford of Bristol, who is quoted by Sibley in his big
book on astrology, wrote to the Bishop of Gloucester telling how a
certain Thomas Perks had been to consult him. Thomas Perks lived with
his father, a gunsmith, and devoted his leisure to mathematics,
astronomy, and the discovery of perpetual motion. One day he asked the
clergyman if it was wrong to commune with spirits, and said that he
himself held that "there was an innocent society with them which a man
might use, if he made no compacts with them, did no harm by their means,
and were not curious in prying into hidden things, and he himself had
discoursed with them and heard them sing to his great satisfaction." He
then told how it was his custom to go to a crossway with lantern and
candle consecrated for the purpose, according to the directions in a
book he had, and having also consecrated chalk for making a circle. The
spirits appeared to him "in the likeness of little maidens about a foot
and a half high … they spoke with a very shrill voice like an ancient
woman" and when he begged them to sing, "they went to some distance
behind a bush from whence he could hear a perfect concert of such
exquisite music as he never before heard; and in the upper part he heard
something very harsh and shrill like a reed but as it was managed did
give a particular grace to the rest." The Reverend Arthur Bedford
refused an introduction to the spirits for himself and a friend and
warned him very solemnly. Having some doubt of his sanity, he set him a
difficult mathematical problem, but finding that he worked it easily,
concluded him sane. A quarter of a year later the young man came again,
but showed by his face and his eyes that he was very ill and lamented
that he had not followed the clergyman's advice for his conjurations
would bring him to his death. He had decided to get a familiar and had
read in his magical book what he should do. He was to make a book of
virgin parchment, consecrate it, and bring it to the cross-road, and
having called up his spirits, ask the first of them for its name and
write that name on the first page of the book and then question another
and write that name on the second page and so on till he had enough
familiars. He had got the first name easily enough and it was in Hebrew,
but after that they came in fearful shapes, lions and bears and the
like, or hurled at him halls of fire. He had to stay there among those
terrifying visions till the dawn broke and would not be the better of it
till he died. I have read in some eighteenth century book whose name I
cannot recall of two men who made a magic circle and who invoked the
spirits of the moon and saw them trampling about the circle as great
bulls, or rolling about it as flocks of wool. One of Lady Gregory's
story-tellers considered a flock of wool one of the worst shapes that a
spirit could take.

There must have been many like experimenters in Ireland. An Irish
alchemist called Butler was supposed to have made successful
transmutations in London early in the eighteenth century, and in the
*Life of Dr. Adam Clarke,* published in 1833, are several letters from a
Dublin maker of stained glass describing a transmutation and a
conjuration into a tumbler of water of large lizards. The alchemist was
an unknown man who had called to see him and claimed to do all by the
help of the devil "who was the friend of all ingenious gentlemen."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Swedenborg, Mediums and the Desolate Places (W.B. Yeats)](vbwi21.md)
