[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](vbwi11)  [Next](vbwi13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Appearances

WHEN I had begun my search for folk-lore, the first to tell me he
himself had seen the Sidhe was an old, perhaps half-crazed man I will
call Michael Barrett (for I do not give the real names either of those
who are living or who have left living relatives). I had one day asked
an old woman who had been spinning wool for me, to be made into frieze
by our weavers, if she had ever seen the faery host. She said, "I never
saw them myself nor I don't think much of them; it is God that takes us
or leaves us as He will. But a neighbouring man was standing in my door
last night, and there's no day of the year he doesn't hear them or feel
them.

"It's in his head I think it does be, and when he stood in the door last
night I said 'the wind does be always in my ears and the sound of it
never stops,' to make him think it was the same with him. But he said,
'I hear them singing and making music all the time, and one of them's
after bringing out a little flute, and it's on it he's playing to them.'
Sure he has half his chimney pulled down, where they used to be sitting
and singing to him day and night. Rut those that are born in the daytime
never have power to see or hear them all their life."

Another neighbour talked to me of him and said, "One night he was
walking across the bog, and a lurcher, a bastard hound, with him. And
something ran across the path in the shape of a white cat, and the
lurcher went after him, and Barrett went home and to bed and left the
door open for the lurcher to come m. And in the morning they found it
there, lying under the table, and it paralysed and not able to stir. But
after a few months it got better, and one night they were crossing the
bog again and the same thing ran across their path, and this time in the
form of a deer. But the dog wouldn't follow it again, but shrank behind
Barrett until such time as it had passed by."

My spinning woman, coming another time with chickens to sell, said,
"Barrett is after telling me this morning that they were never so bad as
these last two nights. 'Friday fine-day' is what they say now, in Irish,
and he got no sleep till he threatened to throw dirty water over them.
The poor man, they do say they are mostly in his head now, but sure he
was a fine fresh man twenty years ago, the night he saw them all linked
in two lots, like slips of girls walking together. And it was that very
same day that Hession's little girl got a touch from them. She was as
fine a little girl as ever you saw, and her mother sent her into Gort to
do a message. And on the road she met a red-haired woman, with long
wisps of hair as bright as silver, and she said, 'Where are you going
and who are you?' 'I'm going to Gort on a message,' says she, 'and I'm
Mrs. Hessian's daughter of such a place.' Well, she came home, and that
very night she got a pain in her thigh, with respects to you, and she
and her mother have half the world walked since then, tryzng to get
relief for her; but never a bit better did she ever get. And no doubt at
all but that's the very same day Michael Barrett saw them in the field
near Hessian's house."

I asked Mr. Yeats to come with me to see the old man, and we walked up
the long narrow lane, from which we could see Slieve Echtge and the
Burren hills, the little cabin with its broken chimney where Michael
Barrett told us of those that had disturbed his rest. This was the first
time we went together to enquire into the Hierarchy of the Sidhe, of
which by degrees we have gathered so much traditional and original
knowledge.

As to old Barrett, I saw him from time to time, and he told me he was
still "tormented," and that "there is one that sat and sang b-b-b all
the night" till a few evenings before he had got a bit of rag and tied
it to a long stick, and hit at him when he came, and drove him out with
the rest. And in the next spring I heard he was ill, and that "on
Saturday he had been told by three he was to die." When I visited him I
found him better, and he said that since the warning on Saturday they
had left him alone "and the children that used to be playing about with
them have gone to some other place; found the house too cold for them
maybe." That was the last time I saw him; I am glad I had been able to
help him to more warmth and comfort before the end.

I asked the old man's brother, a labourer, what he thought of Michael's
visions, but he made little of them. "Old he is, and it's all in the
brain the things he does be talking of. If it was a young man told us of
them we might believe him, but as to him, we pay no attention to what he
says at all. Those things are passed away, and you-I beg your pardon for
using that word--a person--hears no more of them.

"John Casey saw queer things? So he might. Them that travel by night,
why wouldn't they see queer things? But they'd see nothing if they went
to their bed quiet and regular.

"Lydon that had the contract for the schoolhouse, we didn't mind much
what he said happened him the night he slept there alone, and in the
morning he couldn't stir across the floor from the place where he was.
But who knows? Maybe he had too much drink taken before he went to bed.
It was no wonder in the old times if there was signs and the like where
murder had been. But that's come to an end, and time for it.

"There's another man, one Doran, has the same dreams and thoughts as my
brother, and he leaves pieces of silver on the wall; and when they're
took--it's the faeries! But myself I believe it's the boys do be
watching him.

"No, these things are gone from the world, and there's not the same
dread of death there used to be. When we die we go to judgment, and the
places we'll get there, they won't be the same as what we had here. The
charitable, the kind-hearted, lady or gentleman, who'd have a chance if
they didn't? But the tyrants and schemers, what chance will there be for
the like of them?

"You will have a good place there, Barrett, you and John Farrell. You
have done your work better than most of us through all your life, and
it's likely you'll be above us there.

"I did my work all my life, fair and honest every day; and now that I'm
old, I'll keep on the same track to the last. Like a horse that might be
racing at Galway racecourse or another, there might be eight leaps or
ten leaps he might be frightened at; but when he's once over the last
leap there's no fear of him. Why would he fail then, with the winning
post so near at hand?"

I was told by A Gatekeeper:

There was once a family, the O'Hagans living in Dromore Hill, that now
belongs to you, well-to-do people. And one day the son that had been at
college was coming back, and there was a great dinner being made in the
house. And a girl was sent off to a spring by the foith to get some
water, and when she passed by the forth, she heard like the crying of a
child and some one said to it "Nothing given to us today, no milk
spilled for us, nothing laid out for us, but tonight we'll have what we
want and there will be waste and overflow." And that evening the young
man that was coming home got a fall from his horse, and was killed, and
all the grand things for the dinner were thrown about and went to loss.
So never begrudge the drop of milk you'll spill, or the bit you'll let
fall, it might turn all to good in the end.

One night at the house below it was just getting dark, and a man came in
the gate and to the door and came in and fell down on a chair. And when
I saw him shaking and his face so white, I thought it was the *fear
gortha* (the hungry grass) he had walked on, and I called to the wife to
give him something to eat. But he would take nothing but a cop of water
with salt in it, and when he got better he told us that when he was
passing the big tree a man and a woman came out and came along with him.
They didn't speak but they walked on each side of him, and then the
woman seemed to go away, but the man's step was with him till he came in
at the gate.

There was a girl of the Heniffs brought the dinner one day to where the
men were working near where the river rises at Coole. And when she had
left the dinner she began to gather kippeens, and put them in her shawl,
and began to twist a rope of the ends of it to tie them up. And at that
moment she was taken up, and where she found herself was in Gaiway,
sitting in the Square. And she had no money, and she began to think of
the friends she had there and to say, "If they knew where I was they'd
give me money to bring me back." And in those days there was a coach
that ran from Galway to Kiltartan, and she found herself in it, and it
starting, and it left her safe and sound again at home.

Mrs. Casey:

There was a girl at Tyrone was bringing back some apples out of the
garden there. And on the road she met a man, and she thought that he was
one of the old St. Georges, and he asked where did she get the apples,
and bid her put them down in the road, and when she opened the bundle
they were all turned to eggs. So she put them up again and brought them
home, and when she and her mother looked at them in the house they were
beginning to crack, and the chickens to put their beaks through them; so
they put them in the corner of the kitchen for the night, and in the
morning when they went to look at them they were all turned to apples
again, but they thought best not to eat them.

A Munster Woman:

There was a woman I knew in County Limerick, near Foynes--Mrs. Doolan, a
nurse. She was called out of bed one night by a small man with a lamp,
and he led her to a place she had never seen before, and into a house,
and there was a woman m a bed and the child was born after she came. And
I always heard her say it was a faery she attended. And the man led her
back and gave her a sovereign, and bid her change it before sunrise.

And I know a boy lived on Lord Dunraven's property, one of a family of
large farmers, and he had a settle-bed in the kitchen, and one night he
saw the kitchen full of them, and they making up the fire and cooking,
and they set out the table and ate at it.

I often heard they'd fight in November at the time of harvest, and my
father told me that in the year of the famine there was great fighting
heard up in the sky, and they were crying out, "Black potatoes, black
potatoes, we'll have them now." I suppose it was one tribe of them
fighting against another for them. And the oats in that year were all
black as well as the potatoes.

A Clare Man:

I saw them myself one night I was going to Ennis with a load of straw.
It was when we came to Bunnahow and the moon was shining, and I was on
the top of the load of straw, and I saw them in a field. Just like
jockeys they were, and riding horses, red clothes and caps they had like
a jockey would have, but they were small. They had a screen of bushes
put up in the field and some of the horses would jump over it, and more
of them would baulk when they'd be put to it. The men that were with me
didn't see them, they were walking in the road, but they heard the sound
of the horses.

Another Clare Man:

I heard a churning one time in the hill up by the road beyond. I was
coming back from Kinvara, and I heard it plain, no mistake about it. I
was sorry after I didn't call down and ask for a drink. Johnny Moon did
so, and got it. If you wish for a drink and they put it out for you,
it's no harm to take it, but if you refuse it, some harm might happen to
you. Johnny Henderson often told that he heard churning in that spot,
but I wouldn't believe the sun rising from him, he had so many lies. But
after that, I said, "Well, Johnny Henderson has told the truth for once
anyhow."

A Miller:

There was Tom Gantly one evening was going to Coole, and he heard a step
behind him and it followed him every bit of the way, till he got to the
hall door of Coole House; but he could see nothing.

He saw a gig one night on the road there by the wall and it full of
ladies laughing and grandly dressed-the best of hats and feathers they
had. And it turned and passed him a second time. And with the fright he
got, he never would pass that bit of road by himself again.

There were two men went one night to catch rabbits in that field you
have Jet now to Father Fahy, and the one next it. And when they were
standing there they heard a churning below. So they went on a little
way, and they heard a tambourine below, music going on and the beating
of a drum. So they moved a little farther on and then they heard the
sound of a fiddle from below. So they came home and caught no rabbits
that night.

J. Creery:

May is a great time with these strangers, and November is a bad month
for them, and this month you're in now. I was trying the other day in
the town to get a marriage made up for a girl that was seduced-and the
family wouldn't have it this month because of that.

One night on the Kiltartan road I saw a flock of wool by the road side,
and I gave a kick at it and it didn't move, and then another kick and it
didn't move. So it can have been no natural thing.

And Lee told me that one night he saw red men riding through the country
and going over ditches.

\* \* \*

One time I was sick in the bed and I heard music, and I sat up and said:
"Is it music I hear, or is it the squealing of pigs?" And they all said
they could hear nothing. But I could hear it for a long time, and it the
grandest I ever heard-and like a melodeon. And as to the tune, I
couldn't tell what it was but I know that I had heard it before.

A Kerry Piper:

One time in Kerry there was a coach coming after me and it passed beside
me, and I saw with it Mrs. Mitchell from the big house. And when it came
near the bridge it sank into the earth, and I saw no more of it.

And one time I was at Ennistymon I saw the ass-car and the woman and the
man out before me. I had a little ass of my own at that time, and I
followed them thinking to overtake them, but when I was in the hollow
they were on the hill, and when I was on the hill they were in the
hollow. And when they got near to the bridge that is over the big river,
they were not to be seen. For they can never cross over a mering
(boundary) that is a nver.

J. Fagan:

One time I was at a party and I didn't leave the house till 2 o'clock so
you may think it was late in the night before I got home. And after a
while I looked back and I saw someone coming after me, a little old
woman about so high (3 feet) and she wearing a white cap with a frilled
border, and a red square and a red flannel petticoat. I set off to run
when I saw her, for at that time I had the run of a hare, but when I got
near home I looked back and she was after me still. When I got inside
the door I fell on my two knees. And it was seven years before I got the
better of that fright. And from that time to this I never got the run
again that I used to have.

There was a respectable woman, Mrs. Gaynor, living in Cloon, told me
that whenever she went out of Cloon in the direction of Fiddane in one
part of the road there was a woman sometimes met her that she saw at no
other time, and every time she'd meet her she'd spit in her face.

There is a family at Tirneevan and they were having a wed-ding there.
And when it was going on, the wine ran short, and the spirits ran out
and they didn't know what to do to get more, Gort being two miles away.
And two or three strange people came in that they had never seen before.
And when they found what was wanting they said that they'd go get it.
And in a few minutes they were back with the spirits and the wine-and no
place to get it nearer than Gort.

There was a herd's house up at Burren that no one could live in. But one
Holland from Tirneevan said he'd take the place, and try how would he
get on there. So he went with his family, and the first day the daughter
made the place clean and swept it' and then she went out for a can of
milk. And when she was coming in the door, it was knocked out of her
hand and spilled over her. And that evening when they sat down to their
supper the door opened and eight or nine people came in, and a red man
among them. And they sat down and ate. And then they showed Holland one
side of the room, and bid him to keep it always clean, and spring water
in it.

A Herd:

There was a man woke about three o'clock one morning and he bade the
servant girl go down and make the fire and put on the potatoes, where he
had to be going out early. So she went down and there she saw one of
them sitting by the hearth in the kitchen. So she ran upstairs with the
fright she got to where the man 'vas in bed with his wife. So then he
went down himself, and he saw one of them sure enough sitting by the
fire and he asked "How did you come in?" And he said, "By the lock-hole
of the door." And the man said, "There's the pot full of potatoes and
you might as well have used a few of them." And he said, 'We have them
used already; and you think now they are potatoes, but when you put the
pot down on the fire you'll see they are no more than horse dung."

Thomas Cloonan:

One night my father was beyond on the other side of the lake, going to
watch an otter where the water goes away underground. And he heard
voices talking, and he thought one was the voice of Father Nagle the
parish priest of Kilbecanty, and the other the voice of Father Hynes
from Cloon that does be late out fishing for eels. And when he came to
where the voices were, there was no one at all in it. And he went and
sat in the cave, where the water goes under, and there was a great noise
like as il planks were being thrown down overhead. And you may think how
frightened he was when he never took off his boots to cross the river,
but run through it just as he was and never stopped tiil he got to the
house.

Mrs. Cloonan:

Two men I saw one time over in Inchy. I was sitting milking the cow and
she let a snore and I looked up and I saw the two men, small men, and
their hands and their feet the smallest ever I saw, and hats turned back
on their beads, but I did not see their faces. Then the cow rose her
foot, and I thought, "it will be worse for me if she'll put her foot
down on me," and I looked at her, and when I looked up again they were
gone. Mrs. Stafford told me it was not for me they came, but for the
cow, Blackberry, that died soon after.

There was a man in Gort was brought for a while to Tir-na-Og, that is a
part of heaven.

McGarrity that was coming back one night to the new house beyond the
lake saw two children, two little girls they were, standing beside the
house. Paddy told me that, and he said they came there to foretell him
he was stopping there too late.

John Phelan:

I never saw them nor felt them all my life, and I walking the place
night and day, except one time when for twelve nights I slept in the
little house beyond, in the kitchen garden where the apples were being
robbed that time because there was no one living at home. In the
night-time in the loft above my head I used to hear a scratching and a
scraping, and one time a plank that was above in it began to move about.
But I had no fear but stopped there, but I did not put off my clothes
nor stretch myself on the bed for twelve nights. They say that one man
that slept in the same house was found in the morning choked in his bed
and the door locked that they had to burst it in.

And in old Richard Gregory's time there was one Horan slept there, and
one night he ran out of it and out of the Gort gate and got no leave to
put his clothes on. But there's some can see those things and more that
can't, and I'm one of those that can't. Walking Coole demesne I am these
forty years, days and nights, and never met anything worse than myself.

But one night standing by the vinery and the moon shining, on a sudden a
wind rose and shook the trees and rattled the glass and the slates, and
no wind before, and it stopped as sudden as it came. And there were two
bunches of grapes gone, and them that took them by the chimney and no
other way.

James Hill:

One night since I lived here I found late at night that a black jennet I
had at that time bad strayed away. So I took a lantern and went to look
for him, and found him near Doherty's house at the bay. And when I took
him by the halter, I put the light out and led him home. But surely as I
walked there was a footstep behind me all the way home.

I never rightly believed in them till I met a priest about two years ago
coming out from the town that asked his way to Mrs. Canan's, the time
she was given over, and he told me that one time his horse stopped and
wouldn't pass the road, and the man that was driving said, "I can't make
him pass." And the priest said, "It will be the worse for you, if I have
to come down into the road." For he knew some bad thing was there. And
he told me the air is full of them. But Father Dolan wouldn't talk of
such things, very proud he is, and he coming of no great stock.

One night I was driving outside Goole gate--close to where the
Ballinamantane farm begins. And the mare stopped, and I got off the car
to lead her, but she wouldn't go on. Two or three times I made her start
and she'd stop again. Something she must have seen that I didn't see.

Beasts will sometimes see more than a man will. There were three young
chaps I knew went up by the river to hunt coneens one evening, and they
threw the dog over the wall. And when he was in the field he gave a yelp
and drew back as if something frightened him.

Another time my father was going early to some place, and my mother had
a noggin of turnips boiled for him that night before, to give him
something to eat before he'd start. So they got up very early and she
lighted the fire and put the oven hanging over it for to warm the
turnips, and then she went back to bed again. And my father was in a
hurry and he went out and brought in a sheaf of wheaten straw to put
under the oven, the way it would make a quick blaze. And when he came
in, the oven had been taken off the hook, and was put standing in the
hearth, and no mortal had been there. So he was afraid to stop, and he
went back to the bed, and till daybreak they could hear something that
was knocking against the pot. And the servant girl that was in the
house, she awoke and heard quick steps walking to the stable, and the
door of it giving a screech as if it was being opened. But in the
morning there was no sign there or of any harm being done to the pot.

Then the girl remembered that she had washed her feet the night before,
and had never thought to throw out the water. And it's well known to
wash the feet and not to throw the water out, brings some harm--except
you throw fire into the vessel it stands in.

Simon Niland:

Late one night I was out walking, and a gun in my hand, and I was going
down a little avenue of stones, and I heard after me the noise of a
horse's steps. So I stopped and sat down on the stile, for I thought,
the man that's with the horse, I'll have his company a bit of the way.
But the noise got louder like as if it was twenty horses coming, and
then I was knocked down, and I put out my foot to save the gun from
being broken. But when I got up there was no hurt on me or on the gun,
and the noise was all gone, and the place quiet. It was maybe four years
after that or six, I was walking the same path with the priest and a few
others, for a whale had come ashore, and the jaw-bones of it were wanted
to make the piers of a gate. And the priest said to me, "Did you ever
hear of the battle of Troy?" "I didn't hear but I read about it," says
I. "Well," says he, "there was a man at that time called Simon, and they
found that whenever he came out with them to fight there was luck with
them, and when he wasn't with them, there'd be no luck. And that's why
we put you in front of us, to lead us on the path, you having the same
name." So that put it in my head, and I told him about what happened
that night, and I said, "Now would you believe that?" "I would," says
he. "And what are such things done by?" says I. "The fallen angels," he
said, "for they have power to do such things and to raise wind and
storm, but yet they have the hope of salvation at the last."

\* \* \*

One clear night and the moon shining, I was walking home down this road)
and I had a strong dog at that time. And just here where you stand he
began to bark at something and he made rushes at it, and made as if he
was worrying it) but I could see nothing, though if it had been even the
size of a rat I must have seen it, the night was so clear. And I had to
leave him at last and heard him barking and I was at the house-door
before he came up with me.

I know a good many on the island have seen those, but they wouldn't say
what they are like to look at, for when they see them their tongue gets
like a stone.

Mrs. Hynes of Slieve Echtge:

When you see a blast of wind pass, pick a green rush and throw it after
them, and say, 'God speed you." There they all are, and maybe the
*stroke lad* at the end of them.

There was a neighbour of mine in late with me one night, and when he was
going home, just as he passed that little road you see, a big man came
over the wall in front of him, and was growing bigger as he went, till
he nearly fainted with the fright he got.

They can do everything. They can raise the wind, and draw the storm.

And to Drogheda they go for wine, for the best wine is in the cellars
there.

An Islander:

One night I and another lad were coming along the road, and the dog
began to fight, as if he was fighting another dog, but we could see
nothing and we called him off but he wouldn't come. And when we got home
he answered us, and he seemed as if tired out.

There was a strange woman came to this island one day and told some of
the women down below what would happen to them. And they didn't believe
her, she being a stranger, but since that time, it's all been coming
true.

Mrs. Casey:

I knew a woman that every night after she went to bed used to see some
sort of a shadow that used to appear to her. So she went to some old
woman, and she told her to sprinkle holy water about and to put a
blackthorn stick beside her bed. So she got the stick and put it there
and sprinkled the holy water, and it never appeared since then. Three
sorts of holy water she got, from the priest and from the friars and
from some blessed well. And she has them in three pint bottles in the
window, and she'd kill you if you so much as looked at them.

A Fisherman:

I never saw anything myself, but one day I was going over the fields
near Killeen, and it the quietest day of summer you ever saw. And all of
a sudden I heard a great noise like thunder, and a blast of wind passed
by me that laid the thistles low, and then all was quiet again. It might
be that they were changing, for they change from place to place.

I would not give in to faeries myself but for one thing. There was a
little boy of my own, and there was a wedding going to be here, and
there was no bread in the house, and none to be had in Kilcolgan, and I
bade him to go to Kinvara for bread. I pulled out the ass-car for him
and he set out.

And from that time he was never the same, and now he is in the asylum at
Ballinasbe.

Did he tell what happened? He never told me anything, but he told a
neighbour that he met awful looking people on the road to Kinvara just
about midnight, and that whatever they did to him, he could never
recover it.

A Carter:

Often and often I heard things. A great shouting I heard one night
inside Coole demesne--a hurling it must have been. Another time I was
passing at night-time, near Reed the weaver's, and there were rocks
thrown at me all along the road, but they did not touch me, and I could
not see any one thing there. But I never went that road again at
night-time.

It's said those that die are left in the place where they lived to do
their penance. Often and often when I came to that house below, I felt
knocks under the bed, and like some one walking over it.

Two men I know were going from Gort one night, and there near the wall
of the demesne they saw two men ploughing, and they asked one another
what could they be to be ploughing by night. And then they saw that as
they ploughed, the land was going away from them, and they were gone
themselves, and they saw them no more.

An Old Woman who was Housekeeper to the Donnellans:

I'll tell you how the fortune of the family began.

It was Tully O'Donnellan was riding home from Ballinasbe, or some other
place, and it was raining, and he came to a river that was in flood, and
there used to be no bridges in those times. And when he was going to
ride through the river, he saw the *greasa* leprechaun on the bank, and
he offered him a lift, and he stooped down and lifted him up behind him
on the horse.

And when he got near where the castle was, he saw it in flames before
him. And the leprechaun said, "Don't fret after it but build a new
castle in the place I'll show you, about a stone's throw from the old
one." "I have no money to do that," said Tully Donnellan. "Never mind
that," said the leprechaun, "but do as I bid you, and you'll have
plenty." So he did as he bade him, and the morning after he went to live
in the new castle, when he went into that room that has the stone with
his name on it now, it was full up of gold, and you could be turning it
like you'd turn potatoes into a shovel. And when the children would go
into the room with their father and mother, the nurses would put bits of
wax on their shoes, the way bits of the gold would stick to them. And
they had great riches and smothered the world with it, and they used to
shoe their horses with silver. It was in racing they ran through it, and
keeping hounds and horses and horns.

Old Pegs Kelly:

I seen the Sheogue but once, and that was five or six years ago, and I
walking the railway where I was looking after my little hens that do be
straying. And I saw them coming along, and in a minute I was in the
middle of them. Shavings, and shavings, and shavings going along the
road as fast as they could go. And I knew there was no shavings to be
seen this many year, since the stakes were made for the railway down at
Nolan's, and the carpenter that made them dead, and the shop where he
made them picked clean. And I knew well they were the horses the Sheogue
did be riding. But some that saw them said they looked like bits of
paper. And I threw three stones after them and I heard them cry out as
they went. And that night the roof was swept off Tom Dermot's house in
Ryanrush and haystacks blown down. And John Brady's daughter that was
daft those many years was taken, and Tom Horan's little girl that was
picking potatoes, she and her brothers together. She turned black all of
a minute and three days after, she was dead.

That's the only time I seen them, and that I never may again, for
believe me that time I had my enough, thinking as I did that I hadn't
more than three minutes to live.

A Herd's Wife:

Martin's new wife is a fine big woman, if she is lucky. But it's not a
lucky house. That's what happened the last wife that lost her baby and
died. William Martin knows well they are in it, but he is a dark man and
would say nothing. I saw them myself about the house one time, and I met
one on the forth going through the fields; he had the appearance of a
man in his clothes. And sometimes when I look over at Martin's house
there is a very dark look like a dark cloud over it and around it.

The other Army Man:

The faeries are all fallen angels. Father Folan told us from the altar
that they're as thick as the sands of the sea all about us, and they
tempt poor mortals. But as for carrying away women and the like, there's
many that says so, but they have no proof. But you have only to bid them
begone and they will go. One night myself I was after walking back from
Kinvara, and down by the wood beyond I felt one coming beside me, and I
could feel the horse that he was riding on and the way that he lifted
his legs, but they didn't make a sound like the hoofs of a horse. So I
stopped and turned around and said very loud "Be off!" And he went and
never troubled me after. And I knew a man that was dying, and one came
up on his bed and he cried out to it, "Get out of that, you unnatural
animal!" And it left him. There's a priest I heard of that was looking
along the ground like as if he was hunting for something, and a voice
said to him "If you want to see them you'll see enough of them," and his
eyes were opened and he saw the ground thick with them. Singing they do
be sometimes and dancing, but all the time they have the cloven foot.

Fallen angels they are, and after they fell God said, "Let there be
Hell, and there it was in a moment"--("God save us! It's a pity He said
that word and there might have been no Hell today" *murmurs the wife*).
And then He asked the devil what would he take for the souls of all the
people. And the devil said nothing would satisfy him but the blood of a
Virgin's Son. So he got that and then the gates of Hell were opened.

The Wife:

I never seen anything, although one night I was out after a cow till 2
o'clock in the morning and old Gantly told me he wondered at me to be
out in this place, by the wood near the white gate where he saw a thing
himself one night passing. But it's only them that's living in mortal
sin can see such things, that's so Thomas, whatever you may say. But
your ladyship's own place is middling free from them, but Ratlin's full
of them.

And there's many say they saw the banshee, and that if she heard you
singing loud, she'd be very apt to bring you away with her.

A Piper:

There was an old priest I knew--Father McManus--and when he would go
walking in the green lawn before the house, his man, Keary, would go
with him, and he carrying three sticks. And after a while the priest
would say, "*Cur do maide*"--Fire your stick--as far as you can, and he
would throw it. And he would say the same thing a second and a third
time, and after that he would say, "We have no more to protect us now,"
and he would go in. And another priest I was talking to the other day
was telling me they are between earth and air and the grass is full of
them.

Mrs. Casey:

There was a boy I knew at Tyrone was a great card player. And one night
about 10 o'clock he was coming home from a party, and he had the cards
in his hands and he shuffling them as he went along. And presently he
saw a man before him on the road, and the man stopped till he came up,
and when he saw the cards, he says "Stop here and I'll have a game with
you," for the moon was shining bright. So the boy sat down, and the
stranger asked him had he any money, and he said he had five shillings
after the night's play. "Well," says the man, "we'll play the first game
for half-a-crown." So they sat down and put out the money on a flagstone
that was much like a table, and they began to play, and the first game
was won by the stranger. "Well now," says he, "we'll have another." So
the boy began to shuffle the cards, but as he did, one card dropped on
the ground, and he stooped down for it, and when he did, he saw the
man's feet that were partly under the flagstone, and they were like the
feet of a cow. So with the fright he got, he jumped up and began to run
and never stopped till he got inside his house and had the door shut.
And when he had been sitting there a few minutes, a knock came to the
door, and he heard the voice of the stranger say, "It's well for you you
ran away when you did, or you'd be where I am now." And he heard no
more; it was the boy himself told me this.

I hear them in this house ever since the first night I came, in the
kitchen, when all are in bed. Footsteps, I wouldn't think so much of,
but scraping the potatoes, that's another thing.

A daughter I had that went to America died there, and the brother that
came back told me that he was with her, and she going, and surely they
all heard the jennet coming to the door, and when they opened it, there
was nothing there, and many people standing and waiting about it. I knew
a woman died beyond in Boher and left a house full of children and the
night she died there was a light seen in the sick house.

To leave a few cold potatoes, the first of them, outside, you should
surely do it, and not to leave the house without spring water. I knew a
boy that was sleeping up in the loft of a house and one night they had
forgotten to leave water within in the kitchen. And about midnight he
awoke and he saw through a hole in the loft two women, and one of them
just after having a baby. And they said, "What way will we wash the
child, and no water here; we must take the pan of milk down from the
shelf." So the boy said out loud the way they'd hear him, "I must go for
spring water. I forgot to leave it below." So he went and got it and
left it there, and let on not to see them. And--for I forget what time
after that--there was no morning he put his clothes on but he'd find a
half-crown in his boot. To do you harm? No, but the best of neighbours
they are, if you don't chance to offend them.

A Schoolmaster:

In Donegal one night some of the people were at a still in the
mountains, and on a sudden they heard a shot fired, and they thought it
was a signal given to the police) and they made home to the village. And
all the night they could hear like the tramp of horses and of police and
the noise of cars passing by, but nothing could be seen. And next day
the police came in earnest, and searched about the place where they had
been at work at the still, but no one was there and they found nothing.
So they knew it was a warning they were after being given.

John Madden:

One day old Fogarty of Clough was cutting rods in Coole with a
black-handled knife, and he put it in his pocket, and presently he felt
for it and it was gone. But when he went home and went into the house,
there was the knife lying on the table.

My wife's brother was on a cock of hay in that field beyond one tune,
and he sat down to rest and he saw them hurling in red caps and blue,
and a crowd looking in at them. But he said nothing to the men that were
with him. They are mostly in foiths and lonesome places.

An old man, Kelleher, living in the Wicklow Mountains, told me and W. B.
Yeats and Miss Pollexfen:

I often saw them when I had my eyesight; one time they came about me,
shouting and laughing and there were spouts of water all around me. And
I thought that I was coming home, but I was not on the right path and
couldn't find it and went wandering about, but at last one of them said,
"Good-evening, Kelleher," and they went away, and then in a moment I saw
where I was by the stile. They were very small, like little boys and
girls, and had red caps.

I always saw them like that, but they were bigger at the butt of the
river; they go along the course of the rivers. Another time they came
about me playing music and I didn't know where I was going, and at last
one of them said the same way, "Good evening, Kelleher," and I knew that
I was at the gate of the College; it is the sweetest music and the best
that can be heard, like melodeons and fifes and whistles and every sort.

Mrs. Kelleher says: I often hear that music too, I hear them playing
drums.

K: We had one of them in the house for a while, it was when I was living
up at Ticnock, and it was just after I married that woman there that was
a nice slip of a girl at that time. It was in the winter and there was
snow on the ground, and I saw one of them outside, arid I brought him in
and put him on the dresser, and he stopped in the house for a while, for
about a week.

Mrs. K: It was more than that, it was two or three weeks.

K: Ah! maybe it was--I'm not sure. He was about fifteen inches high. He
was very friendly. It is likely he slept on the dresser at night. When
the boys at the public-house were full of porter, they used to come to
the house to look at him, and they would laugh to see him but I never
let them hurt him. They said I would be made up, that he would bring me
some riches, but I never got them. We had a cage here, I wish I had put
him in it, I might have kept him till I was made up.

Mrs. K: It was a cage we had for a thrush. We thought of putting him
into it, but he would not have been able to stand in it.

K: I'm sorry I didn't keep him--I thought sometimes to bring him into
Dublin to sell him.

Mrs. K: You wouldn't have got him there.

K: One day I saw another of the kind not far from the house, but more
like a girl and the clothes greyer than his clothes, that were red. And
that evening when I was sitting beside the fire with the Missus I told
her about it, and the little lad that was sitting on the dresser called
out, "That's Geoffrey-a-wee that's coming for me," arid he jumped down
and went out of the door and I never saw him again. I thought it was a
girl I saw, but Geoffrey wouldn't be the name of a girl, would it?

He had never spoken before that time. Somehow I think that he liked me
better than the Missus. I used to feed him with bread and milk.

Mrs. K: I was afraid of him--I was afraid to go near him, I thought he
might scratch my eyes out--I used to leave bread and milk for him but I
would go away while he was eating it.

K: I used to feed him with a spoon, I would put the spoon to his mouth.

Mrs. K: He was fresh-looking at the first, but after a while he got an
old look, a sort of wrinkled look.

K: He was fresh-looking enough, he had a hardy look.

Mrs. K: He was wearing a red cap and a little red cloth skirt.

K: Just for the world like a Highlander.

Mrs. K: He had a little short coat above that; it was checked and
trousers under the skirt and long stockings all red. And as to his
shoes, they were tanned, and you could hardly see the soles of them, the
sole of his foot was like a baby's.

K: The time I lost my sight, it was a Thursday evening, and I was
walking through the fields. I went to bed that night, and when I rose up
in the morning, the sight was gone. The boys said it was likely I had
walked on one of their paths. Those small little paths you see through
the fields are made by them.

They are very often in the quarries; they have great fun up there, and
about Peacock Well. The Peacock Well was blessed by a saint, and another
well near, that cures the headache.

I saw one time a big grey bird about the cowhouse, and I went to a
comrade-boy and asked him to come and to help me to catch it, but when
we came back it was gone. It was very strange-looking and I thought that
it had a head like a man.

Old Manning:

I never saw them except what I told you, the dog fighting, and I heard
the horses, and at that same time I saw smoke coming out of the ground
near Foley's house at Corker, by the gate.

My mother lived for twenty years in Coole, and she often told me that
when she'd pass Shanwalla hill there would people come out and meet her
and--with respects to you--they'd spit in her face.

Faeries of course there are and there's many poor souls doing their
penance, and how do we know where they may be doing it?

A Farmer:

I might not believe myself there are such things but for what happened
not long after I was married when my first little girl was but a week
old. I had gone up to Ballybrit to tie some sheep and put fetters on
them, and I was waiting for Haverty to come and help me tie them. The
baby was a little unwell that day but I was not uneasy about her. But
while I was waiting for Haverty, a blast of wind came through the field
and I heard a voice say quite clear out of it "Katie is gone." That was
the little one, we had called her Catherine, but though she wasn't a
week in the world, we had it shortened already to Kate. And sure enough,
the child got worse, and we attended her through the night, and before
daybreak she was gone.

An Army Man:

Two nights ago a travelling man came and knocked at John Hanlon's house
at 11 o'clock, where he saw a light in the window and he asked would
there be any one out hurling so late as that For in coming by the field
beyond the chapel he saw it full of people, some on horses, and hurling
going on, and they were all dressed like soldiers, and you would hear
their swords clinking as they ran. And he was not sure were they faeries
till he asked John Hanlon was it the custom of people in this country to
go hurling so late as that. But that was always a great field for them.
From eleven to two, that is the time they have for play, but they must
go away before the cock crows. And the cock will crow sometimes as early
as 1 o'clock, a right one.

It was in the night that Christ our Saviour rose there were some Jews
sitting around the fire, and a cock boiling in the pot. And one of them
said, "He'll never rise again until that cock crows." And the cock rose
out of the pot and crowed, and he that was speaking got scalded with the
water that was splashed about.

A Connemara Man:

One night I was sleeping over there by the dresser and I heard them
("Would you say the day of the week," *says the old woman*. "It's
Thursday," said I. "Thank you," *says the old man, and goes on*) I heard
them thick all about the house--but what they were saying I couldn't
know.

The Old Woman:

It was my uncle that was away at nights and knew the time his horse fell
in the ditch, and he out at sea. And another day he was working at the
bridge and he said, "Before this day is over, a man will be killed
here." And so it happened, and a man was killed there before 12 o'clock.
He was in here one day with me, and I said, "I don't give in to you
being away and such things." And he says: "Urn, Um, Um," three times,
and then he says, "May your own living be long." We had a horse, the
grandest from this to Galway, had a foal when in this place-and before
long, both horse and foal died. And I often can hear them galloping
round the house, both horse and foal. And I not the only one, but many
in the village even hear them too.

Young Mrs. Phelan:

Often I saw a light in the wood at Derreen, above Ballytum. It would
rise high over the trees going round and round. I'd see it maybe for
fifteen minutes at a time, and then it would fall like a lamp.

In the month of May is their chief time for changing, and it's then
there's blowing away of hay and such things and great disturbance.

A Mayo Man:

One time I was led astray in a town, in Golden Hill in Staffordshire. I
was in the streets and I didn't know what way to turn all of a sudden,
and every street looked like a wood before me, and so I went on until I
met some man I knew, and I asked him where I was, and I went in, and
stayed drinking with the others till 10 o'clock and I went home sober.

I saw the white rabbit too at Golden Hill. (One of the other men puts
in, "There is always a white rabbit seen there, that turns into a woman
before any misfortune happens, such as an accident.") I was walking
along the road, and it ran beside me, and then I saw a woman in white
before me on the road, and when I got to her, she was gone. And that
evening a woman in a house nearby fell dead on her own doorstep.

Another time near this, I was passing the barn where Johnny Rafferty the
carpenter and his son used to be working, but it was shut and locked and
no one in it. But when I came near it, I felt as if I was walking on
wood, and my hair stood up on my head, and I heard the noise of tools,
and hammering and sawing in it.

Pete Heffernan:

Old Doran told me that he was near Castle Hacket one time and saw them
having a fair, buying and selling for all the world like ourselves,
common people. But you or I or fifty others might have been there like
him and not seen them. It's only them that are born at midnight that has
the second sight.

Fallen angels, they say they are. And they'd do more harm than what they
do but for the hope they have that some day they may get to heaven. Very
small they are, and go into one another so that what you see might only
be a sort of a little bundle. But to leave a couple of cold potatoes
about at night one should always do it, and to sweep the hearth clean.
Who knows when they might want to come in and warm themselves.

Not to keep the water you wash your feet in in the house at night, not
to throw it out of the door where it might go over them, but to take it
a bit away from the house, and if by any means you can, to keep a bit of
light burning at night, if you mind these three things you'll never be
troubled with them.

That woman of mine was going to Mass one day early and she met a small
little man, and him with a book in his hand. "Where are you going?" says
he. "To the chapel beyond," says she. "Well," says he, "you'd better
take care not to be coming out at this hour and disturbing people," says
he. And when she got into the chapel she saw him no more.

An Old Woman with Oysters from Tyrone:

Oh, I wouldn't believe in the faeries, but it's no harm to believe in
fallen angels!

Mrs. Day:

My own sons are all for education and read all books and they wouldn't
believe now in the stories the old people used to tell. But I know one
Finnegan and his wife that went to Esserkelly churchyard to cry over her
brother that was dead. And all of a sudden there came a pelt of a stone
against the wall of the old church and no one there. And they never went
again, and they had no business to be crying him and it not a funeral.

Francis, my son that's away now, he was out one morning before the
daybreak to look at a white heifer in the field. And there he saw a
little old woman, and she in a red cloak--crying, crying, crying. But he
wouldn't have seen that if he had kept to natural hours.

There were three girls near your place, and they went out one time to
gather cow-dung for firing. And they were sitting beside a small little
hill, and while they were there, they heard a noise of churning,
churning, in the ground beneath them. And as they listened, all of a
minute, there was a noggin of milk standing beside them. And the girl
that saw it first said, "I'll not drink of it lest they might get power
over me." But the other girl said,

"I'll bring it home and drink it." And she began to ridicule them. And
because of she ridiculing them and not believing in them, that night in
bed she was severely beaten so that she wasn't the better of it for a
long time.

Often they'll upset a cart in the middle of the road, when there's no
stone nor anything to upset it And my father told me that sometimes
after he had made the hay up into cocks, and on a day without a breath
of wind, they'd find it all in the next field lying in wisps. One time
too the cart he was driving went over a leprechaun--and the old woman in
the cart had like to faint.

Mr. Hosty of Slieve Echtge:

I never would have believed the shadow of a soul could have power, till
that hurling match I saw that I told you about.

It was in the old time it happened, that there was war in heaven. He
that was called the brightest of the angels raised himself up against
God. And when they were all to be thrown out, St. Michael spoke up for
them for he saw that when the heavens were weeded out they'd be left
without company. So they were stopped in the falling, in the air and in
the earth and in the sea. And they are about us sure enough, and
whenever they'll be saved I don't know, but it is not for us to say what
God will do in the end.

I often heard that our winter is their summer-sure they must have some
time for setting their potatoes and their oats. But I remember a very
old man used to say when he saw the potatoes black, that it was to them
they were gone. "Sure" he used to say, "the other world must have its
way of living as well as ourselves."

Mrs. Casey:

Dolan I was talking to the other day, and I asked him if faeries used
not to be there. And he said, "They're in it yet. There where you're
standing, they were singing and dancing a few nights ago. And the same
evening I saw two women down by the lake and I thought it was the ladies
from the house gone out for a walk, but when I came near, it was two
strange women I saw, sitting there by the lake, and their wings came,
and they vanished into the air."

John Phelan:

I was cutting trees in Inchy one time. And at 8 o'clock one morning when
I got there, I saw a girl picking nuts with her hair hanging down over
her shoulders, brown hair, and she had a good clean face and was tall
and nothing on her head, and her dress was no way gaudy, but simple. And
when she felt me coming, she gathered herself up and was gone as if the
earth had swallowed her up. And I followed her and looked for her, but I
never could see her again from that day to this, never again.

Mary Shannon:

There was a herd's house near Loughrea that had a bad name; and a
strange woman came in one time and told the woman of the house that she
must never throw dirty water out of the back-door. "For," said she, "if
you had clean linen hanging there on a line before the fire, how would
you like any one to come in and to throw dirty water over it?" And she
bid her leave food always on the dresser. "For," said she, "wherever you
leave it we'll be able to find it." And she told how they often went
into Loughrea to buy things, and provisions, and would look like any
other person, and never be known, for they can make themselves visible
or invisible as they like. You might be talking to one of them and never
know she was different from another. At our place there used to be a
good many of these people about, these Ingentry women or women from the
North we sometimes call them. There was one came into the house one day
and told my mother she didn't get all her butter in the nulk. And she
told her the servant-girl was stealing and hiding some of it, for in
these days servants were cheap and we kept a couple; you'd get them for
about five shillings a quarter. And my mother went to look, and then she
went out of the house, and went off in a minute in a blast. And the
husband that was coming into the house, he never saw her at all, and she
going out of the door.

Sunset is a bad hour, and just before sunrise in the morning, and about
12 o'clock in the day, it's best not to be too busy or going about too
much.

An Aran Man:

Sometimes they travel like a cloud, or like a storm. One day I was
setting out the manure in my own garden and they came and rolled it in a
heap and tossed it over the wall, and carried it out to sea beyond the
lighthouse.

Mr. Finnerty:

People say two days of the week, they name two days. Some say Thursday,
and some say whatever day it is, and the day before it, and then they
can't be heard. In the village beyond, there were a good many people in
a house one night, and lights in it, and talking, and of a sudden some
one opened the door-and there outside and round the house they were
listening to them-and when the door was open they were all seen, and
made off as thick as crows to the forth near the Burren hills.

There was one Ward was walking one night near Castle Taylor, and in that
big field that's near the corner where Burke was murdered he saw a big
fire, and a lot of people round about it, and among them was a girl he
used to know that had died.

Last week in that field beyond there, the hay was all taken up, and
turned into the next field in wisps.

You must put the potatoes out for them before they are put on the table,
for they would not touch them if they had been touched by common
persons.

And I saw Horan that had the orchard here bought run to our house in the
middle of the night naked with nothing on but his trousers, where he was
after being beat out of the house in the kitchen garden. Every night
when he was going to bed there did a knocking come in the loft over his
head, but he gave no attention to it. But a great storm Came and a great
lot of the apples was blown down and he gathered them up and filled the
loft with them, thinking when he showed them to get compensation. And
that is the night he was beat out of bed. And John Phelan knows well
what things used to be in that house.

John Creevy:

My father? Yes indeed he saw many things, and I tell you a thing he told
me, and there's no doubt in the earthly world about it. It was when they
lived at Inchy they came over here one time for to settle a marriage for
Murty Delvin's aunt. And when they had the business settled, they were
going home again at dead of night. And a man was after getting married
that day, one Delane from beyond Kilmacduagh, and the drag was after
passing the road with him and his party going home. And all of a minute
the road was filled with men on horses riding along, so that my father
had to take shelter in Delane's big haggard by the roadside. And he
heard the horsemen calling on Delane's name. And twenty-one days after,
Delane lay dead.

There's no doubt at all about the truth of that, and they were no riders
belonging to this world that were on those horses.

Thomas Brown:

There was a woman walking in the road that had a young child at home,
and she met a very old man, having a baby in his arms. And he asked
would she give it a drop of breast-milk. So she did, and gave it a
drink. And the old man said: "It's well for you that you did that, for
you saved your cow by it. But tomorrow look over the wall into the
fields of the rich man that lives beyond the boundary, and you'll see
that one of his was taken in the place of yours." And so it happened.

In the old times there used to be many stories of such things, half the
world seemed to be on the *other side*.

I used not to believe in them myself, until one night I heard them
hurling. I was coming home from town with Jamsie Flann; we were not
drunk but we were hearty. Coming along the road beyond we heard them
hurling in the field beside us. We could see nothing but we'd hear them
hit the ball, and it fly past us like the lightning, so quick, and when
they hit the goal, we heard a moan-"Oh! ah! "--that was all. But after
we went a little way we sat down by a little hill to rest, and there we
heard a thousand voices talking. What they said, we couldn't understand,
or the language, but we knew that it was one side triumphing over the
other.

But the nights are queer--surely they are queer by sea or by land. There
was a friend of mine told me he was out visiting one night, and coming
home across the fields he came into a great crowd of them. They did him
no harm, and among them he saw a great many he knew, that were dead,
five or six out of our own village. And he was in his bed for two months
after that, and he told the priest of it. He said he couldn't understand
the talk, it was like the hissing of geese, and there was one very big
man, that seemed the master of them, and his talk was like you'll hear
in a barrel when it's being rolled.

There's a hill, Cruach-na-Sheogue down by the sea, and many have seen
them there dancing in the moonlight.

There was a man told me he was passing near it one night, and the walls
on each side of the road were all covered with people sitting on them,
and he walked between, and they said nothing to him. And he knew many
among them that were dead before that. Is it only the young go there?
Ah, how do we know what use they may have for the old as well as for the
young?

There are but few in these days that die right. The priests know about
this more than we do, but they don't like to be talking of them because
they might be too big in our minds.

They are just the same in America as they are here, and my sister that
came home told me they were, and the women that do cures, just like the
woman at Clifden, or that woman you know of.

There was one she went to out there, and when you'd come in to ask a
cure she'd be lulled into a sleep, and when she woke she'd give the
cure. Away she was while the sleep lasted.

The Spinning Woman.

No, I never seen them myself, and I born and bred in the same village as
Michael Barrett. But the old woman that lives with me, she does be
telling me that before she came to this part she was going home one
night, where she was tending a girl that was sick, and she had to cross
a hill forth. And when she came to it, she saw a man on a white horse,
and he got to the house before her, and the horse stopped at the
back-door. And when she got there and went in, sure enough the girl was
gone.

I never saw anything myself, but one night I was passing the boreen near
Kinvara, and a tall man with a tall hat and a long coat came out of it.
He didn't follow me, but he looked at me for a while, and then he went
away.

And one time I saw the leprechaun. It's when I was a young woman and
there was black frieze wanting at Ballylee, and in those days they all
thought there could no black frieze be spun without sending for me. So I
was coming home late in the evening. and there I saw him setting by the
side of the road, in a hollow between two ridges. He was very small,
about the height of my knee, and wearing a red jacket, and he went out
of that so soon as he saw me. I knew nothing about him at that time. The
boys say if I'd got a hold of his purse I'd be rich for ever. And they
say he should have been making boots; but he was more in dread of me
than I of him, and had his instruments gathered up and away with him in
one second.

There used to be a lot of things seen, but someway the young people go
abroad less at night, and I'm thinking the souls of some of those may be
delivered by this time.

There was a boy looked out of the door, and he saw a woman milking the
cow. But after, when he went to milk her, he found as much milk as ever
there was.

Mrs. Phelan:

There was a woman at Kilbecanty was out one evening and she saw a woman
dressed in white come after her, and when she looked again she had
disappeared into a hole in the wall. Small she must have grown to get
into that. And for eleven days after that, she saw the same appearance,
and after eleven days she died.

There was another woman lived at Kilbecanty, just beside the churchyard,
you can see the house yet And one day she found a plate of food put in
at the door, the best of food, meat and other things. So she ate it and
the next day the same thing happened. And she told a neighbouring woman
about it, and she left her door open, and a plate of food was left in to
her that night. But when she saw it she was afraid to eat it, but took
it and threw it out. And the next day she died. But the woman that ate
the food, nothing happened to her.

There was one Halloran took that farm on the road beyond one time, but
he locked the house up, not meaning to go and live in it yet a while,
and he kept the key in his pocket. But one night late he was coming by
and he saw a light in the window and looked in, and he saw a woman
sitting by a fire she was after lighting. So he ran away and never went
to live in the house after.

One night myself coming back from Kelly's I saw a man by the side of the
road, and I knew him to be one Cuniff that had died a year before.

There were two men stealing apples in a garden, and when they tried to
get out there was a soldier at the door with a sword in his hand. And at
the door there he was still before them; so they had to leave the two
bags of apples behind.

W. Sullivan:

One night myself I was driving the jennet I had at that time to Cappagh
and I went past a place one Halvey had bought and I saw a man having a
white front to his shirt standing by the wall, and I said to myself,
"Halvey is minding this place well," and I went on, and I saw the man
following me, and the jennet let a roar and kicked at me, and at that
time we passed a stile, and I saw him no more.

Mrs. Barrett:

I don't know did old Michael see anything or was it in his head. But
James, and brother that died, told me one time that he was crossing the
way beyond from Brennan's, where the stones are. And there he saw a
hurling going on. He never saw a field so full before. And he stood and
watched them and wasn't a big frightened, but the dog that was with him
shrank between his legs and stopped there.

And my father told me that one time he was stopping with my uncle up
there near Mrs. Quaid's, in a house that's pulled down since. And he
woke up and saw the night so bright that he went out. And there he saw a
hurling going on, and they had boots like soldiers and were all shining
with the brightness of the night.

And Micky Smith God rest his soul saw them at midday passing in the air
above Cahir, as thick as birds.

A Gate-keeper:

Niland that met the coach that time and saw them other times, he told me
that there were two sets among them. The one handsome and tall and like
the gentry; the others more like our-selves, he said. and short and
wide, and the body starting out in front, and wide belts about their
waists. Only the women he saw, and they were wearing white cans with
borders, and their hair in curls over the forehead and check aprons and
plaid shawls. They are the spiteful ones that would do you a mischief,
and others that are like the gentry would do nothing but to laugh and
criticize you.

One night myself I was outside Loughrea on the road, about 1 o'clock in
the morning and the moon was shining. And I saw a lady, a true lady she
was, dressed in a sort of a ball dress, white and short in the skirt,
and off the shoulders. And she had long stockings and dancing shoes with
short uppers. And she had a long thin face, and a cap on her head with
frills, and every one of the frills was the breadth of my six fingers.
As to flowers or such things, I didn't notice, for I was more fixed in
looking at the cap. I suppose they wore them at balls in some ancient
times. I followed her a bit, and then she cross the road to Johnny
Flanigan the joiner's house, that had a gate with piers. And I went
across after her, to have a better view, and when she got to the pier
she shrank into it and there was nothing left.

Johnny Kelly that lives in Loughrea was over here one evening, where he
had some cattle on the land at Coole. And where the river goes away, he
saw two ladies sitting, ladies he thought them to be, and they had long
dresses. And they rose up and went on to that hole where the water is
and the trees. And there all of a sudden they rose a storm and went up
in it, with a sort of a roar or a cry and passed away through the air.

And I was in the house with my wife and I heard the cry, and I thought
it might be some drunken man going home, and it about 10 o'clock in the
evening. And I went to the door, and presently Kelly came in and you'd
have thought him a drunken man, walking and shaking as he did with the
fright he got seeing them going off away in the storm.

Mrs. Casey:

I went over to see Kate Cloran the other day, knowing that she had seen
some of these things. And she told me that she was led astray by them
one time-a great lot of them, they were dressed in white blouses and
black skirts and some of them had crimson mantles, but none of them had
any covering on their head, and they had all golden hair and were more
beautiful than any one she had ever seen.

And one night she met the coach and four, and it was full of ladies.
letting the window up and down and laughing out at her. They had golden
hair, or it looked so with the lights. They were dressed in white, and
there were bunches of flowers about the horses' heads. Roses, chiefly,
some pink and some blue. The coachmen were strange looking, you could
not say if they were men or women-and their clothes were more like
country clothes. They kept their heads down that she could not see their
faces, but those in the carriage had long faces, and thin, and long
noses.

Mike Martin:

They are of the same size as we are. People only call them diminutive
because they are made so when they're sent on certain errands.

There was a man of Ardrahan used to see many things. But he lost his
eyesight after. It often happens that those that see these things lose
their earthly sight.

The coach and four is seen by many. It appears in different forms, but
there is always the same woman in it. Handsome I believe she is, and
white; and there she will always be seen till the end of the world.

It's best to be neighbourly with them anyway--best to be neighbourly.

There was a woman woke one night and she saw two women by the fire, and
they came over and tried to take away her baby. But she held him and she
nudged her husband with her arm, but he was fast asleep. And they tried
him again, and all she could do wouldn't waken the husband, but still
she had the baby tight, and she called out a curse in the devil's name.
So then they went away, for they don't like cursing.

One night coming home from Madden's where I was making frames with him,
I began to tremble and to shake, but I could see nothing. And at night
there came a knocking at the window, and the dog I had that would fight
any dog in Ireland began to shrink to the wall and wouldn't come out.
And I looked out the door and saw him. Little clothes he had on, but on
his head a quarter cap, and a sort of a bawneen about him. And I would
have followed him, but the rest wouldn't let me.

Another time I was crossing over the stile behind Kiltartan chapel into
Coole, and others along with me. And a great blast of wind came, and two
trees were bent and broken and fell into the river, and the splash of
water out of it went up to the skies. And those that were with me saw
many figures, but myself I only saw one, sitting there by the bank where
the trees fell, dark clothes he had, and he was headless.

They can take all shapes and it's said a pig is the worst, but I believe
if you take no notice of them and bless yourself as they pass, they'll
do you no harm at all.

There were two men walking by a forth that's beyond Cloon, and one of
them must have been in it at some time, for he told the other to look
through his arm, and when he looked he could see thousands of people
about walking and driving, and ladies and gentry among them.

There was a man in Cloon and he was very religious and very devout and
he didn't believe in anything. But one day he was at the Punch-bowl out
on the Ennis road, and there he saw two coaches coming through the thick
wood and they full of people and of ladies, and they went in to the
bushes on the other side. And since he saw that he'd swear to them being
there.

There was a woman living over near Tirneevan, and one morning three men
came galloping up on three horses, and they stopped at the door and tied
up the horses and walked in, and they strangers. And the woman put the
tongs over the cradle where the baby was sleeping, for that is a
*pishogue*. And when they saw the tongs, they looked at one another and
laughed, but they did him no harm, but pulled out the table and sat down
and played cards for a while, and went away again.

But if they're well treated, and if you know how to humour them, they're
the best of neighbours.

There was a woman seen not long ago, all in white, and she standing in a
stream washing her feet. But you need never be afraid of anything that's
white.

There was a woman I know was away sometimes and used to go into a forth
among them. She told me about it, and she said there was big and small
among them as there are here. And they wore caps like hurling cans, all
striped with blue and different colours, and their dress striped the
same way.

A Seaside Man:

There was a girl below in Spiddal was coming home from Galway with her
father, and just at the bridge below she saw the coach and four. Like a
van it was, with horses, and full of gentlemen. And she tried to make
her father see it' and he couldn't. And it passed along the road, and
then turned down into a field, over the stones, and it got to the strand
and ran along it for a while, and what became of it then I don't know.
My father told me that one night he came from a wake, and in the field
beyond, that was all a flag then, but the man that owns it has it
covered with earth now, he saw about twelve ladies all in white, and
they dancing round and round and a fiddler or a flute-player or whatever
he was in the middle. And he thought they were some ladies from Spiddal,
and called out to them that it was late to be out dancing. And he turned
to open the door of the house, and while he was turning they were gone.

There was a man walking one night and he felt a woman come and walk
behind him, and she all in white. And the two of them walked on till
sunrise, and then a cock crowed, and the man said, "There's the cock
crowing." And she said, "That's only a weak cock of the summer." And
soon after another cock crowed, and he asked did she hear it, and she
said, "That's but a poor cock of the harvest." And the third time a cock
crowed and when the raaa asked her she said, "That's a cock of March.
And you're as wise as the man that doesn't tell Friday's dream on
Saturday." For if you dream on a Friday, you must never tell the dream
of a Saturday.

Mrs. Swift:

My mother told me, and she wouldn't tell a lie, that one time she went
to a wake at Ardrahan. And about 12 o'clock, the night being hot, she
and her sister went out to the back of the house. And there they saw a
lot of people running as hard as they could to the house, and knocking
down the walls as they came to them, for there were a lot of small
stones. And she said to her sister, "These must be all the first cousins
corning, and there won't be room to sit in the house when they come in."
So they hurried back. But no one ever came in or came to the door at
all.

They are said to be outside the door there often. And some see them
hurling, small they are then, and with grey coats and blue caps. And the
car-driver told me--he wouldn't tell a lie--that he often passed them
walking like soldiers through the hollow beyond.

An Old Man on Slieve Echtge:

One night I was walking on that mountain beyond, and a little lad with
me, Martin Lehane, and we came in sight of the lake of Dairecaol. And in
the middle of the lake I saw what was like the shadow of a tall fire
tree, and while I was looking it grew to be like the mast of a boat. And
then ropes and rigging came at the sides and I saw that it was a ship;
and the boy that was with me, he began to laugh. Then I could see
another boat, and then more and more till the lake was covered with
them, and they moving from one side to another. So we watched for a
while, and then we went away and left them there.

Mrs. Guinan:

It's only a few days ago, I was coming through the field between this
and the boreen, and I saw a man standing, a countryman you'd say he was.
And when I got near him, all at once he was gone, and when I told Mrs.
Raftery in the next house, she said she didn't wonder at that, for it's
not very long ago she saw what seemed to be the same man, and he
vanished in the same way.

There's a woman living up that road beyond, is married to a man of the
Matthews, and last year she told me that a strange woman came into her
house, and asked had she good potatoes. And she said she had. And the
woman said: "You have them this year, but we'll have them next year."
And she said: "When you go out of the house, it's your enemy you'll see
standing outside," that was her near neighbour and was her worst enemy.

They'll often come in the night, and bring away the food. I wouldn't
touch any food that had been lying about in the night, you wouldn't know
what might have happened it. And my mother often told me, best not eat
it, for the food that's cooked at night and left till the morning, they
will have left none of the strength in it.

There was a hurling seen in a field near our house, little men they were
in green with red caps, and a sergeant of police and his men that were
going by stopped to \]ook at them, but Johnny Roland a boy I know, was
standing in the middle of them all the time in the field, and never saw
anything at all.

A North Galway Woman:

There was a man living over at Caramina, beyond Moyne, Dick Regan was
his name, and one night he was walking over a little hill near that
place. And when he got to the top of it, he found it like a fair green
with all the people that were in it, and they buying and selling just
like ourselves. And they did him no harm, but they put a basket of cakes
into his hand and kept him selling them all the night. And when he got
home, he told the story. And the neighbours when they heard it gave him
the name of the cakes and to the day of his death he was called nothing
but Richard Crackers.

There was a smith, and a man called on him late one evening, and asked
him to shoe a horse for him and so he did. And then he offered him pay
but he would take none. And the man took him out behind the house, and
there were three hundred horses with riders on them, and a hundred
without, and he said, "We want riders for those," and they went on.

An Aran Man:

A man that came over here from Connemara named Costello told me that one
night he was making poteen, and a man on a white horse came up, and the
horse put his head into the place they were making it, and then they
rode away again. So he put a bottle of the whiskey outside the place,
and in a little time he went and looked and it was empty. And then he
put another bottle out, and in a little time he looked again, and it was
empty. And then he put a third, but when he looked the whiskey in it had
not been stirred. And he told me he never did so much with it or made so
much profit as he did in that year.

They are everywhere. Tom Deruane saw them down under the rocks hurling
and they were all wearing black caps. And sometimes you'd see them
coming on the sea, just like a barrel on the top of the water, and when
they'd get near you, no matter how calm the day, you'd have a hurricane
about you. That is when they are taking their diversions. And one
evening late I was down with the wife burning kelp on the rocks, where
we had a little kiln made. And we heard a talking and a whispering about
us on the rocks, and my wife thought it was the child that the sister
was bringing down to her, and she said, "God bless the son!" but no one
came, and the talking went on again, and she got uneasy, and at last we
left the kelp and came home; and we weren't the first that had to leave
it for what they heard in that place.

Fallen angels they are said to be. God threw a third part of them into
Hell with Lucifer, and it was Michael that interceded for the rest, and
then a third part was cast into the air and a third on the land and the
sea. And here they are all about us as thick as grass.

A Needlewoman from North Galway Working at Coole:

Myself and Anne (one of the maids) went up the middle avenue after dark
last night and we got a fright, seeing what we thought to be faeries.
They were men dressed in black clothes like evening clothes, wearing
white ruffles round their necks and high black hats without brims. Two
walked in front and one behind, and they seemed to walk or march stiff
like as if there was no bend in the leg. They held something in each
hand and they stopped before the gate pier where there is a sort of
cross in white like paint, then they disappeared and we turned and ran.

(*When they were going up to bed, I am told, "Anne suddenly stopped
under the picture of Mary Queen of Scots and called out, 'That is like
the frill they wore' and sank down on the stairs in a kind of faint."*)

One time at home I was out about dusk, and presently I heard a creaking,
and a priest walked by reading his prayers. But when he came close I saw
it was Father Ryan that was dead some time before. And I ran in and told
a woman, who used to help in milking, what I had seen, and she said, "If
it's Father Ryan you saw I don't wonder, for I saw him myself at the
back of the door there only a week ago."

There was a boy was making a wall near Cruachmaa and a lot of them came
and helped him, and he saw many neighbours that were dead among them.
And when they had the wall near built another troop of them came runing
and knocked it down. And the boy died not long after.

A Young Man:

My father told me that he was down one time at the north shore gathering
wrack, and he saw a man before him that was gathering wrack too and
stooping down. He had a black waistcoat on him and the rest of his
clothes were flannel just like the people of this island. And when my
father drew near him, he stooped himself down behind a stone; and when
he looked there, there was no sight or mind of him.

One time myself when I was a little chap, about the size of Michael
there, I was out in the fields, and I saw a woman standing on the top of
a wall, and she having a child in her hand. She had a long black coat
about her. And then she got down and crossed over the field, and it
seemed to me all the time that she was only about so high (three feet)
and that there was only about two feet between her and the ground as she
walked, and the child always along with her. And then she passed over
another wall and was gone.

The Spinning Woman:

There was a new-married woman, and the husband was going out and he gave
her wool to spin and to have ready for him. And she couldn't know what
in the world to do, for she never learned to spin. And she was there
sitting at it and a little man came in, and when she told him about it
he said he'd bring it away and spin it for her and bring it back again.
And she asked for his name, but he wouldn't tell that. And soon after
there was a ragman going the road and he saw a hole and he looked down
and there he saw the little man, and he stirring a Pot of stirabout with
one hand and spinning with the other hand, and he was singing while he
stirred: " ----- is my name (that's his name in Irish but I won't tell
you the meaning of it) and she doesn't know it, and so I'll bring her
along with me." So the ragman went in and came to the young woman's
house, and told her what the man was singing. So when he came with the
wool she called him by his name, and he threw the wool down and went
away; for he had no power over her when she knew his name.

Mary Glynn of Slieve Echtge:

That's it, that's it, the other class of people don't like us to be
going out late, we might be in their way, unless it's for a case, or a
thing that can't be helped. And this is Monday, no, Mrs. Deruane, not
Tuesday--we'll say it's Monday. It's at night they're seen, God bless
them, and their music is heard, God bless them, the finest music you
ever heard, like all the fifers of the world and all the instruments,
and all the tunes of the world. There was one of those boys that go
about from house to house on the morning of the new year, to get a bit
of bread or a cup of tea or anything you'll have ready for him, and he
told us that he was coming down the hill near us, and he had the full of
his arm of bits of bread, and he heard the music, for it was but dawn,
and he was frightened and ran and lost the bread. I heard it sometimes
myself and there's no music in the world like it, but it's not all can
hear it. Round the hill it comes, and you going in at the door. And they
are quiet neighbours if you treat them well. God bless them and bring
them all to heaven!

For they were in heaven once, and heaven was the first place there was
war, and they were all to be done away with, and it was St. Peter asked
the Saviour to help them. So he turned His hand like this, and the sky
and the earth were full of them, and they are in every place, and you
know that better than I do because you read books.

Mary Glynn and Mary Irwin:

One night there was bonavs in the house--God bless the hearers and the
place it's told in--God bless all we see and those we don't see!--And
there was a man coming to rise dung in the potato field in the morning,
and so, late at night, Mary Glynn was making stirabout and a cake to
have ready for breakfast.

Mary Irwin's brother was asleep within on the bed. And there came the
sound of the grandest music you ever heard from beyond the stream, and
it stopped here. And Micky awoke in the bed, and was afraid and said,
"Shut up the door and quench the light," and so we did. It's likely they
wanted to come into the house, and they wouldn't when they saw us up and
the lights about. But one time when there were potatoes in the loft,
Mary Irwin and her brothers were well pelted with them when they sat
down to their supper. And Mary Glynn got a blow on the side of her face
from them one night in the bed. And they have the hope of Heaven, and
God grant it to them. And one day there was a priest and his servant
riding along the road, and there was a hurling of them going on in the
field. And a man of them came and stood on the road and said to the
priest, "Tell me this for you know it, have we a chance of Heaven?" "You
have not," said the priest ("*God forgive him," says Mary Glynn--"a
priest to say that*"); and the man that was of them said, "Shut your
fingers in your ears till you have travelled two miles of the road; for
when I go back and tell what you are after telling me to the rest, the
crying and bawling and the roaring will be so great that if you hear it
you'll never hear a noise again in this world." So they put their
fingers then in their ears, but after a while the servant said to the
priest, "Let me take out my fingers now." And the priest said, "Do not."
And then the servant said again, "I think I might take one finger out."
And the priest said, "As you are so persevering you may take it out." So
he did, and the noise of the crying and the roaring and the bawling was
so great that he never had the use of that ear again..

Callan of Slieve Echtge:

We know they are in it, for Father Hobbs that was our parish priest saw
them himself one time there was a station here, and when some said they
were not in it, he said, "I saw them in a field myself, more people than
ever I saw at twenty fairs." It was St. Peter spoke for them, at the
time of the war, when the Saviour was casting them out; he said to Him
not to empty the heavens. And every Monday morning they think the Day of
Judgment may be coming, and they will see Heaven.

There's never a funeral they are not at, walking after the other people.
And you can see them if you know the way, that is to take a green rush
and to twist it into a ring, and to look through it. But if you do,
you'll never have a stim of sight in the eye again, and that's why we
don't like to do it.

Resting they do be in the daytime, and going about in the right.

Old Hayden:

One time I was coming home from a fair and it was late in the right and
it was dark and I didn't know was I on the right road. And I saw a cabin
in a field with a light in it, and I went and knocked at the door and a
man opened the door and let me in, and he said, "Have you any strange
news?" and I said, "I have not," and he said, "There is no place for you
here," and he put me out again. For that was a faery hill, and when
they'll ask have you strange news, and you'll say you have not, they'll
do nothing for you. So I went back in the field, and mere were men
carrying a coffin, and they said, "Give us a hand with this." And I put
my hand to it to help them to lift it. And as we walked on we came to a
house and we went in and there was a fire on the hearth, and they took
the body out of the coffin and put it before the fire, and they said,
"Now let you keep turning it." So I sat there and turned it, and then
they took it up and we went on till we came to another house and the
same thing happened there, and they put me to turn the body. And when we
went out from there they all vanished, and there was the cabin before me
again with the light in it. And when the man came to the door and asked
me, "Is there any strange news?" I said, "There is indeed," and told him
all that had happened. And then I looked round, and I was within a few
yards of my own house.

Mrs. Keely:

When you see a blast of wind, and it comes sudden and carries the dust
with it, you should say, "God bless them," and throw something after
them. How do we know but one of our own may be in it? Half of the world
is with them.

We see them often going about up and down the hill, Jack O'Lanthorn we
call them. They are not the size of your two hands. They would not do
you much harm, but to lead you astray.

The Spinning Woman:

I remember one day a strange woman coming in and sitting down
there--very clever looking she was, and she had a good suit of clothes.
And I bid her rest herself and I'd give her a cup of tea, and she said,
"I travelled far today and you're the first that offered me that." And
when she had it taken she said, "If I had a bit of tobacco, and a bit of
bacon for my dinner, I'd be all right." And I made a sign to the woman I
have, under the table, to give her a bit of tobacco. So she got it for
her and she said, "I shouldn't take it, and this the second time today
you divided it." And that was true, for a neighbouring boy had come in
in the morning and asked for a loan of a bit, and she had cut it for
him. And I said, "Go to that house beyond and the woman will give you a
bit of bacon"; and she said, "I won't go to that woman, for it was she
told you that one of the neighbours was bringing away her butter from
her," and so she had, sure enough. And then she said, she must be in
Cruachmaa that night, and she went away and I never saw her again.

A Mayo Man:

One time I was working in England near Warrington, and I was walking the
road alone at night, and I saw a woman under an umbrella in the mist and
I said, "Is it a living thing you are or dead?" And she vanished on the
minute. And I sat down by the hedge for a while, and I heard feet
walking, walking, up and down inside the hedge, and I am sure they were
the same thing. And then two strange men passed me, dressed in working
clothes, but talking gibberish that I could not under-stand, and I know
that they were no right men. So I went in towards the town and I met a
policeman, and he took up his lamp and made it shine in my face, for
they carry a lamp in their belt and they will take the measurement of
your face with it, the same as by daylight. And he said, "There never
was a worse road for an Irishman to walk than this one." It was maybe
because of the land and the rough people of it he said that.

A Gate-keeper:

My sister and her husband were driving on the Kinvara road one day, and
they saw a carriage coming behind them, and it with bright lamps about
it. And they drew the car to one side to let it pass. And when it passed
they saw it had no horses, and the men that were sitting up where the
drivers should he were headless.

There's many has seen the coach, in different shapes, and some have seen
the riders going over the country. Drumconnor is a great place for these
things. The Sheehans that lived in the castle had no peace or rest. Mrs.
Sheehan looked up one day she was outside, and there was some person
standing at the window, and in a moment it was headless. And they'd see
them coming in at the gate, sometimes in the shape of a woman, and a
sort of a cape in the old fashion and a handkerchief over the head, and
sometimes in the shape of a cow or such things. And noises they'd hear,
and things being thrown about in the house and packs of wool thrown down
the stairs.

And they had a good many children, and all the best and the best-looking
were taken. And at last they got the owner to build them a house
outside, and since that they have no trouble and have lost no more
children.

Mrs. Madden:

Bivers of Cloonrnore one time when he was going to Loughrea, at the
fish-pond corner saw the coach. I didn't see it, but I saw him draw
aside and say to Leary not to let on they saw it.

Meagher another time saw it, and it full of children all in white.

But Egan beyond, he'd never let on to believe in such things and would
make them out to be nothing-he has such a gift of talking.

And one time in the night I and my husband woke and heard the car
rattling by, and we thought it was St. George going to Ballylee Castle,
till we asked in the morning. Four horses it has and they headless, and
sure and certain we heard it pass that night.

Mrs. Casey:

And I knew a boy met the coach and four one time. Drawn by four horses
it was, and lights about it and music, and the horses dressed with
flowers. And in it were sitting ladies, very clever-looking and wild,
and their hair twisted up on their heads, and when they went on a little
way they called to some man on the road to come with them, and he
refused, and they laughed at that and ridiculed him.

I never saw the coach and four with these two eyes; but one time I heard
it pass by, about 11 o'clock at night, when I was sitting up mending the
sole of a boot. Surely it passed by, but I would not look out to see
what it was like.

For there was a woman I knew was walking with a man one night from
Kilcolgan to Oranmore. And as they were sitting by the roadside they
heard the coach and four coming. And the man stood up and looked at it,
but he had no right to do that, he should have turned his head away. And
there were grand people in it, ladies, and flowers about them. But no
sooner did he look at it than he was struck blind and never had his
eyesight since.

It's best not to look at them if they pass. And when you go along the
road and a storm comes in the calm and raises all the dust of the road
up in the air, turn your head another way, for it's they that are
passing. In the month of May is the most time they do be travelling. And
it's best not to go near water then, near a river or a lake.

When my father was dying my mother was sitting with him, and she heard a
car pass the door, going light and quick, but when it passed down the
road again it went heavy, and that was the coach and four.

There was Sully had the forge one time, and passing one night down the
road towards Nolan's gate, he saw a brake pass full of ladies and
gentlemen, as he thought, and he believed it to be St. George's
carriage. But at Nolan's gate, it turned and came up again, and whatever
he saw, when he got home he took to his bed for some days with the
fright he got.

Kelly told me one time he saw the coach and four driving through the
field above Dillon's, with four horses. And wasn't that a strange place
for it to be driving through all the rocks?

There was boys used to be stealing apples from the orchard at Tyrone,
and something in white with a candle used to come after them, and then
change to something in red. So they went to a forth, and they went to
the side of it where the sun rises and there they made the mark of the
cross, but after all they had to leave going after the apples.

There was a woman down at Silver's the other night, and when I was
standing to go home she said, "I wonder you not to be afraid to go
through these fields." So I asked her did ever she see anything, and she
said, "I was with another girl one day near Inchy gate, and we heard a
voice, and we saw the coach and four coming and we were afraid, and we
went in under the bushes to hide ourselves. It passed by us then, it was
big and long, longer than a carriage you could see now, and there were
people in it, men and women dressed in all colours, blue and red and
pink and black, but I could not say what had they on their heads And
there was a man on the box, not a coachman but just a Christian, and he
driving the four horses.

"As to the horses, the two that were in front were grey, but the two
that were near the carriage were brown; it gave me a great fright at the
time."

There is no light about it in the daytime, but at night it is all
shining.

There was a girl saw it one time in the same way, drawn by horses that
were without heads. She got a great fright and she ran home. And in the
morning when she got up, she that had been a dark-haired girl was as
white as snow, and her hair grey. She is living yet and is up to nearly
a hundred years.

Mrs. Roche:

My father would never believe in anything till one time he was walking
near Seanmor with another smith, and he stopped and said "I can't go on
with all the people that's in that field." And my father said "I don't
see any people." And the other said "Put your right foot on my right
foot, and your hand on my right shoulder." And he did, and he saw a
great many in the field, but not so many as the other saw; fine men and
all dressed in white shirts, shining they were so white. He told us
about it when he came home, and he said he wished he didn't see them. He
was dead within the twelvemonth, and the man that was with him was dead
before that, not much time between them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Butter](vbwi13)
