[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](vbwi10)  [Next](vbwi12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Unquiet Dead

A GOOD many years ago when I was but beginning my study of the folk-lore
of belief, I wrote somewhere that if by an impossible miracle every
trace and memory of Christianity could be swept out of the world, it
would not shake or destroy at all the belief of the people of Ireland in
the invisible world, the cloud of witnesses, in immortality and the life
to come. For them the veil between things seen and unseen has hardly
thickened since those early days of the world when the sons of God mated
with the daughters of men; when angels spoke with Abraham in Hebron or
with Columcille in the oakwoods of Derry, or when as an old man at my
own gate told me they came and visited the Fianna, the old heroes of
Ireland, "because they were so nice and so respectable." Ireland has
through the centuries kept continuity of vision, the vision it is likely
all nations possessed in the early days of faith. Here in Connacht there
is no doubt as to the continuance of life after death. The spirit
wanders for a while in that intermediate region to which mystics and
theologians have given various names, and should it return and become
visible those who loved it will not be afraid, but will, as I have
already told, put a light in the window to guide the mother home to her
child, or go out into the barley gardens in the hope of meeting a son.
And if the message brought seems hardly worth the hearing, we may call
to mind what Frederic Myers wrote of more instructed ghosts:

"If it was absurd to listen to Kepler because he bade the planets move
in no perfect circles but in undignified ellipses, because he hastened
and slackened from hour to hour what ought to be a heavenly body's ideal
and unwavering speed; is it not absurder still to refuse to listen to
these voices from afar, because they come stammering and wandering as in
a dream confusedly instead of with a trumpet's call? Because spirits
that bending to earth may undergo perhaps an earthly bewilderment and
suffer unknown limitations, and half remember and hall forget?"

And should they give the message more clearly who knows if it would be
welcome? For the old Scotch story goes that when S. Columcille's brother
Dobhran rose up from his grave and said, "Hell is not so bad as people
say," the Saint cried out, "Clay, clay on Dobhran!" before he could tell
any more.

I was told by Mrs. Dennehy:

Those that mind the teaching of the clergy say the dead go to Limbo
first and then to Purgatory and then to hell or to heaven. Hell is
always burning and if you go there you never get out; but these that
mind the old people don't believe, and I don't believe, that there is
any hell. I don't believe God Almighty would make Christians to put them
into hell afterwards.

It is what the old people say, that after death the shadow goes
wandering, and the soul is weak, and the body is taking a rest. The
shadow wanders for a while and it pays the debts it had to pay, and when
it is free it puts out wings and flies to Heaven.

An Aran Man:

There was an old man died, and after three days he appeared in the
cradle as a baby; they knew him by an old look in his face, and his face
being long and other things. An old woman that came into the house saw
him, and she said, "He won't be with you long, he had three deaths to
die, and this is the second," and sure enough he died at the end of six
years.

Mrs. Martin:

There was a man beyond when I lived at Ballybron, and it was said of him
that he was taken away-up before God Almighty. But the blessed Mother
asked for grace for him for a year and a day. So he got it. I seen him
myself, and many seen him, and at the end of the year and a day he died.
And that man ought to be happy now anyway. When my own poor little girl
was drowned in the well, I never could sleep but fretting, fretting,
fretting. But one day when one of my little boys was taking his turn to
serve the Mass he stopped on his knees without getting up. And Father
Boyle asked him what did he see and he looking up. And he told him that
he could see his little sister in the presence of God, and she shining
like the sun. Sure enough that was a vision He had sent to comfort us.
So from that day I never cried nor fretted any more.

A Herd:

Do you believe Roland Joyce was seen? Well, he was. A man I know told me
he saw him the night of his death, in Esserkelly where he had a farm,
and a man along with him going through the stock. And all of a sudden a
train came into the field, and brought them both away like a blast of
wind.

And as for old Parsons Persse of Castleboy, there's thousands of people
has seen him hunting at night with his horses and his hounds and his
bugle blowing. There's no mistake at all about him being there.

An Aran Woman:

There was a girl in the middle island had died, and when she was being
washed, and a priest in the house, there flew by the window the whitest
bird that ever was seen. And the priest said to the father: "Do not
lament, unless what you like, your child's happy for ever!"

Mrs. Casey:

Near the strand there were two little girls went out to gather cow-dung.
And they sat down beside a bush to rest themselves, and there they heard
a groan Corning from under the ground. So they ran home as fast as they
could. And they were told when they went again to bring a man with them.

So the next time they went they brought a man with them, and they hadn't
been sitting there long when they heard the saddest groan that ever you
heard. So the man bent down and asked what was it. And a voice from
below said, "Let some one shave me and get me out of this, for I was
never shaved after dying." So the man went away, and the next day he
brought soap and all that was needful and there he found a body lying
laid out on the grass. So he shaved it, and with that wings came and
carried it up to high heaven.

A Chimney-sweep:

I don't believe in all I hear, or I'd believe in ghosts and faeries,
with all the old people telling you stories about them and the priests
believing in them too. Surely the priests believe in ghosts, and tell
you that they are souls that died in trouble. But I have been about the
country night and day, and I remember when I used to have to put my hand
out at the top of every chimney in Coole House; and I seen or felt
nothing to frighten me, except one night two rats caught in a trap at
Roxborough; and the old butler came down and beat me with a belt for the
scream I gave at that. But if I believed in any one coming back, it
would be in what you often hear, of a mother coming back to care for her
child.

And there's many would tell you that every time you see a tree shaking
there's a ghost in it

Old Lambert of Dangan was a terror for telling stories; he told me long
ago how he was near the Piper's gap on Ballybrit racecourse, and he saw
one riding to meet him, and it was old Michael Lynch of Ballybrista,
that was dead long before, and he never would go on the racecourse
again. And he had heard the car with headless horses driving through
Loughrea. From every part they are said to drive, and the place they are
all going to is Benmore, near Loughrea, where there is a ruined
dwelling-house and an old forth. And at Mount Mahon a herd told me the
other day he often saw old Andrew Mahon riding about at night. But if I
was a herd and saw that I'd hold my tongue about it.

Mrs. Casey:

At the graveyard of Drumacoo often spirits do he seen. Old George
Fitzgerald is seen by many. And when they go up to the stone he's
sitting on, he'll be sitting somewhere else.

There was a man walking in the wood near there, and he met a woman, a
stranger, and he said "Is there anything I can do for you?" For he
thought she was some countrywoman gone astray. "There is," says she.
"Then come home with me," says he, "and tell me about it." "I can't do
that," says she, "but what you can do is this, go tell my friends I'm in
great trouble, for twenty times in my life I missed going to church, and
they must say twenty Masses for me now to deliver me, but they seem to
have forgotten me. And another thing is," says she, "there's some small
debts I left and they're not paid, and those are helping to keep me in
trouble." Well. the man went on and he didn't know what in the world to
do, for he couldn't know who she was, for they are not permitted to tell
their name. But going about visiting at country houses he used to tell
the story, and at last it came out she was one of the Shannons. For at a
house he was telling it at they remembered that an old woman thev had.
died a year ago, and that she used to be running un little debts unknown
to them. So they made inquiry at Findlater's and at another shop that's
done away with now, and they found tnat sure enough she had left some
small debts, not more than ten shillings in each, and when she died no
more had been said about it. So they paid these and said the Masses, and
shortly after she appeared to the man again. "God bless you now," she
said, "for what you did for me, for now I'm at peace."

A Tinker's Daughter:

I heard of what happened to a family in the town. One night a thing that
looked like a goose came in. And when they said nothing to it, it went
away up the stairs with a noise like lead. Surely if they had questioned
it, they'd have found it to be some soul in trouble.

And there was another soul came back that was in trouble because of a
ha'porth of salt it owed.

And there was a priest was in trouble and appeared after death, and they
had to say Masses for him, because he had done some sort of a crime on a
widow.

Mrs. Farley:

One time myself I was at Killinan, at a house of the Clancys' where the
father and mother had died, but it was well known they often come to
look after the children. I was walking with another girl through the
fields there one evening and I looked up and saw a tall woman dressed
all in black, with a mantle of some sort, a wide one, over her head, and
the waves of the wind were blowing it off her, so that I could hear the
noise of it. All her clothes were black, and had the appearance of being
new. And I asked the other girl did she see her, and she said she did
not. For two that are together can never see such things, but only one
of them. So when I heard she saw nothing I ran as if for my life, and
the woman seemed to be coming after me, till I crossed a running stream
and she had no power to cross that. And one time my brother was stopping
in the same house, and one night about twelve o'clock there came a smell
in the house like as if all the dead people were there. And one of the
girls whose father and mother had died got up out of her bed, and began
to put her clothes on, and they had to lock the doors to stop her from
going away out of the house.

There was a woman I knew of that after her death was kept for seven
years in a tree m Kinadyfe, and for seven years after that she was kept
under the arch of the little bridge beyond Kilchriest, with the water
running under her. And whether there was frost or snow she had no
shelter from it) not so much as the size of a leaf.

At the end of the second seven years she came to her husband, and he
passing the bridge on the way home from Loughrea, and when he felt her
near him he was afraid, and he didn't stop to question her, but hurried
on.

So then she came in the evening to the house of her own little girl. But
she was afraid when she saw her, and fell down in a faint. And the
woman's sister's child was in the house, and when the little girl told
her what she saw, she said "You must surely question her when she comes
again." So she came again that night, but the little girl was afraid
again when she saw her and said nothing. But the third night when she
came the sister's child, seeing her own little girl was afraid, said
"God bless you, God bless you." And with that the woman spoke and said
"God bless you for saying that." And then she told her all that had
happened her and where she had been all the fourteen years. And she took
out of her dress a black silk handkerchief and said: "I took that from
my husband's neck the day I met him on the road from Loughrea, and this
very night I would have killed him, because he hurried away and would
not stop to help me, but now that you have helped me I'll not harm him.
But bring with you to Kilmaeduagh, to the graveyard, three cross sticks
with wool on them, and three glasses full of salt, and have three Masses
said for me; and I'll appear to you when I am at rest." And so she did;
and it was for no great thing she had done that trouble had been put
upon her.

John Cloran:

That house with no roof was made a hospital of in the famine, and many
died there. And one night my father was passing by and he saw some one
standing all in white, and two men beside him, and he thought he knew
one of the men and spoke to him and said "Is that you, Martin?" But he
never spoke nor moved. And as to the thing in white, he could not say
was it man or woman, but my father never went by that place again at
night.

The last person buried in a graveyard has the care of all the other
souls until another is to he buried, and then the soul can go and shift
for itself. It may be a week or a month or a year, but watch the place
it must till another soul comes.

There was a man used to be giving short measure, not giving the full
yard, and one time after his death there was a man passing the river and
the horse he had would not go into it. And he heard the voice of the
tailor saying from the river he had a message to send to his wife, and
to tell her not to be giving short measure, or she would be sent to the
same place as him-self. There was a hymn made about that.

There was a woman lived in Rathkane, alone in the house, and she told me
that one night something came and lay over the bed and gave three great
moans. That was all ever she heard in the house.

The shadows of the dead gather round at Samhain time to see is there any
one among their friends saying a few Masses for them.

An Islander:

Down there near the point, on the 6th of March, 1883, there was a
curragh upset and five boys were drowned. And a man from County Clare
told me that he was on the coast that day, and that he saw them walking
towards him on the Atlantic.

There is a house down there near the sea, and one day the woman of it
was sitting by the fire, and a little girl came in at the door, and a
red cloak about her, and she sat down by the fire. And the woman asked
her where did she come from, and she said that she had just come from
Connemara. And then she went out, and when she was going out the door
she made herself known to her sister that was standing in it, and she
called out to the mother. And when the mother knew it was the child she
had lost near a year before, she ran out to call her, for she wouldn't
for all the world to have not known her when she was there. But she was
gone and she never came agam.

There was this boy's father took a second wife, and he was walking home
one evening, and his wife behind him, and there was a great wind
blowing, and he kept his head stooped down because of the seaweed coming
blowing into his eyes. And she was about twenty paces behind, and she
saw his first wife come and walk close beside him, and he never saw her,
having his head down, but she kept with him near all the way. And when
they got borne, she told the husband who was with him, and with the
fright she got she was bad in her bed for two or three day--do you
remember that, Martin? She died after, and he has a third wife taken
now.

I believe all that die are brought among them, except maybe an odd old
person.

A Kildare Woman:

There was a woman I knew sent into the Rotunda Hospital for an
operation. And when she was going she cried when she was saying good-bye
to her cousin that was a friend of mine, for she felt in her that she
would not come back again. And she put her two arms about her going away
and said, "If the dead can do any good thing for the living, I'll do it
for you." And she never recovered, but died in the hospital. And within
a few weeks something came on her cousin, my friend, and they said it
was her side that was paralysed, and she died. And many said it was no
common illness, but that it was the dead woman that had kept to her
word.

A Connemara Man:

There was a boy in New York was killed by rowdies, they killed him
standing against a lamp-post and he was frozen to it, and stood there
till morning. And it is often since that time he was seen in the room
and the passages of the house where he used to be living.

And in the house beyond a woman died, and some other family came to live
in it; but every night she came back and stripped the clothes off them,
so at last they went away.

When some one goes that owes money, the weight of the soul is more than
the weight of the body, and it can't get away and keeps wandering till
some one has courage to question it.

Mrs. Casey:

My grandmother told my mother that in her time at Cloughhallymore, there
was a woman used to appear in the churchyard of Rathkeale, and that many
boys and girls and children died with the fright they got when they saw
her.

So there was a gentleman living near was very sorry for all the children
dying, and he went to an old woman to ask her was there any way to do
away with the spirit that appeared. So she said if any one would have
courage to go and to question it, he could do away with it. So the
gentleman went at midnight and waited at the churchyard, and he on his
horse, and had a sword with him. So presently the shape appeared and he
called to it and said, "Tell me what you are?" And it came over to him,
and when he saw the face he got such a fright that he turned the horse's
head and galloped away as hard as he could. But after galloping a long
time he looked down and what did he see beside him but the woman running
and her hand on the horse. So he took his sword and gave a slash at her,
and cut through her arm, so that she gave a groan and vanished, and he
went on home.

And when he got to the stable and had the lantern lighted, you may think
what a start he got when he saw the hand still holding on to the horse,
and no power could lift it off. So he went into the house and said his
prayers to Almighty God to take it off. And all night long, he could
hear moaning and crying about the house. And in the morning when he went
out the hand was gone, but all the stable was splashed with blood. But
the woman was never seen in those parts again.

A Seaside Man:

And many see the faeries at Knock and there was a carpenter died, and he
could be heard all night in his shed making coffins and carts and all
sorts of things, and the people are afraid to go near it. There were
four boys from Knock drowned five years ago, and often now they are seen
walking on the strand and in the fields and about the village.

There was a man used to go out fowling, and one day his sister said to
him, "Whatever you do don't go out tonight and don't shoot any wild-duck
or any birds you see flying-for tonight they are all poor souls
travelling."

An Old Man in Galway Workhouse:

Burke of Carpark's son died, but he used often to be seen going about
afterwards. And one time a herd of his father's met with him and he
said, "Come tonight and help us against the hurlers from the north, for
they have us beat twice, and if they beat us a third time, it will be a
bad year for Ireland."

It was in the daytime they had the hurling match through the streets of
Gaiway. No one could see them, and no one could go outside the door
while it lasted, for there went such a whirl-wind through the town that
you could not look through the window.

And he sent a message to his father that he would find some paper he was
looking for a few days before, behind a certain desk, between it and the
wall, and the father found it there. He would not have believed it was
his son the herd met only for that.

A Munster Woman:

I have only seen them myself like dark shadows, but there's many can see
them as they are. Surely they bring away the dead among them.

There was a woman in County Limerick that died after her baby being
born. And all the people were in the house when the funeral was to be,
crying for her. And the cars and the horses were out on the road. And
there was seen among them a carriage full of ladies, and with them the
woman was sitting that they were crying for, and the baby with her, and
it dressed.

And there was another woman I knew of died, and left a family, and often
after, the people saw her in their dreams, and always in rich clothes,
though all the clothes she had were given away after she died, for the
good of her soul, except maybe her shawl. And her husband married a
serving girl after that, and she was hard to the children, and one night
the woman came back to her, and had like to throw her out of the window
in her nightdress, till she gave a promise to treat the children well,
and she was afraid not to treat them well after that.

There was a farmer died and he had done some man out of a saddle, and he
came back after to a friend, and gave him no rest till he gave a new
saddle to the man he had cheated.

Airs. Casey:

There was a woman my brother told me about and she had a daughter that
was red-haired. And the girl got married when she was under twenty, for
the mother had no man to tend the land, so she thought best to let her
go. And after her baby being born, she never got strong but stopped in
the bed, and a great many doctors saw her but did her no good.

And one day the mother was at Mass at the chapel and she got a start,
for she thought she saw her daughter come in to the chapel with the same
shawl and clothes on her that she had be-fore she took to the bed, but
when they came out from the chapel, she wasn't there. So she went to the
house, and asked was she after going out, and what they told her was as
if she got a blow, for they said the girl hadn't ten minutes to live,
and she was dead before ten minutes were out And she appears now
sometimes; they see her drawing water from the well at night and
bringing it into the house, but they find nothing there in the morning.

A Connemara Man:

There was a man had come back from Boston, and one day he was out in the
bay, going towards Aran with £3 worth of cable he was after getting from
McDonagh's store in Gaiway. And he was steering the boat, and there were
two turf-boats along with him, and all in a minute they saw he was gone,
swept off the boat with a wave and it a dead calm.

And they saw him come up once, straight up as if he was pushed, and then
he was brought down again and rose no more.

And it was some time after that a friend of his in Boston, and that was
coming home to this place, was in a crowd of people out there. And he
saw him coming to him and he said, "I heard that you were drowned," and
the man said, "I am not dead, but I was brought here, and when you go
home, bring these three guineas to McDonagh in Galway for it's owned him
for the cable I got from him." And he put the three guineas in his hand
and vanished away.

An Old Army Man:

I have seen hell myself. I had a sight of it one time in a vision. It
had a very high wall around it, all of metal, and an archway in the
wall, and a straight walk into it, just like what would be leading into
a gentleman's orchard, but the edges were not trimmed with box but with
red-hot metal. And inside the wall there were cross walks, and I'm not
sure what there was to the right, but to the left there was five great
furnaces and they full of souls kept there with great chains. So I
turned short and went away; and in turning I looked again at the wall
and I could see no end to it.

And another time I saw purgatory. It seemed to be in a level place and
no walls around it, but it all one bright blaze, and the souls standing
in it And they suffer near as much as in hell only there are no devils
with them there and they have the hope of heaven.

And I heard a call to me from there "Help me to come out of this!" And
when I looked it was a man I used to know in the army, an Irishman and
from this country, and I believe him to be a descendant of King O'Connor
of Athenry. So I stretched out my hand first but then I called out "I'd
be burned in the flames before I could get within three yards of you."
So then he said, "Well, help me with your prayers," and so I do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appearances](vbwi12.md)
