[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bus03)  [Next](bus05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Bustan of Sadi*, tr. by A. Hart Edwards, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

# THE BUSTAN OF SADI

### PROLOGUE

<span class="smallcaps">In The Name of God, the Compassionate, the
Merciful</span>

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the name of Him Who created and
sustains the world, the Sage Who endowed tongue with speech.

He attains no honour who turns the face from the door of His mercy.

The kings of the earth prostrate themselves before Him in supplication.

He seizes not in haste the disobedient, nor drives away the penitent
with violence. The two worlds are as a drop of water in the ocean of His
knowledge.

He withholds not His bounty though His servants sin; upon the surface of
the earth liar He spread a feast, in which both friend and foe may
share.

Peerless He is, and His kingdom is eternal. Upon the head of one He
placeth a crown;

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

another he hurleth from the throne to the ground.

The fire of His friend He turneth into a flowergarden; through the
waters of the Nile He sendeth His foes to perdition.

Behind the veil He seeth all, and concealeth our faults with His own
goodness.

He is near to them that are downcast, and accepteth the prayers of them
that lament.

He knoweth of the things that exist not, of secrets that are untold.

He causeth the moon and the sun to revolve, and spreadeth water upon the
earth.

In the heart of a stone hath He placed a jewel; from nothing hath He
created all that is.

Who can reveal the secret of His qualities; what eye can see the limits
of His beauty?

The bird of thought cannot soar to the height of His presence, nor the
hand of understanding reach to the skirt of His praise.

Think not, O Sadi, that one can walk in the road of purity except in the
footsteps of Muhammad.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

He is the patriarch of the prophets, the guide of the path of salvation;
the mediator of mankind, and the chief of the Court of Judgment. What of
thy praises can Sadi utter? The mercy of God be upon thee, O Prophet,
and peace!

#### ON THE REASON FOR THE WRITING OF THE BOOK

I travelled in many regions of the globe and passed the days in the
company of many men. I reaped advantages in every corner, and gleaned an
ear of corn from every harvest. But I saw none like the pious and devout
men of Shiraz—upon which land be the grace of God—my attachment with
whom drew away my heart from Syria and Turkey.

I regretted that I should go from the garden of the world empty-handed
to my friends, and reflected: "Travellers bring sugar-candy from Egypt
as a present to their friends. Although I have no candy, yet have I
words that are sweeter. The sugar that I bring is not that which is
eaten, but what knowers of truth take away with respect."

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

When I built this Palace of Wealth, [1](bus15.htm#an_1) I furnished it
with ten doors of instruction. [2](bus15.htm#an_2)

It was in the year 655 that this famous treasury became full of the
pearls of eloquence. A quilted robe of silk, or of Chinese embroidery,
must of necessity be padded with cotton; if thou obtain aught of the
silk, fret not—be generous and conceal the cotton. I have heard that in
the day of Hope and Fear the Merciful One will pardon the evil for the
sake of the good. If thou see evil in my words, do thou likewise. If one
couplet among a thousand please thee, generously withhold thy
faultfinding.

Assuredly, my compositions are esteemed in Persia as the priceless musk
of Khutan. Sadi brings roses to the garden with mirth. His verses are
like dates encrusted with sugar—when opened, a stone [3](bus15.htm#an_3)
is revealed inside.

#### CONCERNING ATABAK ABU BAKR, SON OF SAD [4](bus15.htm#an_4)

Although not desiring to write in praise of kings, I have inscribed this
book to the name of a certain one so that perhaps the pious may say:
Sadi, who surpassed all in eloquence,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

lived in the time of Abu Bakr, the son of Sad." Thus, in this book will
his memory remain so long as the moon and sun are in the skies. Beyond
count are his virtues—may the world fulfil his desires, the heavens be
his friend, and the Creator be his guardian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Concerning Justice, Counsel, and the Administration of
Government](bus05)
