[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ihas18)  [Next](ihas20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301107/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Initiation, Human and Solar*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

### CHAPTER XVI

#### THE IMPARTING OF THE SECRETS

We now come to the consideration of the secrets committed at the
initiation ceremony to the initiate. It is apparent, of course, that
only the *fact* of the secret, and an indication as to the matter with
which it concerns itself can be touched upon, and even this would be
left unmentioned were it not that a knowledge of the general outline of
the subject may inspire the applicant for initiation to a more careful
study of such a subject and to a more diligent equipping of his mental
body with information. Thereby (when in due course of time he stands
before the Initiator) he will lose no time in utilising the acquired
secret.

*The Sevenfold Secret*.

After the administration of the oath which pledges the initiate to
inviolable secrecy, the newly made initiate advances alone closer to the
Hierophant; he then places his hand upon the lower end of the Rod of
Initiation which is held in the centre by the Hierophant. The Three Who
stand around the throne of office then place Their hands upon the
glowing diamond which surmounts the Rod, and when these five
personalities are thus linked by the circulating energy emanating from
the Rod, the Initiator confides to the initiate the secret. The reason
for this is as follows: Each of the five initiations with which we are
immediately concerned (for the higher two, not being compulsory, are
outside our present consideration) affects one of the five centres in
man,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The head,

2\. The heart,

3\. The throat,

4\. The solar plexus,

5\. The base of the spine,

</div>

and reveals to him knowledge concerning the various types of force or
energy by which the solar system is animated, and which reach him via a
particular etheric centre. At the application of the Rod his centres
were affected in a particular fashion. By the impartation of the Secret,
the reason is committed to his care, and that reason is demonstrated to
him to be identical with that which necessarily produces some particular
planetary manifestation, and which causes a certain specific greater
cycle.

It might be pointed out that:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. Each secret concerns one or other of the seven great planes of the
solar system.

2\. Each secret deals with, and is the enunciation of, one of the seven
laws of nature. They therefore concern one or other of the basic
evolutions of each planetary scheme. Each scheme embodies one of the
laws as its primary law, and all its evolutions tend to demonstrate the
perfection of that law with its six subsidiary mutations, these six
differing in one particular in each case according to the primary law
manifested.

3\. Each secret conveys a key to the *nature* of some particular
Planetary Logos, and consequently gives the clue to the characteristics
of those Monads who are on that particular planetary ray. It is obvious
how necessary such knowledge is to the adept who seeks to work with the
sons of men, and to manipulate the force currents affecting them and
which they emanate.

</div>

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

4\. Each secret concerns some one ray or colour and gives the number,
note, and the vibration which corresponds.

</div>

These seven secrets are simply short formulas, not of mantric value,
such as in the case of the Sacred Word, but of a mathematical nature,
precisely worded so as to convey the exact intent of the speaker. To the
uninitiated they would look and sound like algebraical formulas, except
that each is composed (when seen clairvoyantly) of an oval of a specific
hue, according to the secret imparted, containing five peculiar
hieroglyphics or symbols. One symbol contains the formula of the law
concerned, another gives the planetary key and tone, a third deals with
vibration, whilst the fourth shows the number and department under which
the ray concerned falls. The last hieroglyph gives one of the seven
hierarchical keys by means of which the members of our planetary
hierarchy can link up with the solar. This is evidently very vague and
ambiguous information, but it will serve to show that, as in the case of
the Words, apprehension had to involve two senses, so in the cognition
of the secrets the two senses again come into play, and the secret is
both heard and appears symbolically to the inner eye.

It will now be apparent why so much stress is laid upon the study of
symbols, and why students are urged to ponder and meditate upon the
cosmic and systemic signs. It prepares them for the grasp and inner
retention of the symbols and formulas which embody the knowledge whereby
they can eventually work. These formulas are based upon nine symbols
which are now recognised:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The cross in its varying forms.

2\. The lotus.

3\. The triangle.

4\. The cube.

</div>

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

5\. The sphere and the point.

6\. Eight animal forms, the goat, the bull, the elephant, the man, the
dragon, the bear, the lion, and the dog.

7\. The line.

8\. Certain signs of the Zodiac, hence the need for the study of
astrology.

9\. The cup, or the holy grail.

</div>

All these symbols allied, interwoven, or taken in part, are combined to
express one or other of the seven Secrets. The initiate has to recognise
them by sight as well as to hear them, and by an effort of the will to
imprint them irrevocably upon his memory. This he is aided to do in
three ways:—*First*, by a long prior training in observation; this can
be begun here and now by all aspirants, and as they learn to imprint
details accurately upon their memory they are laying the foundation for
that acute instantaneous apprehension of that which is shown them by the
Hierophant; *secondly*, by having cultivated within themselves the power
to visualise again that which has once been seen. It will be apparent
here why the emphasis has been laid by all wise teachers of meditation
upon the faculty of the careful building of mental pictures. The aim has
been two-fold:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. To teach the student to visualise his thought-forms accurately, so
that when he begins to create consciously he may lose no time in
inaccurate transformation.

b\. To enable him to picture again accurately the imparted secret, so
that it may instantly be of use to him whenever needed.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Finally*, by the
strongly applied will of the other four Personalities who are holding
the Rod at the same time as the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

initiate. Their trained intense mental concentration greatly facilitates
his apprehension.

In the case of human evolution certain types of force are generated,
dealt with, assimilated, and used, at first unconsciously, and finally
with full intelligence.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. In the *Hall of Ignorance* the force or energy of Brahma (the
activity and intelligence of substance) is that mostly dealt with, and
the man has to learn the meaning of activity based on:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. Inherent energy.

b\. Absorbed energy.

c\. Group energy.

d\. Material energy, or that which is hidden in physical plane matter.

</div>

b\. In the *Hall of Learning* he becomes aware of, and uses the energy
of the second aspect in form building, in social relations, and in
family affiliations. He comes to the recognition of sex and its
relations, but as yet views this force as something to be controlled,
but not consciously and constructively utilised.

c\. In the *Hall of Wisdom* he comes to the knowledge of the first
aspect of energy, the dynamic use of will in sacrifice, and to him is
then committed the key to the threefold mystery of energy. This energy
in its threefold aspect he became aware of, in the other two Halls. At
the third initiation, and at the fourth and fifth, the three keys to the
three mysteries are given to him.

The key to the mystery sensed in the first Hall, the mystery of Brahma,
is handed to him, and he can then unlock the hidden energies of atomic
substance. <span id="page_168">p. 168</span> <span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The key to the mystery
of sex, or of the pairs of opposites, is thrust into his hand, and he
can then unlock the hidden forces of the will aspect. The dynamo of the
solar system is shown to him,—if it might be so expressed—and the
intricacies of the mechanism revealed.

</div>

*The Three Solar Mysteries*.

The three mysteries of the solar system are:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. *The mystery of Electricity*. The mystery of Brahma, The secret of
the third aspect. It is latent in the physical sun.

2\. *The mystery of Polarity*, or of the universal sex impulse. The
secret of the second aspect. It is latent in the Heart of the Sun, or
the subjective Sun.

3\. *The mystery of Fire itself*, or the dynamic central systemic force.
The secret of the first aspect. It is latent in the Central Spiritual
Sun.

</div>

*Their Sequential Revelation*.

The secrets, as imparted sequentially to the initiate, are roughly three
in number, though within them may be found lesser mysteries which are
earlier revealed. At the third initiation the first of the three
fundamental secrets of the solar system is imparted to the initiate,
immediately after he has taken the oath. This we might, for lack of a
better term, call "the secret of electricity." It concerns the phenomena
of the dense objective manifestation of the Logos. It would be wise here
for the student to remember that the three planes of the three worlds,
physical, astral, and mental, form the dense physical body of the solar
Logos. whilst the

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

four higher form His etheric body. Students are apt to for- get that our
seven planes are the seven sub-planes of the cosmic physical. This has a
very definite bearing on the secret of electricity. This is why the
secret is not revealed till the third initiation, and is prepared for by
the impartation of two lesser secrets which concern the physical and
astral planes, and which are imparted at the first two initiations by
the Bodhisattva.

Electrical phenomena are scientifically recognised as dual in nature,
but the inherent triplicity of electricity is as yet but a matter for
speculation for modern science. The fact that it is triple is
demonstrated to the initiate at the first initiation, and the secret of
how to balance forces on the physical plane, and thereby produce
equilibrium, is revealed to him at the first initiation. This secret
likewise puts him in touch with certain of the Builders on the physical
plane—that is, on the etheric levels—and he can then produce physical
plane phenomena should he deem it wise. This he seldom does, as the
results gained thereby are practically unimportant and he wastes not
energy in this manner. The workers with the involutionary forces, the
brothers of darkness, employ this method for the startling and the
enthralling of the unwary. Not thus work the brothers of humanity.

The secret of the coherence of the atom is revealed to the initiate, and
he then is in a position to study the microcosm under the law of
correspondences in a new and illuminating manner. Similarly, through
this revelation concerning the densest part of the logoic body, he can
ascertain much concerning the previous solar system, and the facts anent
the first round of our scheme. This secret is also called "the mystery
of matter."

At the second initiation "the secret of the sea" is unfolded to him, and
through this revelation two subjects of profound

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

interest become clarified to his inner vision. They are:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. The mystery of the astral light.

b\. The law of karma.

</div>

He is, after this, in a position to do two things, without which he
cannot work off that which hinders, and thus achieve liberation; he can
read the akashic records and ascertain the past, thereby enabling
himself to work intelligently in the present, and he can begin to
balance his karma, to work off his obligations, and to understand how
karma in the three worlds can be negated. The relation of that hierarchy
of spiritual beings who are connected with the law of karma as it
affects man is demonstrated to him, and he knows with first-hand
knowledge that the lords of karma are no myth, or symbolical units, but
are highly intelligent entities who wield the law for the benefit of
humanity, and thus enable men to become fully self-conscious and
self-reliant in the occult sense, and to become creators through
perfected knowledge.

At the third initiation "the secret of fohat" is given to him, and then
the mystery of the threefold *body* of the triple Logos is his, and the
*why* of the phenomena of the dense liquid and gaseous bodies of the
Supreme Being is unfolded before his amazed vision. The two secrets
previously imparted, and the knowledge which they gave having been
utilised, the initiate is now in a position to profit by this greater
revelation, and to understand somewhat the following facts:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The creative process of thought form building.

2\. The transmission of energy from the Ego to the physical body via the
force centres on the various planes.

</div>

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

3\. The uprising of kundalini, its geometrical progression, and its
vivification of all the centres.

</div>

By the knowledge thus imparted, and the progress which the initiate has
made in the study of the law of analogy, he can comprehend the
manipulation of the same forces on a vastly larger scale in the
planetary scheme and in the solar system. The method of development in
the three earlier rounds is revealed to him, and he understands,
practically as well as theoretically, the evolutionary process in its
earlier stages. The key to the three lower kingdoms of nature is in his
hands, and certain ideas anent the subject of polarity, of at-one-ment,
and essential union, are beginning to come within his range of
consciousness, only waiting for the fourth initiation to complete the
revelation.

This secret of electricity, which is essentially triple in its nature,
deals with the Brahma or third aspect, and is called sometimes by the
following names:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The Secret of Brahma.

2\. The Revelation of the Mother.

3\. The Secret of Fohatic Force.

4\. The Mystery of the Creator.

5\. The Secret of the Three Who issued from the First (solar system),

</div>

and also by four mystic phrases conveying much light to the intuition:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

6\. The Boat of Mystery which Ploughs the Ocean.

7\. The Key to the Divine Storehouse.

8\. The Light that Guides through the triple caves of Darkness.

9\. The Clue to the Energy uniting Fire and Water.

</div>

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In all these names
much information will come to the student who carefully ponders them,
remembering that they deal with the Brahma aspect in its lowest
manifestation and with the three worlds of human endeavour, and thus
meditating, the student must relate this present solar system to the
preceding one, in which the Brahma aspect dominated, as the Vishnu, or
consciousness aspect dominates in this.

The initiate, through the knowledge imparted, is now in a position to
understand his own triple lower nature, and therefore to balance it in
relation to the higher, to read the records and understand his place
within the group, to manipulate the forces in the three worlds and
thereby effect liberation for himself, thus helping the ends of
evolution, and to co-operate intelligently with the plans of the
Planetary Logos as they may be revealed to him stage by stage. He can
now wield power, and becomes a centre of energy in a greatly increased
degree, being able to dispense or retract force currents. The moment a
man becomes consciously powerful on the mental plane, his power for good
is a hundredfold increased.

At the fourth initiation another of the great secrets is revealed to
him. It is called "the mystery of polarity," and the clue to the
significance of sex in every department of nature on all the planes is
given to him. It is not possible to say much along these lines. All that
can be done is to enumerate some of the subjects to which it gives the
clue, adding to this the information that in our planetary scheme; owing
to the point in evolution of our own Planetary Logos, this secret is the
most vital. Our Planetary Logos is at the stage wherein He is
consciously seeking the at-one-ment with his polar opposite, another
Planetary Logos.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

The subjects on which this secret throws a flood of light are:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. Sex on the physical plane. It gives us a key to the mystery of the
separation of the sexes in Lemurian days.

b\. The balancing of forces in all departments of nature.

c\. The clue as to which Scheme forms with ours a duality.

d\. The true name of our Planetary Logos and His relation to the Solar
Logos.

e\. "The Marriage of the Lamb" and the problem of the heavenly bride. A
clue to this lies in the solar system of S… which must be read
astrologically.

f\. The mystery of the Gemini, and the connection of our particular
Planetary Logos with that constellation.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On a lesser scale,
and in relation to the microcosm, the following subjects are illuminated
when the initiate receives the second great secret, or the fourth which
includes the earlier lesser ones:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

g\. The processes of at-one-ment in the different kingdoms of nature.
The bridging between the kingdoms is shown him, and he sees the unity of
the scheme.

h\. The method of egoic at-one-ment is seen clearly revealed, and the
antahkarana is shown in its real nature, and having been thus revealed,
is dispensed with.

i\. The essential unity existing between the Ego and the personality is
seen.

j\. The relation of the two evolutions, human and deva, is no longer a
mystery, but their position in the body of the Heavenly Man is seen to
be a fact.

</div>

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

One could go on emphasising the multiplicity of matters which the
mystery of polarity, when revealed, makes clear to the initiate, but the
above suffices. This secret concerns primarily the Vishnu, or second
aspect. It sums up in one short phrase the totality of knowledge gained
in the Hall of Wisdom, as the earlier secrets summed up the totality
achieved in the Hall of Learning. It deals with consciousness and its
development by and through the matter aspect. It concerns literally the
unification of the self and the not-self till they are verily and indeed
one.

At the fifth initiation the great secret which concerns the fire or
spirit aspect is revealed to the wondering and amazed Master, and He
realises in a sense incomprehensible to man the fact that all is fire
and fire is all. This secret may be said to reveal to the Initiate that
which makes clear to Him:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. The secret name of the Planetary Logos, thus revealing one syllable
of the name of the Solar Logos.

b\. The work and method of the destroyer aspect of divinity.

c\. The processes whereby obscuration and pralaya are induced.

d\. The mathematical formula which sums up all the cycles of
manifestation.

e\. The triple nature of fire, and the effect of the great fire upon the
lesser.

</div>

As this Shiva, or first, aspect is the one which will arrive at
perfection, or, rather, come within the reach of comprehension within
the next solar system, it profits not to continue considering this
secret. The following tabulation may make the whole matter clearer to
the mind of the student:—

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p><em>Secret of</em></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p><em>Initiation</em></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p><em>Logos<br />
Concerned</em></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p><em>Source of<br />
Energy</em></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p><em>Planes</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Fohat</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Third</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Brahma<br />
Creator</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Physical<br />
Sun</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Seven<br />
Six<br />
Five</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Polarity</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Fourth</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Vishnu<br />
Preserver</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Subjective<br />
Sun</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Four<br />
Three</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Fire</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Fifth</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Shiva<br />
Destroyer</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Central<br />
Spiritual<br />
Sun</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="131"><p>Two</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

As the student will observe, the source of the particular energy
concerned is one aspect of the sun.

At the sixth and seventh initiations two more secrets are revealed,
one—a lesser secret—preparing the way for the revelation of the fourth.
Only four secrets of a major order are revealed to initiates on this
planet, and herein lies the clue to our position in the scheme of solar
evolution. There are only five secrets altogether, of a major kind,
revealed in this solar system, owing to the fact that this is a system
wherein pre-eminently the fifth principle of mind forms the basis of
unfoldment. This fifth revelation is only imparted to those who pass to
the Schemes of synthesis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Diversities of Initiations](ihas20.md)
