[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ihas20)  [Next](ihas22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301107/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Initiation, Human and Solar*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

### CHAPTER XVIII

#### THE SEVEN PATHS

As might be expected, very little has appeared in our literature as to
the seven Paths which stretch before the man who has reached the fifth
initiation. It is obviously impossible, and also unnecessary, to convey
to our mind any impression as to the significance of these paths, or as
to the attributes needed for their treading. As time progresses and the
race reaches a higher point of development, we shall be able to
comprehend more, but under the law of economy it would be fruitless
effort for the teachers of the race to instruct us on the
characteristics needed for the treading of the seven Paths, before we
have as yet apprehended or developed those required for traversing the
Probationary Path, not to mention the Path of Initiation.

One general fact we do know, and that is, that before these Paths can be
trodden, a man must be a Master of the Wisdom, he must be a Brother of
Compassion, and he must be able, through intelligence and love, to wield
the law. Our part at this time is to fit ourselves for the treading of
the Path of Initiation, by the discipline of the Probationary Path, by
the careful direction of the life, by obedience to the law as
understood, and by service to the race. When we have attained
liberation, then these Paths will stretch before us, and the one that we
should tread will become apparent to us. All in this system works under
the great law of attraction, and therefore, according to our vibration,

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

according to our colour and tone, will depend, in all probability, our
choice. The greater free will of the cosmic system is under limitation,
just as is the free will of the system of which we are a part, and the
free will of man himself. Upon innate quality will depend the direction
of our further progress.

These seven Paths might be enumerated as follows, and certain
deductions, based on the law of correspondence, might be given out,
provided always that we remember that words serve more to blind than to
elucidate, and that the briefest details only are possible.

1\. *The Path of Earth Service*.

This is the Path that keeps a man linked to the Hierarchy that is
pledged to the service of our planet, and to the help of its evolutions.
It comprises those who work under the Lord of the World in the seven
groups into which our Masters of the Wisdom are divided. Not so many
Masters follow this Path as some of the others, and only enough are
permitted to do so to carry on planetary evolution satisfactorily. More
is known about this path than about the others, and more will be found
out as members of our humanity fit themselves to contact the
Brotherhood. Their field of employ, Their methods of work, will
eventually become exoteric knowledge, and as the seven groups are
recognised and known, schools of development for the filling of posts in
these groups will be the logical sequence.

2\. *The Path of Magnetic Work*.

Those who do the work of wielding forces, or electrical magnetism for
the use of the Great Ones on all the planes, pass to this Path. They
wield the elemental formative energy, manipulating matter of every
density and vibration.

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Great waves of
ideas and surging currents of public opinion on astral levels, as well
as on the higher levels where the Great Ones work, are manipulated by
them. A large number of fifth ray people, those who have the Ray of
Concrete Knowledge for their monadic ray, pass to this line of
endeavour. The inherent quality in the type of the monad settles usually
the line of activity. The karma of the fifth ray is one of the factors
which produces this. These monads work with Fohat, and must, to the end
of the greater manvantara. They have their eventual position on the
cosmic mental plane, but as yet the capacity for abstract thought is so
little developed that it is impossible for us to comprehend the
significance of this expression.

3\. *The Path of Training for Planetary Logoi*.

This Path is trodden by those who will take up the work of the seven
Planetary Logoi of the next system, and of the forty-nine sub-planetary
Logoi, Their assistants, and of certain other Entities working in that
particular department. There will be seven systems, though we are only
concerned with the three major systems, of which our present system is
the second major system. Each Chohan of a ray takes a certain number of
initiates of the sixth initiation and trains them specially for this
work; special aptitude in colour and sound predisposes the choice, and
the ability to work with "psyche," or the spirits in evolution marks a
man out for this high post. We might say that the Planetary Logoi are
the divine psychologists, and therefore in the training for this post
psychology is the basic subject, though it is a psychology inconceivable
as yet to us. Every Planetary Logos has, in His own special planet,
schools for the development of subordinate Logoi, and there trains Them
for this high office, giving Them opportunity for wide experience. Even

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

the Logoi Themselves progress onward, and Their places must be taken.

4\. *The Path to Sirius*.

Very little may be communicated about this Path, and the curiously close
relation between it and the Pleiades can only be mentioned, further
speculation being impossible. The bulk of liberated humanity goes this
way, and the prospect holds out glorious possibilities. The seven stars
of the Pleiades are the goal for the seven types, and this is hinted at
in the Book of Job, in the words, "Canst thou bind the sweet influence
of the Pleiades?" In the mystery of this influence, and in the secret of
the sun Sirius, are hidden the facts of our cosmic evolution, and
incidentally, therefore, of our solar system.

5\. *The Ray Path*.

It is difficult to know by what other name to call this Path, as so
little is known about it. In treading it, a man stays on his own ray,
and works thereon in the various kingdoms on all the planes, carrying
out the behests of the Lord of the World, and working under His
direction. It carries a man to every part of the solar system, yet links
him definitely with the synthetic ray. It is a very complex path, for it
necessitates a capacity for the most intricate mathematics, and an
ability to geometrise in a manner incomprehensible to our
three-dimensional brains. This path is taken by the man to whom the law
of vibration is of profound importance. He works first in the council
chamber of the Lord of the World at Shamballa, manipulating the law of
vibration on his own ray. Later he will have his habitat on the planet
corresponding to his own ray, and

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

not on the earth unless he is on the ray of the Planetary Logos holding
sway upon the earth. Later again as his evolution progresses, he will
pass to the sun; then having mastered all connected with vibration in
this system he will pass to the cosmic system, going off his own ray
(which is but a subsidiary ray of one cosmic ray), on to the
corresponding cosmic ray.

Just as the evolution of man in this system is fivefold, so in the above
we have enumerated the principal five Paths from which a Master has to
choose. The remaining two can only be touched upon still more briefly,
for they hold but a very few of the evolving sons of men, owing to the
high point of attainment necessitated for their entrance, and the fact
that those who enter upon them pass out of the system altogether. They
do not lead to Sirius, as do some of the other Paths. It will be noted
that four groups remain in the system, passing eventually, in dim and
distant aeons, to the cosmic planes. One group passes directly to
Sirius, and the remaining two groups pass directly after initiation to
the cosmic planes, with no period of intermediate work on earth, in the
system, or on Sirius. These two Paths are:—

6\. *The Path the Logos Himself Is On*.

It will have become apparent to all occult students who have studied
with care the world processes in the light of the law of
correspondences, that the Logos on the cosmic planes is evolving inner
cosmic vision, just as man in his lesser degree is aiming at the same
vision in the system. This might be called the development of the cosmic
third eye. In the physical plane structure of the eye lies hid the
secret and in its study may come some revelation of the mystery.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

A certain part of the eye is the nucleus of sight, and the apparatus of
vision itself; the remainder of the eye acts as a protecting shell, and
both parts are required, and neither can exist without the other. So in
this greater case, only the analogy exists on such high levels that
words only blur and dim the truth. Certain of the sons of men, a nucleus
who reached a very high initiation in the previous solar system, formed
an esoteric group around the Logos when He decided upon further
progress. In consequence He formed this system, cosmic desire for
incarnation driving Him on. This esoteric group remains with the Logos
on the atomic, or first plane of the system, on the subjective inner
side, and it corresponds, in an occult sense, to the pupil of the eye.
The real home of these great Entities is upon the cosmic buddhic plane.

Gradually, by dint of hard effort, certain Masters have qualified
Themselves, or are qualifying Themselves, to take the place of the
original members of the group, permitting of Their return to a cosmic
centre around which our system, and the greater system of Sirius
revolve. Only one adept here and there has the necessary qualifications,
for it involves the development of a certain type of response to cosmic
vibration. It means a specialising in the inner sight, and the
development of a certain measure of cosmic vision. More of the deva
evolution pass to this path than do the human. Human beings pass to it
via the deva evolution, which can be entered by transference to the
fifth Path, the ray Path. On this latter Path, the two evolutions can
merge, and from the fifth Path the sixth can be entered.

7\. *The Path of Absolute Sonship*.

This Sonship is a correspondence on the highest plane to that grade of
discipleship which we call "Son of the Master."

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is the Sonship
to a Being higher than our Logos, of whom we may not speak. It is the
great controlling Path of Karma. The Lipika Lords are on this Path, and
all who are fitted for that line of work, and who are close to the Logos
in a personal intimate sense, pass to the Path of absolute Sonship. It
is the Path of the special intimates of the Logos, and into Their hands
He has put the working out of karma in the solar system. They know His
wishes, His will and His aim, and to Them He entrusts the carrying out
of His behests. This group, associated with the Logos, forms a special
group linked to a still higher Logos.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. Rules For Applicants](ihas22.md)
