[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ihas10)  [Next](ihas12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301107/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Initiation, Human and Solar*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

#### DISCIPLESHIP

*A disciple described*.

A disciple is one who above all else, is pledged to do three things:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. To serve humanity.

b\. To co-operate with the plan of the Great Ones as he sees it and as
best he may.

c\. To develop the powers of the Ego, to expand his consciousness until
he can function on the three planes in the three worlds, and in the
causal body, and to follow the guidance of the higher self and not the
dictates of his three-fold lower manifestation.

</div>

A disciple is one who is beginning to comprehend group work, and to
change his centre of activity from himself (as the pivot around which
everything revolves) to the group centre.

A disciple is one who realises simultaneously the relative
insignificance of each unit of consciousness, and also its vast
importance. His sense of proportion is adjusted, and he sees things as
they are; he sees people as they are; he sees himself as he inherently
is and seeks then to become that which he is.

A disciple realises the life or force side of nature, and to him the
form makes no appeal. He works with force and through force; he
recognises himself as a force centre within a greater force centre, and
his is the responsibility

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

of directing the energy which may pour through him into channels through
which the group can be benefited.

The disciple knows himself to be—to a greater or less degree—an outpost
of the Master's consciousness, viewing the Master in a two-fold sense:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. As his own egoic consciousness.

b\. As the centre of his group; the force animating the units of the
group and binding them into a homogeneous whole.

</div>

A disciple is one who is transferring his consciousness out of the
personal into the impersonal, and during the transition stage much of
difficulty and of suffering is necessarily endured. These difficulties
arise from various causes:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. The disciple's lower self, which rebels at being transmuted.

b\. A man's immediate group, friends, or family, who rebel at his
growing impersonality. They do not like to be acknowledged as one with
him on the life side, and yet separate from him where desires and
interests lie. Yet the law holds good, and only in the essential life of
the soul can true unity be cognised. In the discovery as to what is form
lies much of sorrow for the disciple, but the road leads to perfect
union eventually.

</div>

The disciple is one who realises his responsibility to all units who
come under his influence,—a responsibility of co-operating with the plan
of evolution as it exists for them, and thus to expand their
consciousness and teach them the difference between the real and the
unreal, between life and form. This he does most easily by a
demonstration in his own life as to his goal, his object, and his centre
of consciousness.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

*The work to be done*.

The disciple, therefore, has several things at which to aim:—

A sensitive response to the Master's vibration.

A practical purity of life; a purity not merely theoretical.

A freedom from care. Here bear in mind that care is based on the
personal, and is the result of lack of dispassion and a too ready
response to the vibrations of the lower worlds.

Accomplishment of duty. This point involves the dispassionate discharge
of all obligations and due attention to karmic debts. Special emphasis
should be laid, for all disciples, on the value of dispassion. Lack of
discrimination is not so often a hindrance to disciples these days,
owing to the development of the mind, but lack of dispassion frequently
is. This means the attainment of that state of consciousness where
balance is seen, and neither pleasure nor pain dominates, for they are
superseded by joy and bliss. We may well ponder on this, for much
striving after dispassion is necessary.

He has also to study the Kama-manasic body (desire-mind body) . This is
of very real interest, for it is, in many ways, the most important body
in the solar system, where the human being in the three worlds is
concerned. In the next system the mental vehicle of the self-conscious
units will hold an analogous place, as the physical did in the previous
solar system.

He has also to work scientifically, if it may be so expressed, at the
building of the physical body. He must so strive that he will produce in
each incarnation a body which will serve better as a vehicle for force.
Hence there is nothing impractical in giving information anent
initiation, as some may think. There is no moment of the

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

day that that goal may not be visioned, and the work of preparation
carried on. One of the greatest instruments for practical development
lying in the hands of small and great, is the instrument of SPEECH. He
who guards his words, and who only speaks with altruistic purpose, in
order to carry the energy of Love through the medium of the tongue, is
one who is mastering rapidly the initial steps to be taken in
preparation for initiation. Speech is the most occult manifestation in
existence; it is the means of creation and the vehicle for force. In the
reservation of words, esoterically understood, lies the conservation of
force; in the utilisation of words, justly chosen and spoken, lies the
distribution of the love force of the solar system,—that force which
preserves, strengthens, and stimulates. Only he who knows somewhat of
these two aspects of speech can be trusted to stand before the Initiator
and to carry out from that Presence certain sounds and secrets imparted
to him under the pledge of silence.

The disciple must learn to be silent in the face of that which is evil.
He must learn to be silent before the sufferings of the world, wasting
no time in idle plaints and sorrowful demonstration, but lifting up the
burden of the world; working, and wasting no energy in talk. Yet withal
he should speak where encouragement is needed, using the tongue for
constructive ends; expressing the love force of the world, as it may
flow through him, where it will serve best to ease a load or lift a
burden, remembering that as the race progresses, the love element
between the sexes and its expression will be translated to a higher
plane. Then, through the spoken word, and not through the physical plane
expression as now, will come the realisation of that true love which
unites those who are one in service and in aspiration. Then love between
the units of the human family will take the form of the utilisation of

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

speech for the purpose of creating on all planes, and the energy which
now, in the majority, finds expression through the lower or generating
centres will be translated to the throat centre. This is as yet but a
distant ideal, but even now some can vision that ideal, and seek—through
united service, loving co-operation, and oneness in aspiration, thought,
and endeavour,—to give shape and form to it, even though inadequately.

*Group relationships*.

The path of the disciple is a thorny one; briars beset his every step,
and difficulties meet him at every turn. Yet in the treading of the
path, in the overcoming of the difficulties, and in a single-hearted
adherence to the good of the group, with a proportionate attention to
the individuals and their evolutionary development, comes at length
fruition, and the attainment of the goal. A SERVER of the race stands
forth. He is a server because he has no ends of his own to serve, and
from his lower sheaths goes out no vibration which can beguile him from
his chosen path. He serves, because he knows what is in man, and because
for many lives he has worked with individuals and with groups, gradually
expanding the range of his endeavour until he has gathered around him
those units of consciousness whom he can energise, and use, and through
whom he can work out the plans of his superiors. Such is the goal, but
the intermediate stages are fraught with difficulty for all who stand on
the verge of self-discovery, and of becoming the Path itself.

Some practical advice might be of value here:—

Study with care the first three books of the Bhagavad Gita. The problem
of Arjuna is the problem of all disciples, and the solution is eternally
the same.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

Stand ready and watch the heart. In the transferring of the fire from
the solar plexus to the heart centre comes much pain. It is not easy to
love as do the Great Ones, with a pure love which requires nothing back;
with an impersonal love that rejoices where there is response, but looks
not for it, and loves steadily, quietly, and deeply through all apparent
divergences, knowing that when each has found his own way home, he will
find that home to be the place of at-one-ment.

Be prepared for loneliness. It is the law. As a man dissociates himself
from all that concerns his physical, astral and mental bodies, and
centres himself in the Ego, it produces a temporary separation. This
must be endured and passed, leading to a closer link at a later period
with all associated with the disciple through the karma of past lives,
through group work, and through the activity of the disciple (carried on
almost unconsciously at first) in gathering together those through whom
later he will work.

Cultivate happiness, knowing that depression, an over-morbid
investigation of motive, and undue sensitiveness to the criticism of
others leads to a condition wherein a disciple is almost useless.
Happiness is based on confidence in the God within, a just appreciation
of time, and a forgetfulness of self. Take all the glad things which may
come as trusts to be used to spread joy, and rebel not at happiness and
pleasure in service, thinking it an indication that all is not well.
Suffering comes as the lower self rebels. Control that lower self,
eliminate desire, and all is joy.

Have patience. Endurance is one of the characteristics of the Ego. The
Ego *persists*, knowing itself immortal. The personality becomes
discouraged, knowing that time is short.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

To the disciple naught occurs but what is in the plan, and where the
motive and sole aspiration of the heart are towards the carrying out of
the Master's will and the serving of the race, that which eventuates has
in it the seeds of the next enterprise, and embodies the environment of
the next step forward. Herein lies much of clarification, and herein may
be found that on which the disciple may rest when the vision is clouded,
the vibration lower than perhaps it should be, and the judgment fogged
by the miasmas arising from circumstances on the physical plane. With
many, much arises in the astral body that is based on old vibration and
has no foundation in fact, and the battleground is so to control the
astral situation that out of present anxieties and worries may grow
confidence and peace, and out of violent action and interaction there
may be elaborated tranquility.

It is possible to reach a point where naught that occurs can ruffle the
inner calm; where the peace that passeth understanding is known and
experienced, because the consciousness is centred in the Ego, who is
peace itself, being the circle of the buddhic life; where poise itself
is known and felt, and equilibrium reigns because the centre of the life
is in the Ego, who is—in essence—balance; where calm rules unruffled and
unshaken, because the divine Knower holds the reins of government, and
permits no disturbance from the lower self; where bliss itself is
reached that is based, not on circumstances in the three worlds, but on
that inner realisation of existence apart from the not-self, an
existence that persists when time and space and all that is contained
therein, are not; that is known when all the illusions of the lower
planes are experienced, passed through, transmuted and transcended; that
endures when the little world of human endeavour has dissipated and
gone, being

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

seen as naught; and that is based on the knowledge that I AM THAT.

Such an attitude and experience is for all those who persist in their
high endeavour, who count all things but naught if they may but achieve
the goal, and who steer a steady course through circumstances, keeping
the eyes fixed upon the vision ahead, the ears attentive to the Voice of
the God within, that sounds in the silence of the heart; the feet firmly
placed on the path that leads to the Portal of Initiation; the hands
held out in assistance to the world, and the whole life subordinated to
the call of service. Then all that comes is for the best—sickness,
opportunity, success, and disappointment, the gibes and machinations of
enemies, the lack of comprehension on the part of those we love—all is
but to be used, and all exists but to be transmuted. Continuity of
vision, of aspiration, and of the inner touch, is seen to be of more
importance than them all. That continuity is the thing to be aimed at,
in spite of, and not because of circumstances.

As the aspirant progresses he not only balances the pairs of opposites,
but is having the secret of his brother's heart revealed to him. He
becomes an acknowledged force in the world and is recognised as one who
can be depended upon to serve. Men turn to him for assistance and help
along his recognised line, and he begins to sound forth his note so as
to be heard in deva and human ranks. This he does—at this stage—through
the pen in literature, through the spoken word in lecturing and
teaching, through music, painting and art. He reaches the hearts of men
in some way or another, and becomes a helper and server of his race. Two
more characteristics of this stage might here be mentioned:—

The aspirant has an appreciation of the occult value of money in
service. He seeks nothing for himself, save

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

that which may equip him for the work to be done, and he looks upon
money and that which money can purchase as something which is to be used
for others and as a means to bring about the fruition of the Master's
plans as he senses those plans. The occult significance of money is
little appreciated, yet one of the greatest tests as to the position of
a man upon the Probationary Path is that which concerns his attitude to
and his handling of that which all men seek in order to gratify desire.
Only he who desires naught for himself can be a recipient of financial
bounty, and a dispenser of the riches of the universe. In other cases
where riches increase they bring with them naught but sorrow and
distress, discontent, and misuse.

At this stage also the aspirant's life becomes an instrument of
destruction in the occult sense of the term. Wherever he goes the force
which flows through him from the higher planes and his own inner God
produces at times peculiar results upon his environment. It acts as a
stimulator of both the good and the evil. The lunar Pitris, or little
lives which form the bodies of his brother and his own body, are
likewise stimulated, their activity is increased and their power greatly
aggravated. This fact is used by Those Who work on the inner side to
bring about certain desired ends. This it is also which often causes the
temporary downfall of advanced souls. They cannot stand the force
pouring into them, or upon them, and through the temporary
over-stimulation of their centres and vehicles they go to pieces. This
can be seen working out in groups as well as in individuals. But,
inversely, if the lunar Lords, or lives of the lower self, have been
earlier subjugated and brought under control, then the effect of the
force and energy contacted is to stimulate the response of the physical
brain consciousness and the head centres to egoic contact.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then the otherwise
destructive force becomes a factor for good and a helpful stimulation,
and can be used by Those Who know how, to lead men on to further
illumination.

All these steps have to work out on all the three lower planes, and in
the three bodies, and this they do according to the particular ray and
sub-ray. In this fashion is the work of the disciple carried forward,
and his testing and training carried out. Thus is he brought—through
right direction of energy and wise manipulation of force currents—to the
Portal of Initiation, and he graduates from the Hall of Learning into
the Hall of Wisdom, that Hall wherein he gradually becomes "aware" of
forces and powers latent in his own Ego and egoic group, wherein the
force of the egoic group is his for the using, for he can now be trusted
to wield it only for the helping of humanity, and wherein—after the
fourth initiation—he becomes a sharer in, and can be trusted with, some
part of the energy of the Planetary Logos, and thus be enabled to carry
forward the plans of that Logos for evolution.

It would be well to remember that disciples on the first ray understand
discipleship largely in terms of energy, or force, or activity, whilst
disciples on the second ray understand it more in terms of consciousness
or initiation. Hence the divergence of expressions in ordinary use, and
the lack of comprehension among thinkers. It might prove useful to
express the idea of discipleship in terms of the different rays—meaning
by this, discipleship as it manifests on the physical plane in service:

|         |               |             |            |                  |
|---------|---------------|-------------|------------|------------------|
| 1st Ray | Force         | Energy      | Action     | The Occultist.   |
| 2nd Ray | Consciousness | Expansion   | Initiation | The true Psychic |
| 3rd Ray | Adaptation    | Development | Evolution  | The Magician.    |
| 4th Ray | Vibration     | Response    | Expression | The Artist.      |
| 5th Ray | Mentation     | Knowledge   | Science    | The Scientist.   |
| 6th Ray | Devotion      | Abstraction | Idealism   | The Devotee.     |
| 7th Ray | Incantation   | Magic       | Ritual     | The Ritualist.   |

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

Remember carefully that we are here dealing with disciples. Later on as
they progress, the various lines approximate and merge. All have been at
one time magicians, for all have passed upon the third ray. The problem
now is concerned with the mystic and the occultist, and their eventual
synthesis. A careful study of the foregoing will lead to the realisation
that the difficulties between thinkers, and between disciples of all
groups, consist in their identifying themselves with some form, and in
their inability to understand the different points of view of others. As
time elapses, and they are brought into closer relationship with the two
Masters with whom they are concerned (their own inner God and their
personal Master), the inability to cooperate and to merge their
interests in the good of the group will pass away, and community of
endeavour, similarity of object, and mutual co-operation will take the
place of what is now so much seen, divergence. We might well ponder on
this, for it holds the key to much that is puzzling and, to many,
distressing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Path of Initiation](ihas12)
