[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ihas03)  [Next](ihas05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301107/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Initiation, Human and Solar*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# INITIATION, HUMAN AND SOLAR

### CHAPTER I

#### INTRODUCTORY REMARKS

Before entering upon the subject matter of the following articles on
Initiation, on the Paths that open before the perfected man, and on the
Occult Hierarchy, certain statements may be made which seem essential
for the judicious study and comprehension of the ideas submitted.

It is to be recognised that throughout this volume facts are alleged and
definite statements made which are not susceptible of immediate proof by
the reader. Lest it be inferred that the writer arrogates to herself any
credit or personal authority for the knowledge implied she emphatically
disavows all such claims or representations. She cannot do otherwise
than present these statements as matters of fact. Nevertheless, she
would urge those who find somewhat of merit in these pages that they he
not estranged by any appearance of dogmatism in the presentation. Nor
should the inadequacy of the personality of the writer act as a
deterrent to the open-minded consideration of the message to which her
name happens to be appended. In spiritual issues, names, personalities,
and the voice of external

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

authority, hold small place. That alone is a safe guide which holds its
warranty from inner recognition and inner direction. It is not,
therefore, material whether the reader receive the message of these
pages as a spiritual appeal in an idealistic setting, a presentation of
alleged facts, or a theory evolved by one student and presented for the
consideration of fellow students. To each it is offered for whatever of
inner response it may evoke, for whatever of inspiration and of light it
may bring.

In these days of the shattering of the old form and the building of the
new, adaptability is needed. We must avert the danger of crystallisation
through pliability and expansion. The "old order changeth," but
primarily it is a change of dimension and of aspect, and not of material
or of foundation. The fundamentals have always been true. To each
generation is given the part of conserving the essential features of the
old and beloved form, but also of wisely expanding and enriching it.
Each cycle must add the gain of further research and scientific
endeavour, and subtract that which is worn out and of no value. Each age
must build in the product and triumphs of its period, and abstract the
accretions of the past that would dim and blur the outline. Above all,
to each generation is given the joy of demonstrating the strength of the
old foundations, and the opportunity to build upon these foundations a
structure that will meet the needs of the inner evolving life.

The ideas that are elaborated here find their corroboration in certain
facts that are stated in the occult literature now extant. These facts
are three in number, and are as follows:—

\(a\) In the creation of the sun and the seven sacred planets composing
our solar system, our Logos employed matter that was already impregnated
with particular qualities. Mrs. Besant in her book, "Avataras," (which
some of

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

us think the most valuable of all her writings, because one of the most
suggestive), makes the statement that "our solar system is builded out
of matter already existing, out of matter already gifted with certain
properties …" (page 48) . This matter, therefore, we deduce, held latent
certain faculties that were forced to demonstrate in a peculiar way,
under the law of Cause and Effect, as does all else in the universe.

\(b\) All manifestation is of a septenary nature, and the Central Light
which we call Deity, the one Ray of Divinity, manifests first as a
Triplicity, and then as a Septenary. The One God shines forth as God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, and these three are again
reflected through the Seven Spirits before the Throne, or the seven
Planetary Logoi. The students of occultism of non-Christian origin may
call these Beings the One Ray, demonstrating through the three major
Rays and the four minor, making a divine Septenary. The Synthetic Ray
which blends them all is the great Love-Wisdom Ray, for verily and
indeed "God is Love." This Ray is the indigo Ray, and is the blending
Ray. It is the one which will, at the end of the greater cycle, absorb
the others in the achievement of synthetic perfection. It is the
manifestation of the second aspect of Logoic life. It is this aspect,
that of the Form-Builder, that makes this solar system of ours the most
concrete of the three major systems. The Love or Wisdom aspect
demonstrates through the building of the form, for "God is Love," and in
that God of Love we "live and move and have our being," and will to the
end of aeonian manifestation.

\(c\) The seven planes of Divine Manifestation, or the seven major
planes of our system, are but the seven subplanes of the lowest cosmic
plane. The seven Rays of which

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

we hear so much, and which hold so much of interest and of mystery, are
likewise but the seven sub-rays of one cosmic Ray. The twelve creative
Hierarchies are themselves but subsidiary branches of one cosmic
Hierarchy. They form but one chord in the cosmic symphony. When that
sevenfold cosmic chord, of which we form so humble a part, reverberates
in synthetic perfection, then, and only then, will come comprehension of
the words in the Book of Job: "The morning stars sang together."
Dissonance yet sounds forth, and discord arises from many systems, but
in the progression of the aeons an ordered harmony will eventuate, and
the day will dawn when (if we dare speak of eternities in the terms of
time) the sound of the perfected universe will resound to the uttermost
bounds of the furthest constellation. Then will be known the mystery of
"the marriage song of the heavens."

The reader is also asked to remember and weigh certain ideas prior to
taking up the study of Initiation. Due to the extreme complexity of the
matter it is an utter impossibility for us to do more than get a general
idea of the scheme; hence the futility of dogmatism. We can do no more
than sense a fraction of some wonderful whole, utterly beyond the reach
of our consciousness,—a whole that the highest Angel or Perfected Being
is but beginning to realise. When we recognise the fact that the average
man is as yet fully conscious only on the physical plane, nearly
conscious on the emotional plane, and only developing the consciousness
of the mental plane, it is obvious that his comprehension of cosmic data
can be but rudimentary. When we recognise the further fact, that to he
conscious on a plane and to have control on that plane are two very
different conditions, it becomes apparent how remote is the possibility
of our approximating more than the general trend of the cosmic scheme.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

We must recognise also that danger lies in dogma and in the hide-bound
facts of textbooks, and that safety lies in flexibility, and in a
shifting angle of vision. A tact, for instance, looked at from the
standpoint of humanity (using the word "fact" in the scientific sense as
that which has been demonstrated past all doubt and question) may not be
a fact from the standpoint of a Master. To Him it may be but part of a
greater fact, only a fraction of the whole. Since His vision is fourth
and fifth dimensional, His realisation of the place of time in eternity
must be more accurate than ours. He sees things from above downwards,
and as one to whom time is not.

An inexplicable principle of mutation exists in the Mind of the Logos,
or the Deity of our solar system, and governs all His actions. We see
but the ever changing forms, and catch glimpses of the steadily evolving
life within those forms, but as yet have no clue to the principle which
works through the shifting kaleidoscope of solar systems, rays,
hierarchies, planets, planes, schemes, rounds, races, and sub-races.
They interweave, interlock, and interpenetrate each other, and utter
bewilderment is ours as the wonderful pattern they form unfolds before
us. We know that somewhere in that scheme we, the human hierarchy, have
our place. All, therefore, that we can do is to seize upon any data that
seems to affect our own welfare, and concerns our own evolution, and
from the study of the human being in the three worlds seek to understand
somewhat the macrocosm. We know not how the one can become the three,
the three become the seven, and so proceed to inconceivable
differentiation. To human vision this interweaving of the system forms
an unimaginable complexity, the key to which seems not to be
forthcoming. Seen from the angle of a Master we know that all proceeds
in ordered sequence. Seen from the angle of divine vision the whole will
move

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

in harmonious unison, producing a form geometrically accurate. Browning
had hold of a part of this truth when he wrote:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"All's change, but permanence as well"… and continued:

"Truth inside, and outside, truth also; and between each, falsehood that
is change, as truth is permanence."

"Truth successively takes shape, one grade above its last presentment…"

</div>

We must remember also that beyond a certain point it is not safe nor
wise to carry the communication of the facts of the solar system. Much
must remain esoteric and veiled. The risks of too much knowledge are far
greater than the menace of too little. With knowledge comes
responsibility and power,—two things for which the race is not yet
ready. Therefore, all we can do is to study and correlate with what
wisdom and discretion may be ours, using the knowledge that may come for
the good of those we seek to help, and recognising that in the wise use
of knowledge comes increased capacity to receive the hidden wisdom.
Coupled also with the wise adaptation of knowledge to the surrounding
need must grow the capacity for discreet reservation, and the use of the
discriminating faculty. When we can wisely use, discreetly withhold, and
soundly discriminate, we give the surest guarantee to the watching
Teachers of the race that we are ready for a fresh revelation.

We must resign ourselves to the fact that the only way in which we can
find the clue to the mystery of the rays, systems, and hierarchies, lies
in the study of the law of correspondences or analogy. It is the one
thread by which we can find our way through the labyrinth, and the one

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

ray of light that shines through the darkness of the surrounding
ignorance. H. P. Blavatsky, in "The Secret Doctrine," has told us so,
but as yet very little has been done by students to avail themselves of
that clue. In the study of this Law we need to remember that the
correspondence lies in its essence, and not in the exoteric working out
of detail as we think we see it from our present standpoint. The factor
of time leads us astray for one thing; we err when we attempt to fix
stated times or limits; all in evolution progresses through merging,
with a constant process of overlapping and mingling. Only broad
generalities and a recognition of fundamental points of analogy are
possible to the average student. The moment he attempts to reduce to
chart form and to tabulate *in detail,* he enters realms where he is
bound to err, and staggers through a fog that will ultimately overwhelm
him.

Nevertheless, in the scientific study of this law of analogy will come a
gradual growth of knowledge, and in the slow accumulation of facts will
gradually be built up an ever-expanding form, that will embody much of
the truth. The student will then awake to the realization that after all
the study and toil he has at least a wide general conception of the
Logoic thoughtform into which he can fit the details as he acquires them
through many incarnations. This brings us to the last point to be
considered before entering upon the subject proper, which is:

That the development of the human being is but the passing from one
state of consciousness to another. It is a succession of expansions, a
growth of that faculty of awareness that constitutes the predominant
characteristic of the indwelling Thinker. It is the progressing from
consciousness polarised in the personality, lower self, or body, to that
polarised in the higher self, ego, or soul, thence to a polarisation in
the Monad, or Spirit, till the consciousness eventually

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

is Divine. As the human being develops, the faculty of awareness extends
first of all beyond the circumscribing walls that confine it within the
lower kingdoms of nature (the mineral, vegetable and animal) to the
three worlds of the evolving personality, to the planet whereon he plays
his part, to the system wherein that planet revolves, until it finally
escapes from the solar system itself and becomes universal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Initiation Defined](ihas05.md)
