[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ihas19)  [Next](ihas21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301107/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Initiation, Human and Solar*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

### CHAPTER XVII

#### DIVERSITIES OF INITIATIONS

*Major and Minor Initiations*.

In dealing with this question of the diversities of initiations it may
be of value to the student to remember that the great moment in which a
man passed out of the animal kingdom into the human, which is called in
many occult textbooks the "moment of individualisation," was in itself
one of the greatest of all initiations. Individualisation is the
conscious apprehension by the self of its relation to all that
constitutes the not-self, and in this great initiatory process, as in
all the later ones, the awakening of consciousness is preceded by a
period of gradual development; the awakening is instantaneous at the
moment of self-realisation for the first time, and is always succeeded
by another period of gradual evolution. This period of gradual
evolution, in its turn, leads up to a later crisis which is called
Initiation. In the one case, we have initiation into self-conscious
existence, in the other, initiation into spiritual existence.

These realisations, or apprehended expansions of consciousness, are
under natural law, and come in due course of time to every soul *without
exception*. In a lesser degree they are undergone daily by every human
being, as his mental grip of life and experience gradually grows, but
they only become initiations into the wisdom (as differentiated from
expansions of knowledge) when the knowledge gained is:—

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. Consciously sought for.

b\. Self-sacrificingly applied to life.

c\. Willingly used in service for others.

d\. Intelligently utilised on the side of evolution.

</div>

Only souls of a certain amount of experience and development do all
these four things consistently and steadily, and thus transmute
knowledge into wisdom, and experience into quality. The ordinary average
man transmutes ignorance into knowledge, and experience into faculty. It
would be helpful if all of us pondered upon the difference between
inherent quality and innate faculty; one is the very nature of buddhi,
or wisdom, and the other of manas, or mind. The union of these two,
through a man's conscious effort, results in a major initiation.

These results are brought about in two ways:—First, by a man's own
unaided effort, which leads him in due course of time to find his own
centre of consciousness, to be guided and led by the inner ruler or Ego
entirely, and to unravel, through strenuous effort and painful
endeavour, the mystery of the universe, which is concealed in material
substance energised by Fohat. Secondly, by a man's efforts, supplemented
by the intelligent loving co-operation of the Knowers of the race, the
Masters of the Wisdom. In this case the process is quicker, for a man
comes under instruction—should he so desire—and subsequently, when he
has on his part provided the right conditions, there is placed at his
disposal the knowledge and the help of Those Who have achieved. In order
to avail himself of this help he has to work with the material of his
own body, building right material into an ordered form, and has
therefore to learn discrimination in the choice of matter, and to
understand the laws of vibration and of construction. This entails the
mastering, in some measure, of the laws that govern the

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brahma and Vishnu
aspects: it means a faculty of vibrating with atomic accuracy, and the
development of the quality of attractiveness, which is the basis of the
building, or Vishnu aspect.

He has to equip, also, his mental body so that it may be an explainer
and transmitter, and not a hindering factor as now. He must likewise
develop group activity, and learn to work in a co-ordinated manner with
other units. These are the main things that a man must accomplish along
the path of initiation, but when he has worked at them, he will find the
Way, it will be made clear to him, and he will then join the ranks of
the Knowers.

Another point to be remembered is that this effort to make people
co-operate intelligently with the Hierarchy, and to train them to join
the ranks of the Lodge, is, as earlier pointed out, a special effort
(inaugurated in Atlantean days and continued to this time) made by the
Hierarchy of the planet, and is very largely in the nature of an
experiment. The method whereby a man assumes *conscious* place in the
body of a Heavenly Man differs in different planetary Schemes; the
Heavenly Man, Who uses our planetary Scheme as His body of
manifestation, chooses to work in this particular way during this
particular period for His own specific purposes; it is part of the
process of vitalising one of His centres, and of linking up His heart
centre with its connection in the head. As other of His centres are
vitalised, and come into full activity, other methods of stimulating the
cells in His body (the deva and human monads) may be followed, but for
the present the cosmic Rod of Initiation, which is applied to a Heavenly
Man, in much the same manner as the lesser rods are applied to man, is
being utilised in such a way that it produces that specific stimulation
which demonstrates in the activity of man on the Path of Probation and
the Path of Initiation.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

Therefore man must recognise the cyclic nature of initiation, and the
place of the process in time and space. This is a special period of
activity in the cycle of a Heavenly Man, and it works out on our planet
as a vast period of trial or initiatory testing; it is, nevertheless,
equally a period of vitalisation and of opportunity.

We must also endeavour to realise the fact that initiation may be seen
taking place on the three planes in the three worlds, and the thought
must ever be borne in mind of the relative value and place of the unit,
or cell, in the body of a Heavenly Man. The point must here be
emphasised that the *major initiations, or the initiations of manas, are
those taken on the mental plane and in the causal body*. They mark the
point in evolution where the unit recognises in fact, and not only in
theory, his identity with the divine Manasaputra in Whose body he has
place. Initiations can be taken on the physical plane, on the astral,
and on the lower mental, but they are not considered major initiations,
and are not a conscious, co-ordinated, unified stimulation that involves
the whole man.

A man, therefore, may take initiation on each plane, but only those
initiations which mark his transference from a *lower four into a higher
three* are considered so in the real sense of the word, and only those
in which a man transfers his consciousness from the lower quarternary
into the triad are major initiations. We have, therefore, three grades
of initiations:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

First, initiations in which a man transfers his consciousness from the
lower four subplanes of the physical, astral, and mental planes
respectively, into the higher three subplanes. When this is done upon
the mental plane a man is then known technically as a disciple, an
initiate, an adept. He uses then each of the three higher subplanes of
the mental plane as a point from

</div>

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

which to work his way completely out of the three worlds of human
manifestation into the triad. Therefore it is apparent that what one
might consider as lesser initiations can be taken on the physical and
astral planes, in the conscious control of their three higher subplanes.
These are true initiations, but do not make a man what is technically
understood as a Master of the Wisdom. He is simply an adept of a lesser
degree.

Secondly, initiations in which a man transfers his consciousness from
plane to plane, instead of from subplane to subplane. Herein comes a
point to be carefully recognised. A true Master of the Wisdom has not
only taken the lesser initiations referred to above, but has also taken
the five steps involved in the conscious control of the five planes of
human evolution. It remains for him then to take the two final
initiations which make him a Chohan of the sixth degree, and a Buddha,
before that control is extended to the remaining two planes of the solar
system. It is obvious, therefore, that it is correct to speak of the
seven initiations, yet it would be nevertheless equally correct to
enumerate five, ten, or twelve initiations. The matter is complicated
for occult students, owing to certain mysterious factors about which
they can naturally know nothing, and which must remain to them, as yet,
utterly incomprehensible. These factors are founded in the individuality
of the Heavenly Man Himself, and involve such mysteries as His
particular karma, the aim He may have in view for any particular cycle,
and the turning of the attention of the cosmic *ego* of a Heavenly Man
to His reflection, the evolving Heavenly Man of a solar system.

A further factor may also be found in certain periods of stimulation,
and of increased vitalisation, such as a cosmic initiation produces.
These outside effects naturally

</div>

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

produce results in the units or cells in the body of the Heavenly Man,
and lead often to events unforeseen and apparently inexplicable.

Thirdly, initiations in which a Heavenly Man may take either a minor or
a major initiation, thereby involving His entire nature. For instance,
when individualisation took place during the Lemurian, or the third root
race, and the human family in this cycle definitely came into
manifestation, it signified a major initiation for our Heavenly Man. The
present stimulation in hierarchical effort is leading up to a lesser
initiation. Each great cycle sees a major initiation of a Heavenly Man
taken on one or other of the globes, and herein again complication lies,
and much food for thought.

</div>

To the three above points we might also briefly add that of the coming
in, or passing out, of any particular ray. The little that can be said
upon this point, which is one of the greatest difficulty, might be
summed up in the following three statements: First, that initiations
taken on the four minor rays rank not in equality with initiations taken
upon the major three. This is complicated somewhat by the fact that
within the planetary Scheme, during cyclic evolution, a minor ray may be
temporarily regarded as a major ray. For instance, at this particular
time in our planetary Scheme, the seventh Ray of Ceremonial Law or Order
is regarded as a major ray, being a ray of synthesis, and one on which
the Mahachohan is blending His work. Secondly, that the first three
initiations are taken upon the ray of the Ego, and link a man up with
the great White Lodge; the last two are taken upon the ray of the monad,
and have a definite effect upon the path for service that will be chosen
later by the adept. This statement must be linked up with that earlier
made, which stated that the fifth initiation made a man

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

a member of the Greater Lodge, or Brotherhood, on Sirius, being
literally the first of the Sirian initiations. The fourth initiation is
the synthesis of the Initiations of the Threshold in the Sirian Lodge.
Finally, according to the ray on which initiation is taken, so very
largely depends the subsequent path of service.

*The Day of Opportunity*.

The question might here be asked wherein this information is of value to
the student. In illustration of this it would be wise if students would
ponder the significance of the coming in of the present Ray of
Ceremonial Law or Magic. It is the ray that deals with the building
forces of nature, that concerns itself with the utilisation of the form
intelligently by the life aspect. It is largely the ray of executive
work, with the object of building, co-ordinating and producing cohesion
in the four lower kingdoms of nature. It is distinguished largely by the
energy which manifests itself in ritual, but this word ritual must not
be narrowed down to its present use in connection with Masonic, or
religious ritual. Its application is far wider than this, and includes
the methods of organisation which are demonstrated in all civilised
communities, such as in the world of commerce and of finance, and the
great business organisations everywhere to be seen. Above all, its
interest lies for us in the fact that it is the ray which brings
opportunity to the occidental races, and through the medium of this life
force of executive organisation, of government by rule and order, by
rhythm and by ritual, will come the time wherein the occidental races
(with their active, concrete mind, and their vast business capacity) can
take initiation,—an initiation, we must remember, upon a ray which is
temporarily recognised as a major ray. A large number of the initiates
and

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

those who have obtained adeptship in the last cycle, have been orientals
and those in Hindu bodies. This cycle has been dominated by the sixth
ray, which is just passing out, and the two preceding. In the
preservation of equilibrium the time now comes when a period of
attainment by occidentals will be seen, and this upon a ray suited to
their type of mind. It is interesting to note that the oriental type
attains its objective through meditation, with a modicum of executive
organisation and ritual, and that the occidental will achieve largely
through the organisation which lower mind produces, and a type of
meditation of which intense business concentration might be considered
an illustration. The one-pointed application of the mind by a European
or American business man might be regarded as a type of meditation. In
the purification of motive lying back of this application will come, for
the occidental, his day of opportunity.

By availing themselves of the present day of opportunity, and by
conformity to the rules for treading the Path, will come to many in the
West the chance to take these further steps. That opportunity will be
found by the man who is ready in the place where he is, and among the
familiar circumstances of his daily life. It will be found in attention
to duty, in the surmounting of tests and trials, and in that inner
adherence to the voice of the God within, which is the mark of every
applicant for initiation. Initiation involves the very thing that is
done from day to day by any who are consciously endeavouring to train
themselves:—the next point to be reached, and the next bit of work to be
accomplished is pointed out by the Master (either the God within or a
man's Master if he is consciously aware of Him) and the reason is given.
Then the Teacher stands aside and watches the aspirant achieve. As He
watches, He recognises points of crisis, where the application of a test
will do one of two

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

things, focalise and disperse any remaining unconquered evil—if that
term might here be used—and demonstrate to the disciple both his
weakness and his strength. In the great initiations, the same procedure
can be seen, and the ability of the disciple to pass these greater tests
and stages is dependent upon his ability to meet and surmount the daily
lesser ones. "He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful
also in much," is an occult statement of fact, and should characterise
the whole daily activity of the true aspirant; the "much" is surmounted
and passed, because it is regarded simply as an intensification of the
normal, and no initiate has ever passed the great test of initiation who
has not accustomed himself to pass lesser tests every day of his life;
tests then come to be regarded as normal, and are considered, when
encountered, as part of the usual fabric of his life. When this attitude
of mind is attained and held, there exists no surprise or possible
defeat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. The Seven Paths](ihas21)
