[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ihas24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301107/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Initiation, Human and Solar*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

### GLOSSARY

*Adept*. A Master, or human being who, having traversed the path of
evolution and entered upon the final stage of the path, the Path of
Initiation, has taken five of the Initiations, and has therefore passed
into the Fifth, or Spiritual kingdom, having but two more Initiations to
take.

*Adi*. The First; the primeval; the atomic plane of the solar system;
the highest of the seven planes.

*Agni*. The Lord of Fire in the Vedas. The oldest and most revered of
the Gods in India. One of the three great deities Agni, Vayu and Surya,
and also all the three, as he is the triple aspect of fire; fire is the
essence of the solar system. The Bible says: "Our God is a consuming
fire." It is also the symbol of the mental plane of which Agni is
paramountly lord.

*Agnichaitans*. A group of fire devas.

*Atlantis*. The continent that was submerged in the Atlantic ocean,
according to the occult teaching and Plato. Atlantis was the home of the
Fourth Root Race, whom we now call the Atlanteans.

*Antahkarana*. The path, or bridge, between higher and lower mind,
serving as a medium of communication between the two. It is built by the
aspirant himself in mental matter.

*Ashram*. The centre to which the Master gathers the disciples and
aspirants for personal instruction.

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

*Atma*. The Universal Spirit; the divine Monad; the seventh Principle;
so called in the septenary constitution of man. (See diagram in
Introduction.)

*Atomic subplane*. The matter of the solar system is divided by the
[occultists](errata.htm#2) into seven planes or states, the highest of
which is the atomic plane. Similarly, each of the seven planes is
divided into seven subplanes, of which the highest is called the atomic
subplane. There are therefore forty-nine subplanes, and seven of these
are atomic.

*Aura*. A subtle invisible essence or fluid which emanates from human
and animal bodies, and even from things. It is a psychic effluvium,
partaking of both mind and body. It is electro-vital, and also
electro-mental.

*Auric egg*. An appellation that has been given to the causal body owing
to its form.

*Bodhisattva*. Literally, he whose consciousness has become
intelligence, or buddhi. Those who need but one more incarnation to
become perfect buddhas. As used in these letters the Bodhisattva is the
name of the office which is at present occupied by the Lord Maitreya,
Who is known in the occident as the Christ. This office might be
translated as that of World Teacher. The Bodhisattva is the Head of all
the religions of the world, and the Master of the Masters and of the
angels.

*Buddha* (The) . The name given to Gautama. Born in India about B.C. 621
he became a full buddha in B.C. 592. The Buddha is one who is the
"Enlightened," and has attained the highest degree of knowledge possible
for man in this solar system.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

*Buddhi*. The Universal Soul or Mind. It is the spiritual soul in man
(the Sixth Principle) and therefore the vehicle of Atma, the Spirit,
which is the Seventh Principle.

*Causal Body*. This body is, from the standpoint of the physical plane,
no body, either subjective or objective. It is, nevertheless, the centre
of the egoic consciousness, and is formed of the conjunction of buddhi
and manas. It is relatively permanent and lasts throughout the long
cycle of incarnations, and is only dissipated after the fourth
initiation, when the need for further rebirth on the part of a human
being no longer exists.

*Chohan*. Lord, Master, a Chief. In this book it refers to those Adepts
who have gone on and taken the sixth initiation.

*Deva* (or Angel) . A god. In Sanskrit a resplendent deity. A Deva is a
celestial being, whether good, bad, or indifferent. Devas are divided
into many groups, and are called not only angels and archangels, but
lesser and greater builders.

*Egoic Groups*. On the third subplane of the fifth plane, the mental,
are found the causal bodies of the individual men and women. These
bodies, which are the expression of the Ego, or of the individualised
self-consciousness, are gathered together into groups according to the
ray or quality of the particular Ego involved.

*Elementals*. The Spirits of the Elements; the creatures involved in the
four kingdoms, or elements, Earth. Air, Fire, and Water. Except a few of
the higher kinds and their rulers they are forces of nature more than
ethereal men and women.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

*Etheric body*. (Etheric double.) The physical body of a human being is,
according to occult teaching, formed of two parts, the dense physical
body, and the etheric body. The dense physical body is formed of matter
of the lowest three subplanes of the physical plane. The etheric body is
formed of the four highest or etheric subplanes of the physical plane.

*Fifth Principle*. The principle of mind; that faculty in man which is
the intelligent thinking principle, and which differentiates man from
the animals.

*Fohat*. Cosmic electricity; primordial light; the ever-present
electrical energy; the universal propelling vital force; the ceaseless
destructive and formative power; the synthesis of the many forms of
electrical phenomena.

*Guru*. Spiritual Teacher. A Master in metaphysical and ethical
doctrines.

*Hierarchy*. That group of spiritual beings on the inner planes of the
solar system who are the intelligent forces of nature, and who control
the evolutionary processes. They are themselves divided into twelve
Hierarchies. Within our planetary scheme, the earth scheme, there is a
reflection of this Hierarchy which is called by the occultist the Occult
Hierarchy. This Hierarchy is formed of chohans, adepts, and initiates
working through their disciples, and, by this means, in the world. (See
diagram page [48](ihas09.htm#page_48).)

*Initiations*. From the Latin root meaning the first principles of any
science. Process of penetrating into the mysteries of the science of the
Self and of the one self in all selves. The Path of Initiation is the
final stage of

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

the path of evolution trodden by man, and is divided into five stages,
called the Five Initiations.

*Jiva*. A separated unit of consciousness.

*Kali yuga*. "Yuga" is an age or cycle. According to the Indian
philosophy our evolution is divided into four yugas or cycles. The
Kali-yuga is the present age. It means the "Black Age," a period of
432,000 years.

*Karma*. Physical action. Metaphysically, the law of retribution; the
law of cause and effect, or ethical causation. There is the karma of
merit and the karma of demerit. It is the power that controls all
things, the resultant of moral action, or the moral effect of an act
committed for the attainment of something which gratifies a personal
desire.

*Kumaras*. The highest seven self-conscious beings in the solar system.
These seven Kumaras manifest through the medium of a planetary scheme in
the same way as a human being manifests through the medium of a physical
body. They are called by the Hindu "the mind-born sons of Brahma"
amongst other names. They are the sumtotal of intelligence and of
wisdom. Within the planetary scheme the reflection of the systemic order
is also seen. At the head of our world evolution stands the first
Kumara, aided by six other Kumaras, three exoteric and three esoteric,
Who are the focal points for the distribution of the force of the
systemic Kumaras.

*Kundalini*. The power of Life: one of the forces of nature. It is a
power known only to those who practise concentration in yoga, and is
centred within the spine.

*Lemuria*. A modern term first used by some naturalists and now adopted
by Theosophists to indicate a continent

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

that, according to the Secret Doctrine of the East, preceded Atlantis.
It was the home of the third root race.

*Logos*. The deity manifested through every nation and people. The
outward expression, or the effect of the cause which is ever concealed.
Thus, speech is the Logos of thought, hence it is aptly translated by
the "verbum" and the "word" in its metaphysical sense. (See John 1:
1–3.)

*Lord of Civilisation*. (See Mahachohan.)

*Lords of the Flame*. One of the great Hierarchies of spiritual beings
who guide the solar system. They took control of the evolution of
humanity upon this planet about 18 million years ago, during the middle
of the Lemurian, or third root race.

*Macrocosm*. The great universe, literally; or God manifesting through
His body, the solar system.

*Mahachohan*. The Head of the third great department of the Hierarchy.
This great being is the Lord of Civilisation, and the flowering forth of
the principle of intelligence. He is the embodiment on the planet of the
third, or intelligence aspect of deity in its five activities.

*Mahamanvantara*. The great interludes of time between two solar
systems. This term is frequently applied to the greater solar cycles. It
implies a period of universal activity.

*Manas, or Manasic Principle*. Literally, the Mind, the mental faculty;
that which distinguishes man from the mere animal. It is the
individualising principle; that which enables man to know that he
exists, feels, and knows. It is divided in some schools into two parts,
higher or abstract mind, and lower or concrete mind.

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

*Mantrams*. Verses from the Vedas. In the exoteric sense a mantram (or
that psychic faculty or power that conveys perception or thought) is the
older portion of the Vedas, the second part of which is composed of the
Brahmanas. In esoteric phraseology mantram is the word made flesh, or
rendered objective through divine magic. A form of words or syllables
rhythmically arranged, so that when sounded certain vibrations are
generated.

*Manu*. The representative name of the great Being Who is the Ruler,
primal progenitor and chief of the human race. It comes from the
Sanskrit root "man"—to think.

*Manvantara*. A period of activity as opposed to a period of rest,
without reference to any specific length of cycle. Frequently used to
express a period of planetary activity and its seven races.

*Maya*. Sanskrit, "Illusion." Of the principle of form or limitation.
The result of manifestation. Generally used in a relative sense for
phenomena or objective appearances that are created by the mind.

*Mayavi Rupa*. Sanskrit, "Illusive Form." It is the body of
manifestation created by the adept by an act of will for use in the
three worlds. It has no material connection with the physical body. It
is spiritual and ethereal and passes everywhere without let or
hindrance. It is built by the power of the lower mind, of the highest
type of astral matter.

*Microcosm*. The little universe, or man manifesting through his body,
the physical body.

*Monad*. The One. The threefold spirit on its own plane. In occultism it
often means the unified triad—Atma, Buddhi, Manas; Spiritual Will,
Intuition and Higher

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

mind,—or the immortal part of man which reincarnates in the lower
kingdoms and gradually progresses through them to man and thence to the
final goal.

*Nirmanakaya*. Those perfected beings who renounce Nirvana (the highest
state of spiritual bliss) and choose a life of self-sacrifice, becoming
members of that invisible host which ever protects humanity within
karmic limits.

*Permanent atom*. Those five atoms, with the mental unit, one on each of
the five planes of human evolution (the mental unit being also on the
mental plane) which the monad appropriates for purposes of
manifestation. They form a stable centre and are relatively permanent.
Around them the various sheaths or bodies are built. They are literally
small force centres.

*Planetary Logos*. This term is generally applied to the seven highest
spirits corresponding to the seven archangels of the Christian. They
have all passed through the human stage and are now manifesting through
a planet and its evolutions, in the same way that man manifests through
his physical body. The highest planetary spirit working through any
particular globe is, in reality, the personal God of the planet.

*Prakriti*. Derives its name from its function as the material cause of
the first evolution of the universe. It may be said to be composed of
two roots, "pra" to manifest, and "krita" to make; meaning, that which
caused the universe to manifest itself.

*Prana*. The Life Principle, the breath of Life. The occultist believes
the following statement: "Life we look upon as the one form of
existence, manifesting in what is called matter, or what, incorrectly
separating then.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

we name Spirit, Soul, and Matter in man. Matter is the vehicle for the
manifestation of soul on this plane of existence; soul is the vehicle
for the manifestation of spirit, and these three as a trinity are
synthesised by Life, which pervades them all."

*Purusha*. The spiritual self. The embodied self. The word literally
means "The dweller in the city"—that is, in the body. It is derived from
the Sanskrit "pura" which means city or body, and "usha" a derivative of
the verb "vas," to dwell.

*Quaternary*. The fourfold lower self, or man, in the three worlds.
There are various divisions of this, but perhaps for our purpose the
best is to enumerate the four as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. Lower mind.

2\. Emotional or [karmic](errata.htm#3) body.

3\. Prana, or the Life Principle.

4\. The etheric body, or the highest division of the twofold physical
body.

</div>

*Raja Lord*. The word "Raja" simply means King or Prince; the word has
been applied to those great angels or entities who ensoul the seven
planes. These are great devas who are the sumtotal and the controlling
intelligence of a plane.

*Raja Yoga*. The true system of developing psychic and spiritual powers
and union with one's higher self or the Ego. It involves the exercise,
regulation, and concentration of thought.

*Ray*. One of the seven streams of force of the Logos; the seven great
lights. Each of them is the embodiment of a great cosmic entity. The
seven Rays can be divided

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

into the three Rays of Aspect and the four Rays of Attribute, as
follows:

*Rays of Aspect*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The Ray of Will, or Power.

2\. The Ray of Love-Wisdom.

3\. The Ray of Activity or Adaptability.

</div>

*Rays of Attribute*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

4\. The Ray of Harmony, Beauty, Art, or Unity.

5\. The Ray of Concrete Knowledge or Science.

6\. The Ray of Abstract Idealism or Devotion.

7\. The Ray of Ceremonial Magic, or Law.

</div>

The above names are simply some chosen from among many, and embody the
different aspects of force by means of which the Logos manifests.

*Ring-pass-not*. This is at the circumference of the manifested solar
system, and is the periphery of the influence of the sun, both
esoterically and exoterically understood. The limit of the field of
activity of the central life force.

*Root Race*. One of the seven races of man which evolve upon a planet
during the great cycle of planetary existence. This cycle is called a
world period. The Aryan root race, to which the Hindu, European, and
modern American races belong, is the fifth, the Chinese and Japanese
belonging to the fourth race.

*Sensa, or Senzar*. The name for the secret sacerdotal language, or the
"mystery speech" of the initiated adepts all over the world. It is a
universal language, and largely a hieroglyphic cypher.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

*Shamballa*. The City of the Gods, which is in the West to some nations,
in the East to others, in the North or South to yet others. It is the
sacred island in the Gobi Desert. It is the home of mysticism and the
Secret Doctrine.

*Triad*. The Spiritual Man; the expression of the monad. It is the
germinal spirit containing the potentialities of divinity. These
potentialities will be unfolded during the course of evolution. This
Triad forms the individualised or separated self, or Ego.

*Viveka*. The Sanskrit "discrimination." The very first step in the path
of occultism is the discrimination between the real and the unreal,
between substance and phenomenon, between the Self and the Not-self,
between spirit and matter.

*Wesak*. A festival which takes place in the [Himalayas](errata.htm#4)
at the full moon of May. It is said that at this festival, at which all
the members of the Hierarchy are present, the Buddha, for a brief
period, renews his touch and association with the work of our planet.

*Yoga*. 1. One of the six schools of India, said to be founded by
Patanjali, but really of much earlier origin. 2. The practice of
Meditation as a means of leading to spiritual liberation.

*Note:* This glossary does not undertake fully to explain all the above
terms. It is simply an attempt to render into English certain words used
in this book, so that the reader may understand their connotation. The
majority of the definitions have been culled from the Theosophical
Glossary, The Secret Doctrine, and the Voice of the Silence.

 

 

 

 

 
