[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ihas07)  [Next](ihas09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301107/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Initiation, Human and Solar*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

### CHAPTER V

#### THE THREE DEPARTMENTS OF THE HIERARCHY

We have already dealt with the subject of the founding of the Hierarchy
upon earth, and we saw how it came to be, touching likewise upon certain
crises which have occurred, and which still affect events in the present
time. In dealing with the work and aims of the personnel of the
Hierarchy, it will not be possible to state what those aims have been,
nor to consider in detail who the active personalities have been during
the past millennia of years since the Hierarchy came into existence.

Many great Beings from planetary and solar sources, and once or twice
from cosmic sources, have at times lent Their aid and dwelt briefly upon
our planet. By the energy which flowed through Them, and by Their
profound wisdom and experience, They stimulated earth's evolutions and
brought the purposes of the Planetary Logos so much the nearer to
completion. Then They passed on, and Their places were taken by those
among the members of the Hierarchy Who were willing to undergo a
specific training and expansion of consciousness. In turn these adepts
and Masters had Their places filled by initiates, and thus constantly
has there been opportunity for disciples and highly evolved men and
women to pass into the ranks of the Hierarchy, and thus constantly has
there been a circulation of new life and blood, and the coming in of
those who belong to a particular period or age.

Some of the great names during the later periods are known to history,
such as Shri Sankaracharya, Vyasa,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mahommet, Jesus of
Nazareth, and Krishna, down to those lesser initiates, Paul of Tarsus,
Luther, and certain of the outstanding lights in European history.
Always have these men and women been agents for the carrying out of race
purpose, for the bringing about of group conditions, and for the
furthering of the evolution of humanity. Sometimes they have appeared as
beneficent forces, bringing peace and contentment with them. More often
have they come as agents of destruction, breaking up the old forms of
religion and of government in order that the life within the rapidly
crystallising form might be set free and build for itself a newer and a
better vehicle.

Much that is stated here is already well known, and has already been
given out in the different occult books. Yet in the wise and careful
enunciation of collected facts, and their correlation with that which
may be new to some students, comes an eventual synthetic grasp of the
great plan, and a wise uniform realisation as to the work of that great
group of liberated souls who, in utter self-abnegation, stand silently
behind the world panorama. Through the power of their will, the strength
of their meditations, the wisdom of their plans, and the scientific
knowledge of energy which is theirs, they direct those force currents,
and control those form-building agencies which produce all that is seen
and unseen, movable and immovable in the sphere of creation within the
three worlds. This, coupled to their vast experience, is what fits them
to be the agents for the distribution of the energy of the Planetary
Logos.

As has already been stated, at the head of affairs, controlling each
unit and directing all evolution, stands the KING, the Lord of the
World, Sanat Kumara, the Youth of Endless Summers, and the Fountainhead
of the Will, (showing forth as Love) of the Planetary Logos.
Co-operating with Him as His advisers are three Personalities

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

called the Pratyeka Buddhas, or the Buddhas of Activity. These four are
the embodiment of active intelligent loving will. They are the full
flowering of the intelligence, having achieved in an earlier solar
system that which man is now striving to perfect. In earlier cycles in
this system They began to demonstrate intelligent love, and from the
standpoint of the average human being They are perfect love and perfect
intelligence, though from the standpoint of that Existence Who embraces
even our planetary scheme in His body of manifestation, that love aspect
is as yet but in process of developing, and the will is only embryonic.
Another solar system will see the will aspect come to fruition, as love
will mature in this.

Standing around the Lord of the World, but withdrawn and esoteric, are
three more Kumaras, Who make the seven of planetary manifestation. Their
work is to us necessarily obscure. The three exoteric Buddhas, or
Kumaras, are the sumtotal of activity or planetary energy, and the three
esoteric Kumaras embody types of energy which as yet are not in full
demonstration upon our planet. Each of these six Kumaras is a reflection
of, and the distributing agent for, the energy and force of one of the
six other Planetary Logoi, the remaining six spirits before the Throne.
Sanat Kumara alone, in this scheme, is self-sustaining and
self-sufficient, being the physical incarnation of one of the Planetary
Logoi, which one it is not permissible to state, as this fact is one of
the secrets of initiation. Through each of Them passes the life force of
one of the six rays, and in considering Them one might sum up Their work
and position as follows:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. They each embody one of the six types of energy, with the Lord of
the World as the synthesiser and the embodier of the perfect seventh
type, our planetary type.

</div>

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

2\. They are each distinguished by one of the six colours, with the Lord
of the World showing forth the full planetary colour, these six being
subsidiary.

3\. Their work is therefore concerned, not only with force distribution,
but with the passing into our scheme from other planetary schemes, of
Egos seeking earth experience.

4\. Each of Them is in direct communication with one or another of the
sacred planets.

5\. According to astrological conditions, and according to the turning
of the planetary wheel of life, so one or another of these Kumaras will
be active. The three Buddhas of Activity change from time to time, and
become in turn exoteric or esoteric as the case may be. Only the King
persists steadily and watchfully in active physical incarnation.

</div>

Besides these main presiding Personalities in the Council Chamber at
Shamballa, there is a group of four Beings Who are the representatives
upon the planet of the four Maharajas, or the four Lords of Karma in the
solar system, who are specifically concerned with the evolution at the
present time of the human kingdom. These four are connected with:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The distribution of karma, or human destiny, as it affects
individuals, and through the individuals, the groups.

2\. The care and tabulation of the akashic records. They are concerned
with the Halls of Records, or with the "keeping of the book," as it is
called in the Christian Bible; They are known in the Christian world as
the recording angels.

</div>

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

3\. The participation in solar councils. They alone have the right
during the world cycle to pass beyond the periphery of the planetary
scheme, and participate in the councils of the Solar Logos. Thus They
are literally planetary mediators, representing our Planetary Logos and
all that concerns Him in the greater scheme of which He is but a part.

</div>

Co-operating with these karmic Lords are the large groups of initiates
and devas who occupy themselves with the right adjustment of:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. World karma,

b\. Racial karma,

c\. National karma,

d\. Group karma,

e\. Individual karma,

</div>

and who are responsible to the Planetary Logos for the correct
manipulation of those forces and building agencies which bring in the
right Egos on the different rays at the correct times and seasons.

With all these groups we have little concern, for they are contacted
only by initiates of the third initiation, and by those of even more
exalted rank.

The remaining personnel of the Hierarchy is divided into three main and
four subsidiary groups, each of these groups, as will be seen by
reference to the appended chart, being presided over by one of Those
Whom we call the three Great Lords.

*The work of the Manu*.

The Manu presides over group one. He is called Vaivasvata Manu, and is
the Manu of the fifth root-race. He

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

is the ideal man or thinker, and sets the type for our Aryan race,
having presided over its destinies since its inception nearly one
hundred thousand years ago. Other Manus have come and gone and His place
will be, in the relatively near future, taken by someone else. He will
then pass on to other work of a more exalted kind. The Manu, or the
prototype of the fourth root-race, works in close co-operation with Him,
and has His centre of influence in China. He is the second Manu that the
fourth root-race has had, having taken the place of the earlier Manu at
the time of the final stages of Atlantean destruction. He has remained
to foster the development of the race type, and to bring about its final
disappearance. The periods of office of all the Manus overlap, but there
remains no representative of the third root-race upon the globe at this
time. Vaivasvata Manu has His dwelling place in the Himalaya mountains.
and has gathered around Him at Shigatse some of those immediately
connected with Aryan affairs in India, Europe and America, and those who
will later be concerned with the coming sixth root-race. The plans are
prepared for ages ahead, centres of energy are formed thousands of years
before they will be required, and in the wise fore-knowledge of these
Divine Men nothing is left to sudden eventuation, but all moves in
ordered cycles and under rule and law, though within karmic limitations.

The work of the Manu is largely concerned with government, with
planetary politics, and with the founding, direction, and dissolution of
racial types and forms. To Him is committed the will and purpose of the
Planetary Logos. He knows what is the immediate objective for this cycle
of evolution over which He has to preside, and His work concerns itself
with making that will an accomplished fact. He works in closer
co-operation with the building devas than does His Brother, the Christ,
for to Him is

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

given the work of setting the race type, of segregating the groups out
of which races will develop, of manipulating the forces which move the
earth's crust, of raising and lowering continents, of directing the
minds of statesmen everywhere so that racial government will proceed as
desired, and conditions be brought about which will produce those needed
for the fostering of any particular type. Such a work can now be seen
demonstrating in North America and Australia.

The energy which flows through Him emanates from the head centre of the
Planetary Logos, passing to Him through the brain of Sanat Kumara, Who
focalises all the planetary energy within Himself. He works by the means
of a dynamic meditation, conducted within the head centre, and produces
His results through His perfect realisation of that which has to be
accomplished, through a power to visualise that which must be done to
bring about accomplishment, and through a capacity to transmit creative
and destructive energy to those who are His assistants. And all this is
brought about through the power of the enunciated sound.

*The work of the World Teacher, the Christ*.

Group two has the World Teacher for its presiding Head. He is that Great
Being Whom the Christian calls the Christ; He is known also in the
Orient as the Bodhisattva, and as the Lord Maitreya, and is the One
looked for by the devout Mohammedan, under the name of the Iman Madhi.
He it is Who has presided over the destinies of life since about 600
B.C. and He it is Who has come out among men before, and Who is again
looked for. He is the great Lord of Love and of Compassion, just as his
predecessor, the Buddha, was the Lord of Wisdom.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Through Him flows
the energy of the second aspect, reaching Him direct from the heart
centre of the Planetary Logos via the heart of Sanat Kumara. He works by
means of a meditation centred within the heart. He is the World Teacher,
the Master of the Masters, and the Instructor of the Angels, and to Him
is committed the guidance of the spiritual destinies of men, and the
development of the realisation within each human being that he is a
child of God and a son of the Most High.

Just as the Manu is occupied with the providing of the type and forms
through which consciousness can evolve and gather experience, thus
making existence in its deepest sense possible, so the World Teacher
directs that indwelling consciousness in its life or spirit aspect,
seeking to energise it within the form so that, in due course of time,
that form can be discarded and the liberated spirit return whence it
came. Ever since He left the earth, as related with approximate accuracy
in the Bible story (though with much error in detail) has He stayed with
the sons of men; never has He really gone, but only in appearance, and
in a physical body He can be found by those who know the way, dwelling
in the Himalayas, and working in close co-operation with His two great
Brothers, the Manu and the Mahachohan. Daily He pours out His blessing
on the world, and daily He stands under the great pine in His garden at
the sunset hour with hands uplifted in blessing over all those who truly
and earnestly seek to aspire. To Him all seekers are known, and, though
they may remain unaware of Him, the light which He pours forth
stimulates their desire, fosters the spark of struggling life and spurs
on the aspirant until the momentous day dawns when they stand face to
face with the One Who by being "lifted up" (occultly understood) is
drawing all men unto Himself as the Initiator of the sacred mysteries.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

*The work of the Lord of Civilisation, the Mahachohan*.

Group three has as its Head the Mahachohan. His rule over the group
persists for a longer period than that of His two Brothers, and He may
hold office for the term of several root-races. He is the sumtotal of
the intelligence aspect. The present Mahachohan is not the original one
Who held the office at the founding of the Hierarchy in Lemurian days—it
was then held by one of the Kumaras, or Lords of the Flame, Who came
into incarnation with Sanat Kumara—but He took hold of His position
during the second sub-race of the Atlantean root-race. He had achieved
adeptship on the moon-chain, and it was through His instrumentality that
a large number of the present more advanced human beings came into
incarnation in the middle of the Atlantean root-race. Karmic affiliation
with Him was one of the predisposing causes, thus making this
eventuality possible.

His work concerns itself with the fostering and strengthening of that
relation between spirit and matter, life and form, the self and the
not-self, which results in what we call civilisation. He manipulates the
forces of nature, and is largely the emanating source of electrical
energy as we know it. Being the reflection of the third, or creative
aspect, energy from the Planetary Logos flows to Him from the throat
centre, and He it is Who in many ways makes the work of His Brothers
possible. Their plans and desires are submitted to Him, and through Him
pass the instructions to a large number of the deva agents.

Thus you have Will, Love, and Intelligence represented in these three
great Lords; you have the self, the not-self, and the relation between
synthesised in the unity of manifestation; you have racial government,
religion and civilisation forming a coherent whole, and you have
physical manifestation, the love or desire aspect, and the mind

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

of the Planetary Logos working out into objectivity. The closest
co-operation and unity exists between these three Personalities, and
every move and plan and event exists in Their united foreknowledge. They
are in daily touch with the Lord of the World at Shamballa, and the
entire guidance of affairs rests in Their hands, and in those of the
Manu of the fourth root-race. The World Teacher holds office in
connection with both the fourth and fifth root-races.

Each of these departmental heads directs a number of subsidiary offices,
and the department of the Mahachohan is divided into five divisions, so
as to take in the four lesser aspects of Hierarchical rule.

Under the Manu work the regents of the different world divisions, such
as, for instance, the Master Jupiter, the oldest of the Masters now
working in physical bodies for humanity, Who is the regent for India,
and the Master Rakoczi, Who is the regent for Europe and America. It
must be remembered here that though the Master R., for instance, belongs
to the seventh ray, and thus comes under the department of energy of the
Mahachohan, yet in Hierarchical work He may and does hold office
temporarily under the Manu. These regents hold in Their hands the reins
of government for continents and nations, thus guiding, even if unknown,
their destinies; They impress and inspire statesmen and rulers; They
pour forth mental energy on governing groups, thus bringing about the
desired results wherever co-operation and receptive intuition can be
found amongst the thinkers.

The World Teacher presides over the destiny of the great religions
through the medium of a group of Masters and initiates Who direct the
activities of these different schools of thought. In illustration:—The
Master Jesus, the inspirer and director of the Christian Churches every

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

where, though an adept on the sixth ray under the department of the
Mahachohan, works at present under the Christ for the welfare of
Christianity; other Masters hold similar posts in relation to the great
oriental faiths, and the various occidental schools of thought.

In the department of the Mahachohan a large number of Masters, in
fivefold division, work in connection with the deva evolution, and with
the intelligence aspect in man. Their divisions follow those of the four
minor rays of attribute:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. The ray of harmony or beauty.

2\. The ray of concrete science or knowledge.

3\. The ray of devotion or abstract idealism.

4\. The ray of ceremonial law or magic,

</div>

just as the three departmental heads represent the three major rays of:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

  I. Will or power.

 II. Love or wisdom.

III\. Active intelligence, or adaptability.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The four rays or
attributes of mind, with the third ray of intelligence, as synthesised
by the Mahachohan, make up the sumtotal of the fifth principle of mind
or manas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Lodge of Masters](ihas09.md)
