[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ihas16)  [Next](ihas18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301107/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Initiation, Human and Solar*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

#### THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE OATH

*The Work of the Lodge during Initiation*.

We now come to the most solemn part of the initiation ceremony. This
ceremony, from one point of view, divides itself into three parts:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

First. That in which the initiate is concerned and in which he realises
his own august Self, the Presence, and sees the vision and the plan.

Second. That in which the Initiator is concerned, in which He wields the
Rod of Fire, and effects certain specific results in the body of the
applicant.

Third. That in which certain words and formulas are committed to the
initiate by the Hierophant, and which he carries away within his
consciousness in order the better to carry out that portion of the plan
which concerns himself.

</div>

During the whole procedure the Lodge of Masters, congregated without the
Triangle of force, has been occupied with a three-fold work, Their aim
being to produce certain results in the consciousness of the initiate
and thus to aid the Hierophant in His strenuous endeavour. It must be
remembered that under the law of economy wherever there is an
application or a transmission of force from one force centre to another
there is a consequent diminution in the centre of withdrawal. This is
the basis of the set times and seasons in connection with the initiation
ceremony. The sun

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

is the source of all energy and power, and the work of the Initiator is
facilitated when advantage is taken of favourable solar conditions. The
times and seasons are ascertained through esoteric solar and cosmic
astrology; this being based, of course, on the correct figures, the true
mathematical conception, and a real knowledge of the basic facts
concerning the planets and the solar system. The horoscope of the
initiate is also invariably cast so as to check the time for an
individual initiation, and only when the individual signs blend and
coincide with the ceremonial chart by which the Initiator is guided, is
it possible to perform the ceremony. This is the reason why sometimes
initiation has to be postponed to a later life, even when the initiate
has done the necessary work.

The threefold work of the Lodge during the ceremony may be described as
follows:—

First: The chanting of certain mantrams sets loose energy from a
particular planetary centre. It must be remembered here that every
planetary scheme is a centre in the body of a Solar Logos, and embodies
a peculiar type of energy or force. According to the energy desired at a
particular initiation, so it is transferred, via the sun, from that
planetary centre to the initiate. The procedure is as follows:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. The energy is set in motion from the planetary centre through the
power of the Planetary Logos, aided by the scientific knowledge of the
Lodge, and the utilisation of certain words of power.

b\. It passes thence to the sun where it mingles with pure solar energy.

c\. It is transmitted from the sun to that particular chain in our Earth
scheme which corresponds numerically to the particular originating
planetary scheme.

</div>

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

d\. From there it is transferred to the corresponding globe, and thence
to the dense physical planet. By the use of a particular mantram the
Initiator then focuses the energy in His own body, using it both as a
receiving and a transmitting station. Eventually it reaches the
initiate, via the Triangle and the Sponsors. It will be apparent,
therefore, to the student that when the Initiator is the Lord of the
World, or the physical reflection of the Planetary Logos of our scheme,
the force comes more directly to the initiate than at the first two
initiations, wherein the Bodhisattva is the Hierophant. Only at the
third initiation will the initiate be in a condition to receive *direct*
planetary force.

</div>

Second: The concentration undertaken by the Lodge assists the initiate
to realise within himself the various processes undergone. This is
accomplished by working definitely on. his mental body, and thus
stimulating all the atoms, through the united thought power of the
Masters. The work of apprehension is thus directly aided. This
concentration in no way resembles hypnotic suggestion, or the powerful
impress of stronger minds upon the weaker. It takes the form of a
strenuous meditation by the assembled Masters and initiates upon the
realities concerned and upon the Self; through the force thus liberated
the initiate is enabled to transfer his consciousness more easily away
from the not-self to the divine essentials wherewith he is immediately
concerned. The thought power of the Masters succeeds in shutting out the
vibration of the three worlds and enables the applicant literally to
"leave behind him" all the past and to have that far-seeing vision which
sees the end from the beginning and the things of time as though they
were not.

Third: Through certain ceremonial rhythmic action the

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lodge greatly
assists in the work of initiation. Just as in the Wesak Festival,
results in force demonstration arc brought about by the use of chanted
mantrams and the sacred ceremonial pacing and interweaving of the
assembled crowd in the formation of geometrical figures, so in the
initiation ceremony a similar procedure is followed. The geometrical
figures appropriate for the various initiations differ, and herein lies
one of the safeguards of the ceremony. The initiate knows the set figure
for his own initiation, but no more.

All these three aspects of the work of the Masters and initiates in
Lodge assembled, occupy them until the moment when the Rod has been
applied. Through its application the initiate has become a member of the
Lodge, and the entire ceremonial then changes, prior to the taking of
the oath and the revelation of the Word and Secret.

The Sponsors drop back from either side of the initiate and take Their
places in the ranks, whilst the three Buddhas of Activity (or Their
representatives at the first two initiations) take Their stand behind
the seat of office of the Hierophant. The Lodge members are grouped
differently, and initiates of the same degree as the newly admitted
applicant place themselves around him, and assist in the final part of
the ceremony; the remainder of the initiates and adepts stand in their
various grades.

The earlier three stages of the initiation ceremony are the same for all
initiations. In the final two stages those who are not of equal rank
with the newly made initiate (such as first degree initiates at the
initiation of a third degree member) drop back to the rear of the Hall
of Initiation at Shamballa, and a "wall of silence" is built up through
mantric energy between the two groups; a vacuum, so to speak, is formed,
and nothing can then be transmitted from the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

inner group to the outer. The latter confine themselves to deep
meditation and the chanting of certain formulas, and in the inner group
around the Hierophant a dual performance is taking place:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. The newly made initiate is taking the oath.

b\. Certain Words and Secrets are being handed over to him.

</div>

*Two Types of Oaths*.

All oaths connected with the occult Hierarchy may be divided into two
groups:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. *The Oath of Initiation*, in which the initiate binds himself by the
most solemn pledges never to reveal, on pain of summary punishment, any
occult secret, or to express in words outside the Initiation Hall that
which has been committed to his keeping.

2\. *The Oath of Office*, administered when any member of the Lodge
takes a specific post in Hierarchical work. This oath deals with his
functions and with his relations to

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. The Lord of the World,

b\. His immediate superior,

c\. His fellow workers in the Lodge,

d\. The world of men whom he is to serve.

</div>

</div>

It is needless to say more here regarding this latter type of oath, as
it concerns only officials of the Hierarchy.

*The Oath of Initiation*.

The Oath of Initiation, with which we are dealing now, is divided into
three sections, and is administered by the Hierophant to the initiate,
being repeated after the Initiator

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

phrase by phrase; it is punctuated at various points by the chanting, by
initiates of the same degree, of words in Sensa equivalent to "So let it
be."

The three divisions of the oath may be roughly described as:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. A solemn phrase embodying the purpose actuating the initiate, a
protestation as to his unchangeable will-attitude, and a solemn
declaration as to his realisation, coupled with a promise to reveal no
part of the realised purpose except in so far as his daily life in the
world of men and his service for the race will proclaim it. This
involves an oath as to secrecy concerning the revealed part of the
Logoic plan seen in the "revelation of the vision."

2\. An undertaking of a profoundly solemn nature concerning his relation
to his other selves, the Lodge of which he is a member, and the selves
of men everywhere. This involves his attitude to his brothers of all
degrees, and includes also a serious undertaking never to reveal the
true nature of the Self aspect as it has been shown to him in
initiation. This includes an oath of secrecy as to the realised
relationship of the Solar Logos to the Planetary Logos, and of the
Planetary Logos of our scheme to the scheme itself.

3\. The enunciation of a solemn undertaking never to reveal to anyone
the knowledge that has come to him as to the sources of energy and of
force with which he has been brought into contact. This is a triple oath
to retain complete silence as to the true nature of energy, as to its
laws of manipulation, and a pledge only to use the force placed at his
disposal through initiation for the service of the race and the
furthering of the plans of the Planetary Logos.

</div>

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

This great oath is couched in different terms, according to the
initiation undergone, and, as earlier said, is taken in three sections
with an interlude between each part occupied by certain ceremonial work
of the initiated group around the newly admitted brother.

It might here be noted that each section of the oath really concerns one
of the three aspects of divine manifestation, and as the initiate takes
his pledge, one of the three Heads of Departments collaborates with the
Initiator in the work of administration. In this way energy of a triple
nature becomes available according to the different sections of the oath
taken. This energy flows down from the three major rays, through the
Hierophant and the corresponding departmental head at the first two
initiations, to the initiate, via the group of initials of the same
degree, so that each initiation is a means of stimulation and expansion
to all. At the final five initiations the force flows via the three
Buddhas of Activity instead of the departmental heads.

It might be of interest to point out here that during this part of the
ceremony the group is bathed in colour, corresponding to the type of
energy and its originating planetary scheme, and it is the work of the
Initiator to put the initiate in touch with this energy. This pours down
upon the group from the moment that segregation has been effected, and
is brought about by the Initiator using certain words and elevating His
Rod of Power. The three Buddhas of Activity, Who are the great energy
centres upon our planet, then touch the tip of the Rod with Their staffs
of office, a certain mystic Word is jointly uttered by Them, and the
downpour begins, continuing to the end of the ceremony.

The question may be asked whether any initiates break their oath. Very
rarely, for we must remember that no

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

initiation is taken until a certain stage has been reached. A few cases
have occurred, but as the Lord of the World is cognisant of all that
transpires, the future, as well as the present and the past, no
opportunity is ever given to an initiate to reveal that which is hidden.
Intent may exist. but opportunity will lack. The initiate who thus sins
in intention will be struck dumb, and sometimes dead, prior to thus
failing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. The Giving of the Word](ihas18.md)
