[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ihas08)  [Next](ihas10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0853301107/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Initiation, Human and Solar*, by Alice A. Bailey, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span id="img_04800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Solar and
Planetary Hierarchies](tn/04800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04800.jpg)  
Solar and Planetary Hierarchies  
</span>

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span id="img_04900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Key to Diagram of
Solar and Planetary Hierarchies](tn/04900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04900.jpg)  
Key to Diagram of Solar and Planetary Hierarchies  
</span>

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

### CHAPTER VI

#### THE LODGE OF MASTERS

*The divisions*.

We have considered somewhat the highest offices in the ranks of the
Hierarchy of our planet. Now we will deal with what we might call the
two divisions into which the remaining members are divided. They form
literally two Lodges within the greater body:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

a\. The —— Lodge, comprised of initiates above the fifth initiation, and
a group of devas or angels.

b\. The Blue Lodge, comprised of all initiates of the third, fourth, and
fifth initiations.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Below these come a
large group of initiates of the first and second initiations, and then
the disciples of every grade. The disciples are considered as affiliated
with the Lodge, but not as literally members of it. Finally come those
who are on probation, and who hope through strenuous effort to achieve
affiliation.

From another point of view we can consider the Lodge members as existing
in seven groups, each group representing one type of the sevenfold
planetary energy emanating from the Planetary Logos. The triple division
has first been given, as ever in evolution you have the major three
(manifesting through the three departments) and then the seven, these
seven showing again as a triple differentiation and a septenary.
Students must bear in mind that all that is herein imparted concerns the
work of the Hierarchy in connection with the fourth or human kingdom,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

and refers especially to those Masters Who work in connection with
humanity. Were the deva evolution being dealt with, the entire
tabulation and division would have to differ from this.

Again, there are certain aspects of hierarchical work affecting, for
instance, the animal kingdom; this work calls into activity beings and
workers and adepts totally distinct from the servers of the fourth or
human kingdom. Therefore students should carefully remember that all
these details are relative, and that the work and personnel of the
Hierarchy are infinitely greater and more important than may appear upon
a superficial reading of these pages. Certainly we are dealing with what
might be considered Its primary work, for in the service of the human
kingdom we are concerned with the manifestation of the three aspects of
divinity, but the other departments are interdependent and the work
progresses as a synthetic whole.

The workers, or adepts, concerned with the evolution of the human
family, comprise sixty-three, if the three great Lords are counted in
making the nine times seven necessary for the work. Of these forty-nine
work exoterically, if it might be so expressed, and fourteen
esoterically, being more concerned with the subjective manifestation.
Not many of Their names are known to the public, nor would it be wise in
many cases to reveal Who They are, where They dwell, and what is Their
particular sphere of activity. A very small minority, through group
karma and a willingness thus to sacrifice Themselves, have come before
the public eye during the past one hundred years, and therefore
concerning these, certain information may be given out. Quite a number
of people in the world today are aware of Their existence independently
of any particular school of thought, and the realisation that Those Whom
they thus know personally are workers in a great and

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

unified scheme of endeavour may encourage these real knowers to testify
to their knowledge, and thus establish past all controversy the reality
of Their work. Certain schools of occultism and of theosophical
endeavour have claimed to be the sole repository of Their teaching, and
the sole outlet for Their efforts, thereby limiting that which They do,
and formulating premises which time and circumstance will fail to
substantiate. They work most assuredly through such groups of thinkers,
and throw much of Their force into the work of such organisations, yet,
nevertheless, They have Their disciples and Their followers everywhere,
and work through many bodies and many aspects of teaching. Throughout
the world, disciples of these Masters have come into incarnation at this
time with the sole intent of participating in the activities and
occupations and truth dissemination of the various churches, sciences,
and philosophies, and thus producing within the organisation itself an
expansion, a widening, and a disintegration where necessary, which might
otherwise be impossible. It might be wise for occult students everywhere
to recognise these facts, and to cultivate the ability to recognise the
hierarchical vibration as it demonstrates through the medium of
disciples in the most unlikely places and groups.

One point should here be stated in connection with the work of the
Masters through Their disciples, and it is this. All the various schools
of thought which are fostered by the energy of the Lodge are, in every
case, founded by a disciple, or several disciples, and upon these
disciples, and not upon the Master, lies responsibility for results and
the consequent karma. The method of procedure is somewhat as
follows:—The Master reveals to a disciple the objective in view for an
immediate little cycle, and suggests to him that such and such a
development would be desirable. It is the work of the disciple to
ascertain the best

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

method for bringing about the desired results, and to formulate the
plans whereby a certain percentage of success will be possible. Then he
launches his scheme, founds his society or organisation, and
disseminates the necessary teaching. Upon him rests the responsibility
for choosing the right co-workers, for handing on the work to those best
fitted, and for clothing the teaching in a presentable garb. All that
the Master does is to look on with interest and sympathy at the
endeavour, as long as it holds its initial high ideal and proceeds with
pure altruism upon its way. The Master is not to blame should the
disciple show lack of discrimination in the choice of co-workers, or
evidence an inability to represent the truth. If he does well, and the
work proceeds as desired, the Master will continue to pour His blessing
upon the attempt. If he fails, or his successors turn from the original
impulse, thus disseminating error of any kind, in His love and in His
sympathy the Master will withdraw that blessing, withhold His energy,
and thus cease from stimulating that which had better die. Forms may
come and go, and the interest of the Master and His blessing pour
through this or that channel; the work may proceed through one medium or
another, but always the life force persists, shattering the form where
it is inadequate, or utilising it when it suffices for the immediate
need.

*Certain Masters and Their Work*.

Under the first great group of which the Manu is the Head, can be found
two Masters, the Master Jupiter, and the Master Morya. Both of them have
taken more than the fifth initiation, and the Master Jupiter, Who is
also the Regent of India, is looked up to by all the Lodge of Masters as
the oldest among Them. He dwells in the Nilgherry Hills in Southern
India, and is not one of the Masters Who

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

usually takes pupils, for He numbers amongst His disciples initiates of
high degree and quite a number of Masters. In His hands are the reins of
government for India, including a large part of the Northern frontier,
and to Him is committed the arduous task of eventually guiding India out
of her present chaos and unrest, and of welding her diverse peoples into
an ultimate synthesis. The Master Morya, Who is one of the best known of
the Eastern adepts, and Who numbers amongst His pupils a large number of
Europeans and Americans, is a Rajput Prince, and for many decades held
an authoritative position in Indian affairs.

He works in close co-operation with the Manu, and will Himself
eventually hold office as the Manu of the sixth root-race. He dwells, as
does His Brother, the Master K. H., at Shigatse in the Himalayas, and is
a well-known figure to the inhabitants of that far-away village. He is a
man of tall and commanding presence, dark hair and beard and dark eyes,
and might be considered stern were it not for the expression that lies
in His eyes. He and His Brother, the Master K. H., work almost as a
unit, and have done so for many centuries and will, on into the future,
for the Master K. H. is in line for the office of World Teacher when the
present holder of that office vacates it for higher work, and the sixth
root-race comes into being. The houses in which They both dwell are
close together, and much of Their time is spent in the closest
association. As the Master M. is upon the first Ray, that of Will or
Power, His work largely concerns itself with the carrying out of the
plans of the present Manu. He acts as the Inspirer of the statesmen of
the world, He manipulates forces, through the Mahachohan, that will
bring about the conditions desired for the furthering of racial
evolution. On the physical plane those great national executives

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

who have far vision and the international ideal are influenced by Him,
and with Him co-operate certain of the great devas of the mental plane,
and three great groups of angels work with Him on mental levels, in
connection with the lesser devas who vitalise thoughtforms, and thus
keep alive the thoughtforms of the Guides of the race for the benefit of
the whole of humanity.

The Master M. has a large body of pupils under His instruction, and
works in connection with many organisations of an esoteric and occult
kind, as well as through the politicians and statesmen of the world.

The Master Koot Humi, Who is also very well known in the occident, and
has many pupils everywhere, is of Kashmiri origin, though the family
originally came from India. He is also an initiate of high degree, and
is upon the second, or the Love-Wisdom Ray. He is a man of noble
presence, and tall, though of rather slighter build than the Master M.
He is of fair complexion, with golden-brown hair and beard, and eyes of
a wonderful deep blue, through which seem to pour the love and the
wisdom of the ages. He has had a wide experience and education, having
been originally educated at one of the British universities, and speaks
English fluently. His reading is wide and extensive, and all the current
books and literature in various languages find their way to His study in
the Himalayas. He concerns Himself largely with the vitalising of
certain of the great philosophies, and interests Himself in a number of
philanthropic agencies. To Him is given the work very largely of
stimulating the love manifestation which is latent in the hearts of all
men, and of awakening in the consciousness of the race the perception of
the great fundamental fact of brotherhood.

At this particular time the Master M., the Master K. H. and the Master
Jesus are interesting Themselves

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

closely with the work of unifying, as far as may be, eastern and western
thought, so that the great religions of the East, with the later
development of the Christian faith in all its many branches, may
mutually benefit each other. Thus eventually it is hoped one great
universal Church may come into being.

The Master Jesus, Who is the focal point of the energy that flows
through the various Christian churches, is at present living in a Syrian
body, and dwells in a certain part of the Holy Land. He travels much and
passes considerable time in various parts of Europe. He works specially
with masses more than with individuals, though He has gathered around
Him quite a numerous body of pupils. He is upon the sixth Ray of
Devotion, or Abstract Idealism, and His pupils are frequently
distinguished by that fanaticism and devotion which manifested in
earlier Christian times amongst the martyrs. He Himself is rather a
martial figure, a disciplinarian, and a man of iron rule and will. He is
tall and spare with rather a long thin face, black hair, pale complexion
and piercing blue eyes. His work at this time is exceedingly
responsible, for to Him is given the problem of steering the thought of
the occident out of its present state of unrest into the peaceful waters
of certitude and knowledge, and of preparing the way in Europe and
America for the eventual coming of the World Teacher. He is well known
in the Bible history, coming before us first as Joshua the Son of Nun,
appearing again in the time of Ezra as Jeshua, taking the third
initiation, as related in the book of Zechariah, as Joshua, and in the
Gospel story He is known for two great sacrifices, that in which He
handed over His body for the use of the Christ, and for the great
renunciation which is the characteristic of the fourth initiation. As
Appollonius of Tyana, He took the

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

fifth initiation and became a Master of the Wisdom. From that time on He
has stayed and worked with the Christian Church, fostering the germ of
true spiritual life which is to be found amongst members of all sects
and divisions, and neutralising as far as possible the mistakes and
errors of the churchmen and the theologians. He is distinctively the
Great Leader, the General, and the wise Executive, and in Church matters
He co-operates closely with the Christ, thus saving Him much and acting
as His intermediary wherever possible. No one so wisely knows as He the
problems of the West, no one is so closely in touch with the people who
stand for all that is best in Christian teachings, and no one is so well
aware of the need of the present moment. Certain great prelates of the
Anglican and Catholic Churches are wise agents of His.

The Master Djwhal Khul, or the Master D. K. as He is frequently called,
is another adept on the second Ray of Love-Wisdom. He is the latest of
the adepts taking initiation, having taken the fifth initiation in 1875,
and is therefore occupying the same body in which He took the
initiation, most of the other Masters having taken the fifth initiation
whilst occupying earlier vehicles. His body is not a young one, and He
is a Tibetan. He is very devoted to the Master K. H. and occupies a
little house not far distant from the larger one of the Master, and from
His willingness to serve and to do anything that has to be done, He has
been called "the Messenger of the Masters." He is profoundly learned,
and knows more about the rays and planetary Hierarchies of the solar
system than anyone else in the ranks of the Masters. He works with those
who heal, and co-operates unknown and unseen with the seekers after
truth in the world's great laboratories, with all who definitely aim at
the healing and solacing of the world, and with the great philanthropic
world movements

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

such as the Red Cross. He occupies Himself with various pupils of
different Masters who can profit by His instruction, and within the last
ten years has relieved both the Master M. and the Master K. H. of a good
deal of Their teaching work, taking over from Them for certain stated
times some of Their pupils and disciples. He works largely, too, with
certain groups of the devas of the ethers, who are the healing devas,
and who thus collaborate with Him in the work of healing some of the
physical ills of humanity. He it was Who dictated a large part of that
momentous book The Secret Doctrine, and Who showed to H. P. Blavatsky
many of the pictures, and gave her much of the data that is to be found
in that book.

The Master Who concerns Himself especially with the future development
of racial affairs in Europe, and with the mental outgrowth in America
and Australia, is the Master Rakoczi. He is a Hungarian, and has a home
in the Carpathian mountains, and was at one time a well-known figure at
the Hungarian Court. Reference to Him can be found in old historical
books, and He was particularly before the public eye when he was the
Comte de St. Germain, and earlier still when he was both Roger Bacon and
later, Francis Bacon. It is interesting to note that as the Master R.
takes hold, on the inner planes, of affairs in Europe, His name as
Francis Bacon is coming before the public eye in the Bacon-Shakespeare
controversy. He is rather a small, spare man, with pointed black beard,
and smooth black hair, and does not take as many pupils as do the
Masters previously mentioned. He is at present handling the majority of
the third ray pupils in the occident in conjunction with the Master
Hilarion. The Master R. is upon the seventh Ray, that of Ceremonial
Magic or Order, and He works largely through esoteric ritual and
ceremonial, being vitally

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

interested in the effects, hitherto unrecognised, of the ceremonial of
the Freemasons, of the various fraternities and of the Churches
everywhere. He is called in the Lodge, usually, "the Count," and in
America and Europe acts practically as the general manager for the
carrying out of the plans of the executive council of the Lodge. Certain
of the Masters form around the three great Lords an inner group, and
meet in council with great frequency.

On the fifth Ray of Concrete Knowledge or Science, we find the Master
Hilarion, who, in an earlier incarnation was Paul of Tarsus. He is
occupying a Cretan body, but spends a large part of His time in Egypt.
He it was Who gave out to the world that occult treatise "Light on the
Path," and His work is particularly interesting to the general public at
this crisis, for He works with those who are developing the intuition,
and controls and transmutes the great movements that tend to strip the
veil from the unseen. His is the energy which, through His disciples, is
stimulating the Psychical Research groups everywhere, and He it was Who
initiated, through various pupils of His, the Spiritualistic movement.
He has under observation all those who are psychics of the higher order,
and assists in developing their powers for the good of the group, and in
connection with certain of the devas of the astral plane He works to
open up to the seekers after truth that subjective world which lies
behind the grossly material.

Little can be given out anent the two English Masters. Neither of them
takes pupils in the same sense that the Master K. H. or the Master M.
take pupils. One of Them, who resides in Great Britain, has in hand the
definite guidance of the Anglo-Saxon race, and He works upon the plans
for its future development and evolution. He is behind the Labour
movement throughout the world,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

transmuting and directing, and the present rising tide of democracy has
His directing hand upon it. Out of the democratic unrest, out of the
present turmoil and chaos, will arise the future world condition which
will have for its keynote co-operation and not competition,
distribution, and not centralisation.

One other Master may here be briefly mentioned, the Master Serapis,
frequently called the Egyptian. He is the Master upon the fourth ray,
and the great art movements of the world, the evolution of music, and
that of painting and drama, receive from Him an energising impulse. At
present He is giving most of His time and attention to the work of the
deva, or angel evolution, until their agency helps to make possible the
great revelation in the world of music and painting which lies
immediately ahead. More about Him cannot be given out, nor can His
dwelling place be revealed.

The Master P. works under the Master R. in North America. He it is Who
has had much to do esoterically with the various mental sciences, such
as Christian Science, and New Thought, both of which are efforts put
forth by the Lodge in an endeavour to teach men the reality of that
which is not seen, and the power of the mind to create. This Master
occupies an Irish body, is on the fourth ray, and the place of His
residence may not be revealed. Much of the work of the Master Serapis
was taken over by Him when the latter turned His attention to the deva
evolution.

*The present work*.

Certain facts concerning these Masters, and Their work in the present
and in the future, may be in place here. First, the work of training
Their pupils and disciples to fit them to be of use in two great events,
one, the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

coming of the World Teacher towards the middle or close of this present
century, and the other, the training of them to be of use in the
founding of the new sixth sub-race and in the reconstruction of the
present world conditions. This being the fifth sub-race of the fifth
root-race, the pressure of the work on the five rays of mind which are
controlled by the Mahachohan, is very great. The Masters are carrying an
over heavy burden, and much of Their work of teaching disciples has been
delegated to initiates and advanced disciples, and certain of the
Masters on the first and second rays have temporarily taken over pupils
in the Mahachohan's department.

Secondly, the preparation of the world on a large scale for the coming
of the World Teacher, and the taking of the necessary steps before They
Themselves come out among men, as many of Them surely will towards the
close of this century. A special group is forming amongst Them now Who
are definitely preparing Themselves for this work. The Master M., the
Master K. H. and the Master Jesus will be specially concerned with the
movement towards the last quarter of this century. Other Masters will
participate also, but these three are the ones with Whose names and
offices people should familiarise themselves, wherever possible. Two
other Masters, specially concerned with the seventh or ceremonial ray,
Whose particular work it is to supervise the development of certain
activities within the next fifteen years, work under the Master R. Very
definitely may the assurance be given here, that prior to the coming of
the Christ, adjustments will be made so that at the head of all great
organisations will be found either a Master, or an initiate who has
taken the third initiation. At the head of certain of the great occult
groups, of the Freemasons of the world, and of the various great
divisions of the Church, and resident in many of the great nations

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

will be found initiates or Masters. This work of the Masters is
proceeding now, and all Their efforts are being bent towards bringing it
to a successful consummation. Everywhere They are gathering in those who
in any way show a tendency to respond to high vibration, seeking to
force their vibration and to fit them so that they may be of use at the
time of the coming of the Christ. Great is the day of opportunity, for
when that time comes, through the stupendous strength of the vibration
then brought to bear upon the sons of men, it will be possible for those
who now do the necessary work to take a great step forward, and to pass
through the portal of initiation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Probationary Path](ihas10)
