[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch14)  [Next](bk01ch16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

 

**Chapter XV**

 

**On the dispassion of S’ûka and the instructions of Bhagavatî to Hari**

 

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

 

1-67. Hearing these words of Vyâsa Deva S’ûka Deva said :-- O Father! I
do not like at all to take to a householder's life; as I see clearly
that it fastens men, as a cord fastens animals, and is a source of
incessant pain. O Father! Where can you expect happiness from a
householder who is always loaded with anxiety how and whence to get
wealth? Those, who have greed for wealth, oppress their poor relatives,
even; and extort money. Even one who is the lord of the three worlds,
who

 

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

 

is their Indra, he also is not so happy as a beggar, that has no
desires. See, then, who else can be happy in this world? Whenever an
ascetic is seen to practise severe asceticism, Indra, the lord of the
Devas becomes anxious and sorry, and raises various obstacles in his
way. See also that Brahmâ is not happy with his big samsâra (his
creation which is his house). Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u, though He has got
His beautiful Kamalâ, the presiding Deity of all wealth and prosperity,
is always suffering, since He is incessantly engaged in fighting with
the Asuras; and though He is the husband of Lak<u>s</u>mî and full of
prosperity, He practises, almost, every now and then, terrible
asceticism with great care and earnestness. So who else is there, who is
possessed of constant happiness? I know also Bhagavân S'ankara, too,
suffers incessant troubles and has to fight against the Daityâs. So,
then, O Father: how can a poor householder be happy when the rich
householder cannot sleep happily, with his constant care for wealth. O
highly fortunate one! Knowing full well this truth of the world, why are
you plunging me, your son, in this terrible Samsâra, full of pains and
agonies.

 

O Father! What shall I say to you about the miseries of the world! There
is pain in birth, pain in old age, pain in death, and pain in the life
in the womb full of urines and faeces; but the pain, arising from desire
and greed, is more terrible than all the pains mentioned above; and
then, the pains experienced while asking for them are greater than the
pangs of death. Alas! There is no other way for the Brahmâns to earn
their livelihood than to accept gifts from others. Therefore the
Brahmâns have to suffer daily death-like pangs in having to wait in
expectation from others; can there be anything more regrettable than
this? The Brahmâ<u>n</u>as, studying all the Vedas and Dharma S'âstras
and acquiring wisdom, have got at last to go to the rich and praise them
(in expectation of some money) carefully. O Father! if one does not
become a householder, then what care is there to feed one's own belly?
If there be contentment in the mind, any how the belly can be filled
with leaves, roots and fruits; but if there be wife, sons and grandsons
and many dependent relatives, then to feed them all, much trouble and
anxiety are experienced. So how can you expect, O Father! perfect
happiness in the world? So teach me, O Father! the S’âstras on Yoga and
eternal truth that will give perfect happiness; no advice in karma
kân<u>d</u>a (the series of actions) will bring me pleasure. Now advise
me how the karmas can be exhausted; how the root of the three sorts of
karmas, Sanchita, Prârabdha, and Vartamâna, giving torments of birth,
death, etc., the Avidyâ, the great ignorance, can be destroyed? The
fools do not understand how the women suck the blood out of persons like
leeches, for they get themselves deluded by their gestures and postures!
The lady of the house, whom the people

 

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

 

call kântâ, the beautiful one, steal away the semen virile, the strength
and energy in the way of giving them happiness as sexual intercourse,
and their minds and wealth and everything by their crooked love
conversations; so see what greater thief can there be than a woman? In
my opinion, those that are ignorant are certainly deluded by the
Creator; they accept wife to destroy their own pleasure of happiness.
They can never understand that the women can never be the source of
pleasure; they are the source of all miseries. Hearing these words of
S’ûka, Vyâsa became merged in the deep sea of cares and anxieties,
thinking what to do then. The incessant tears of pain flowed from his
eyes; his whole body began to shiver and his mind became too much
worried.

 

Seeing this distressed and sorrowful state of his father, S'ûkdeva, with
eyes full of wonder, said :-- Oh! What a power has Mâyâ got?

 

Oh!  He, whose words are accepted by all, with great love and care as
equivalent to the Vedas, who is the author of the Vedânta Dars'ana, and
before whom nothing is veiled in ignorance, Oh! that greatest Pundit,
the knower of all the Tattvas, is now deluded by Mâyâ? Oh! what is that
Mâyâ who has been able to delude Vyâsa Deva, the son of Satyavati, so
skilled in the knowledge of Brahmâ Vidyâ; I also do not know how, with
what great care, one is to practise Sâdhanâ towards Her.

 

Alas! He who has composed eighteen Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>as and the great
Mahâ Bhârata, who has divided the Vedas in four parts, the same Veda
Vyâs has today been deluded by the power of Mâyâ! What to speak of other
persons! Oh! Mâyâ has deluded Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes'vara and
others and the whole universe; then who is there in the three worlds
that is not fascinated by Her influence! I therefore, take refuge unto
the Internal Governess, the Devî Mahâ Mâyâ. Oh! what wonderful power She
wields? By her own Mâyic power, She has kept God even under Her control,
who is omniscient and the Controller of all. The Pundits, who know the
Purâ<u>n</u>as say, that Vyâsa Deva is born of the part of Vi<u>sn</u>u;
but, see the wonder, that he is today plunged in the sea of delusion
like a merchant whose ship has been wrecked. Alas! How great is the
wonderful power of Mâyâ! The all-knowing Vyâsa is today under the
control of Mâyâ and is weeping like an ordinary man! So I have come to
the firm conclusion that the wise Pundits are incapable to surpass the
strength of Mâyâ. What a great error arises through the power of Mâyâ!
See! indeed!! who is he and who am I? What for we have come here? There
is no certainty, nothing whatsoever, about that. And, see, also, how he
has got the nice idea of “father” on his body and the idea of “his son”
in my body, that are composed of five elements.

 

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

 

This is now quite evident to me that, when the Brâhmin Mahar<u>s</u>i
Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyan is weeping under the influence of Mâyâ, She is
the strongest of all; even those who are skilled in the great Mâyâ fall
under Her prey.

 

Then S’ûka Deva bowed down mentally to the Devî, Mahâ Mâyâ, who is the
Creatrix of Brahmâ and the other Devas and who is the Controller of them
all; and then began to speak the following auspicious words pregnant
with reason, to his father Vyâsa Deva, greatly distressed and plunged in
the sea of sorrows :-- “O Father! you are exceedingly fortunate, for you
are the son of the high souled Parâs'ara and you yourself are the
instructor of real truth, the tattva jnâna, to all persons; so, O Lord!
why are you giving vent to sorrows, like an ordinary bewildered man? O
Mahâbhâga! why are you plunging yourself in this great error, though you
are a high souled personage! See, it is quite true that now I am born as
your son; but this I don't know what relation existed between you and me
in my previous birth? So, O highly intelligent one! Open your eyes of
wisdom, and be patient; do not throw yourself, in vain, in the sea of
sorrows. All this universe is like a net of delusion; knowing this,
abandon all your grief; why are you feeling yourself so much weak and
distressed, for your attachment towards your son? Hunger is satisfied by
eating something, and thirst is satisfied by the drinking of water;
hunger is not satisfied by seeing the son. So the organ of scent is
satisfied by smelling sweet scents; and the organ of hearing is
satisfied by hearing sweet music; and when thirst arises to enjoy women,
that is satisfied only by sexual intercourse; but what satisfaction can
a son give? So what shall I do to you by remaining as your son? The son,
in fact, is not the cause of any satisfaction to one's self. For this
reason, in ancient days, the poor Brahmin Ajigarta gave his son to the
king Harischandra, for necessary equivalent price in money, who wanted a
man for his sacrifice where human beings are to be sacrificed as
victims. In fact, those things that are urgently required as necessities
give happiness; and all these articles can be obtained by wealth; so if
you want to enjoy happiness, then earn money; of what use shall I be to
you as your son? O Muni! you can see subtle things and you are greatly
intelligent; so I pray to you, to look upon me as your son and open my
eyes of wisdom, that I can be free for ever from this womb of birth. O
Sinless one! To get a human birth in this land of Karma (in India) is
very difficult; again to get a Brâhmin birth is extremely rare; so when
I have got this so very rare birth, why shall I spend my time in vain? O
Father! Though I have served many spiritual teachers, fraught with
wisdom, for many years, yet the firm idea “I am, as it were, bound up in
this net of Samsâra” the notion covered with dark darkness of ignorance,
caused by desires, this net of Samsâra does not leave me.

 

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

 

When the son S’ûka Deva of extraordinary power and intelligence spoke
thus, Vyâsa saw that his son was strongly inclined to take to the four
Âs'ram, that of Sannyâsa and spoke thus :-- O Son! If your mind has
become so, then read Bhâgavat Purâ<u>n</u>a, composed by me, highly
auspicious, voluminous, and the second Vedas.

 

In this you have the chapters on Creation (Sarga) and secondary creation
(upa sarga), etc., the five characteristics as in other Purâ<u>n</u>as
and it is sub-divided into twelve Skandhas. Hearing of this Bhâgavata
brings up to the mind that Brahmâ alone is real and all the universe is
unreal and knowledge both intuitive and indirect springs up. For this
very reason, the Bhâgavata treatise is considered as the ornament of the
Purâ<u>n</u>as. Therefore, O highly intelligent one! you better study
the Purâ<u>n</u>a. O Child! In days of yore, at the end of a Kalpa,
Bhagavân Hari was lying, as a small child on a floating leaf of a banyan
tree, and was thinking thus :-- “Who is the Intelligent One that has
created me a small child? What is His object? Of what stuff am I made
of? and how am I created? whence can I know all this?” At this moment
the Devî Bhagavatî Who is all chaitanya, seeing the high-souled Bhagavân
Hari musing thus, spoke out in the form of a celestial voice in the
following half-stanza:-- “All this that is seen is I Myself; there is
existent nothing other that is eternal.” Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u, then,
began to think deeply the above celestial voice :-- “Who has uttered
this word, pregnant of truth, to me? How shall I come to know the
speaker, whether that is female, male or a hermaphrodite?” Pondering
over this for a long time, when he could not come to a definite
conclusion, he began to repeat (make japam) frequently that word of
Bhagavatî with a whole heart. When Hari, lying on a banyan tree leaf,
became very anxious to know what the above words implied, then the
all-auspicious Devî Bhagavatî with a beautiful face, calm and quiet
appearance, appeared before Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u, of unrivalled
splendour, in the form of Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî, who is all of Sattva
Gu<u>n</u>a, surrounded by Her Vibhûtis, Her manifestations of
attendents, Her smiling companions of the same age, decked with
ornaments, and wearing divine clothings, and holding each in their four
divine hands, conch shell, disc, club, and lotus.

 

The lotus eyed Vi<u>sn</u>u was very much surprised to see that
beautiful Devî, standing without anything to rest on that water; He saw
that on four sides of the Devî, were staying Rati, Bhûti, Buddhi, Mati,
Kîrti, Smriti, Dhriti, S'raddhâ, Medhâ, Svadhâ, Svâhâ, Kshudhâ, Nidrâ,
Dayâ, Gati, Tu<u>st</u>i, Pu<u>st</u>i, K<u>s</u>amâ, Lajjâ, Jrimbhâ
Tandrâ and other personified forces, each possessing a clear distinct
form, and endowed with a clear distinct feeling. In the hands of them
all were divine weapons; on their necks, necklaces and garlands of

 

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

 

Mandâra flowers; and all the limbs of their bodies were decorated with
divine ornaments. Seeing in that one mass of ocean the Devî
Lak<u>s</u>mî and Her S'aktis, Bhagavân Janârdan, the soul of all,
became greatly astonished and thought within Himself thus :-- “What is
this? Is this Mâyâ that I am witnessing? Whence have appeared these
women? and whence have I come here, lying on this banyan leaf? How has
the banyan tree come to existence in this one mass of ocean? And who is
it, that has placed me here in the form of a child? Is this my Mother?
Or is this some Mâyâ that can create impossible things?

 

Why has She made Herself manifest before me now? Or is there some hidden
motive that She has appeared thus? What ought I to do now? Or shall I go
to some other place? or shall I continue remaining here in this form of
the child, silent and with vigilance.

 

Thus ends the fifteenth chapter of the 1st Skandha on the dispassion of
S'ûka and the instructions of Bhagavatî to Hari in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>a
S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](bk01ch16)
