[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch19)  [Next](bk02ch01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

 

**Chapter XX**

 

**On Vyâsa  doing his duties**

 

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

 

1-8. The Ri<u>s</u>is said :-- “O Sûta! What did Veda Vyâsa  do, when
the highest Yogi S’ûka, Deva-like, acquired all the excellent
supernatural powers? Kindly describe all these in detail.”

 

Hearing this question, Sûta spoke :-- O Rishis! Vyâsa  already had with
him many disciples Asita, Devala, Vais'ampâyana, Jaimini, Sumantu and
others, all engaged in the study of the Vedas. After their studies were
over, they all went out to propagate Dharma on the earth. Then Vyâsa ,
seeing that the disciples went to the earth and his son S’ûka Deva had
got to the next world, became very much distressed with sorrow and
wanted to go to some other place. He then decided to go to his birth
place and went to the banks of the Ganges and there remembered his
auspicious mother Satyavatî, forsaken by him before, very sorrowful, and
the daughter of a fisherman. He then quitted that heaven-like mountain,
the source of all happiness and came to his own birth place. Reaching
the island where he was born, he enquired the whereabouts of the
beautiful faced, the fisherman's daughter as well the wife of a king.
The fishermen replied that their king had given her in marriage to the
king S'antanu. Then the king of fishermen, seeing Vyâsa there, gladly
worshipped him and gave him a cordial welcome and spoke with folded
palms, thus :--

 

9-16. O Muni! When I have become so fortunate as to see you, rare even
to the Devas, then my birth has been sanctified today and you have
purified my family. O Brâhmin! Kindly say what for have you come?

 

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

 

My wife, son and all my riches and every other thing that I have are at
your disposal. Thus hearing the history of his mother Satyavatî, Vyâsa 
erected an Âs’rama on the beautiful banks of the river Sarasvatî and
remained there in tapasyâ with an enlightened mind.

 

Some time elapsed when the highly energetic S’antanu got through his
wife Satyavatî two sons. Vyâsa  Deva considered them as his two brothers
and became very glad, though he himself used to live in the forest. The
first son of the king S’antanu was Chitrângada, endowed with all
auspicious qualities, exceedingly beautiful, and tormenting his foes;
the second son was Vichitra-vîrya; he was endowed with all qualities.
The king S’antanu became very happy to get these children. S’antanu had
one son before through his wife Gangâ; he was a great hero and very
powerful; and the two sons of Satyavatî were equally powerful. The high
souled S’antanu now seeing the three sons, all endowed with all
auspicious qualities, began to think that the Devas were incapable to
defeat him.

 

17-34. After some time, the religious S’antanu quitted his worn-out body
as a man quits his clothes worn out in due time. After the king S’antanu
had ascended the Heavens, the energetic Bhîs'ma performed duly his
funeral obsequies and gave various things in charity to the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as. He did not accept the kingdom himself; but placed
Chitrângada on the throne and became known by the name of Devavrata
(truthful in vow like the Devas). The pure souled Chitrângada, born of
Satyavatî became so much powerful by sheer force of his arms, and became
so great a hero that the enemies felt endless troubles. Now once on an
occasion, the greatly powerful Chitrângada, surrounded by a great army,
went on an hunting excursion to the forest in quest of rurû deer, etc.,
when the Gandarbha Chitrângada, seeing the king on the way, alighted
from his chariot.

 

O ascetics! A fierce battle then ensued for three years on that sacred
and wide expanse Kuruk<u>s</u>ettra between the two heroes, both equally
powerful. In the battle, the king Chitrângada, the son of S’antanu was
slain by the Gandarbha Chitrângada and went up to Heavens. Bhîs’ma, born
of the womb of Gangâ, hearing the above news, expressed his sorrows and,
being surrounded by the ministers completed all the funeral obsequies
and installed Vichitravîrya on the throne. The beautiful Satyavatî
became very much agitated by the death of her son; but when the
ministers and the highsouled spiritual teachers consoled her, she became
glad when she saw that her youngest son became king. Vyâsa  Deva, too,
felt himself glad to hear that his youngest brother had been made king.
After some time when the all auspicious, Satyavatî's son Vichîtravîrya
attained his youth,

 

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

 

Bhîs’ma began to think of his marriage. At this time the king of Kâsî
(Kâs'îrâj) called an assembly Svayamvara (where the kings are invited
and the bride selects the bridegroom) for the marriage of her three
daughters, endowed with all auspicious qualities, at one and the same
time. Thousands and thousands of kings and princes from various
countries were invited there in the assembly; and, worshipped duly, they
went and decorated the hall. At that time the highly energetic fiery
Bhîs’ma alone, mounting on his chariot, attacked the infantry and
cavalry, and defeated all the kings assembled there, and perforce
carried away the three daughters of Kâs'îrâj and took them to
Hastinâpur. Bhîs’ma behaved towards those three daughters as if they
were mothers, sisters or daughters and informed Satyavatî without any
delay of everything that had happened.

 

35-39. Then he called for the astrologers and Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, versed in
the Vedas and enquired about the auspicious day for their marriage. When
the day was fixed and when every preparation was made, the religious
Bhîs’ma wanted Vichitravîrya to marry them. At this time, the eldest
daughter, beautiful-eyed spoke out modestly to the Gangâ's son Bhîs’ma
:-- “O Gangâ's son, the illustrious son of your family and the best of
the Kurus! You are the best knower of Dharma; therefore what more shall
I say to you. In the Svayamvara assembly I mentally selected S'âlva and
it struck me that he, too, looked on me with a very loving heart towards
me. So, O tormentor of foes! Now do what is fit for that sacred family;
O Gangâ's son! Not only you are extraordinarily powerful but you are
also the foremost of the religious. Sâlva mentally wanted to marry me;
now do as you like.”

 

40-44. When the eldest daughter spoke thus, Bhîs’ma asked the aged
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, ministers and his mother “What ought to be done now”
and, taking the opinions of all, spoke to that daughter :-- “O beautiful
one! You can go wherever you like.” Thus saying, Bhîs’ma released her.
Then the beautiful daughter of Kâsîrâj went to the house of Sâlvarâj and
expressed to him her heart's desire :-- “O great king! Knowing me
attached to yourself, Bhîs’ma has quitted me according to the laws of
Dharma; I have therefore come to you now; marry me. O best of the kings!
I will be your legal wife, for already I used to think you as my husband
and you, too, must have thought me your wife.”

 

45-47. S'âlva replied as follows :-- “O beautiful one! When Bhîs’ma
caught hold of your arm before me and took you to his chariot, then I
won't marry you. You can say yourself what intelligent man can marry a
woman touched by another? Therefore I won't marry you, though

 

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

 

Bhîs’ma has quitted you, in the light of another.” Hearing these words
of S’âlva, the daughter of Kâsîrâj wept bitterly; yet S’âlva quitted
her. Therefore, finding no other way, she went back to Bhîs’ma weeping,
and said as follows :--

 

48-50. O great warrior! S’âlva did not consent to marry me, as you first
took me to the chariot and afterwards left me. So, O Mahâbhâga! You
better look to Dharma and marry me, as you know best what is Dharma. If
you do not marry me, I will certainly quit my life. Hearing her words
Bhîs’ma said :-- O beautiful one! How can I accept you, when your mind
has become attached towards another. So, O fair one! You better go back
soon to your own father with a calm, clear mind. When Bhîs’ma said thus,
that daughter of Kâsîrâj did not go back, out of sheer shame, to her
father's house, but went to a forest and in a greatly solitary place of
pilgrimage began to practise asceticism.

 

51-56. Now the other two daughters of Kâsîrâj, beautiful and all
auspicious Ambâlikâ and Ambikâ became the wives of the king
Vichîtravîrya. Thus the powerful king Vichîtravîrya began to enjoy
various pleasures in the palace and in the gardens and thus passed his
time. For full nine years the king Vichîtravîrya enjoyed the sexual
pleasures and became attacked with consumption and fell into the jaws of
death. Hearing the death news of her son Vichîtravîrya, Satyavatî became
very sorry and surrounded by her ministers, performed his funeral
obsequies. Then she spoke privately to Bhîs’ma with a grievous heart :--
“O highly fortunately son! now you better govern your father's kingdom
and see that the family of Yayâti does not become extinct. So better
take your brother's wife and try your best to continue your family line.

 

57-74. Bhîs’ma then said :-- "O Mother! Did you not hear of the promise
that I already made before my father? So I cannot ever marry and govern
the kingdom.” Hearing these words of Bhîs’ma, Satyavatî became anxious.
She began to think as follows :-- “How now the continuity of the family
be kept! And it is not advisable to remain idle when the kingdom has
become kingless; no happiness can be derived in this state.” Thus
thinking, she became exceedingly distressed; then the Gangâ's son,
Bhîs’ma spoke to her :-- “O respected one! Do not worry your mind with
cares; now take steps so as to secure a son from Vichîtravîrya's wife.
Call some best Brâhmin, born of a good family and unite him with
Vichîtravîrya's wife. There is no fault, as far as I know, in doing thus
to keep up the family line. O sweet smiling one! Thus having begotten
the grandson, give him this kingdom; I will also obey his commands.”
Hearing these reasonable words of Bhîs’ma, Satyavatî remem

 

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

 

bered her own son, the sinless Vyâsa  Deva, who was born to her during
her virginity. As soon as Vyâsa was remembered, he, the great ascetic
and effulgent like the sun, came there and bowed down to his mother. The
highly energetic Vyâsa was then worshipped duly by Bhîs’ma and welcome
by Satyavatî and began to rest there like a smokeless fire. The mother
Satyavatî then spoke to the chief Muni :-- “O son! Now procreate a
beautiful son from your sperm and the ovum of Vichîtravîrya's wife.”
Hearing the mother's words, Vyâsa  considered them as Veda's injunction
and thought they must be obeyed and promised before her that he must
obey and and fulfil her orders. He remained there, waiting for the
menstruation period. When the due period of menstruation arrived, Ambikâ
bathed and had a sexual intercourse with Vyâsa  and begot a very
powerful son, but a blind one (since she closed her eyes at the sight of
Vyâsa  during her intercourse). Seeing the son born blind Satyavatî
became exceedingly sorry; she, then, asked her other son's wife :-- “Go
soon and get a son born of you in the aforesaid manner.” When the
menstruation period arrived, Ambâlikâ during the night time went to
Vyâsa  and mixed and became pregnant. In due time a son was born; that
child became of a very pale colour; so Satyavatî thought the new child,
too, unfit for the kingdom; therefore at the end of the year again asked
her son's wife Ambâlikâ to go to Vyâsa . She asked Vyâsa  also for the
same purpose and sent Ambâlikâ to his bed room. But Ambâlikâ became
afraid, and could not go herself but sent her maid servant for the
purpose. Thus from the womb of the maid servant the high souled Vidura
was born, having Dharma's parts and the most auspicious towards all.
Thus Vyâsa  begot three very powerful sons Dhritarâ<u>st</u>ra,
Pan<u>d</u>u and Vidura for the continuity of the family line. O sinless
Mahar<u>s</u>is! Thus I have described to you how my Guru Vyâsa  Deva,
who knows well all the Dharmas, kept up the continuity of his family and
how he begot sons in the womb of his brother Vichîtravîrya's wives,
according to the laws of Dharma, to keep up a family.

 

Thus ends the twentieth chapter of the 1st Skandha as well as the first
Skandha on Vyâsa  doing his duties in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa .

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](bk02ch01)
