[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch08)  [Next](bk01ch10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IX**

** **

**On the killing of Madhu Kai<u>t</u>abha**

 

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

 

1-49. Sûta said:--O Munis! When the excellent Tâmasi S’akti, the Goddess
presiding over sleep came out from the eyes, mouth, nose, heart, etc.,
of the body of the World-Guru Vi<u>sn</u>u and rested in the celestial
space, then the powerful Lord Vi<u>sn</u>u began to yawn and got up. He
saw the Prajâpati Brahmâ, terrified and spoke to him in words, deep like
rumbling in the clouds :-- “O Bhagavân Padmayone! What makes you come
here, and leave your tapasyâ? Why do you look so terrified and anxious?”
Hearing this, Brahmâ said: “O Deva! The two very powerful and very
terrible Daityas, Madhu Kai<u>t</u>abha sprung from the wax of Thy ears
approached to kill me; terrified thus, I have come to Thee. So, O Lord
of the Universe! O Vâsudeva! now I am quite out of senses and terrified;
save me.” Vi<u>sn</u>u, then, said :-- “Now go and rest in peace,
without any fear; let those two stupids, whose life has been well nigh
exhausted, come to me for battle; I will certainly kill them.”

 

Sûta said :-- While Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Lord of all the Devas,
was thus saying, those two very powerful Dânavas, elated with pride,
came up there, in their search for Brahmâ. O Munis! The two proud
Daityas stood there in the midst of the Pralaya water without anything
to stand on and with calm attitude. They then spoke to Brahmâ as follows
:-- O You have fled and come here? You cannot escape. Go on and fight. I
will kill You before this one.

 

Then I will kill him also who sleeps on this bed of serpent. Either give
us battle or acknowledge yourself as our servant. Hearing their words,
Janârdan Visnu addressed them as follows:-- “O two Dânavas, mad for war!
Come and fight with me as you like; I will surely curb your pride. O two
powerful ones! If you trust me, come and fight”. Hearing this, the two
Dânavas in the midst of that mass of water rest-

 

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

 

ing without any support, came up there to fight, with their eyes rolling
with anger. The Daitya, named Madhu, became very angry, came up quickly
to fight while Kai<u>t</u>abha remained where he stood. Then the
hand-to-hand fight ensued between the  two mad athletes; Bhagavân Hari
and Madhu became tired; Kai<u>t</u>abha came up and began to fight.
After that Madhu and Kai<u>t</u>abha joined and, blind with rage, began
to fight again and again hand to hand with the very powerful
Vi<u>sn</u>u. And Bhagavân Brahmâ and the Prime Force Âdyâ S’akti
witnessed this from the celestial Heavens. So the fight lasted for a
long, long, time; yet the two Dânavas did not feel a bit tired: rather
Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u became tired. Thus five thousand years passed
away; Hari then began to ponder over their mode of death. He thought :--
“I fought for five thousands of years but the two formidable Dânavas
have not been tired anything, rather I am tired; it is a matter of great
surprise. Where has gone my prowess? and what for the two Dânavas were
not tired; What is the cause? This is a matter, now, seriously to be
thought over”. Seeing Bhagavân Hari thus sunk in cares, the two haughty
Dânavas spoke to him with great glee and with a voice like that of the
rumbling of cloud :-- “O Vi<u>sn</u>u ! If you feel tired, if you have
no sufficient strength to fight with us, then raise your folded palms on
your head and acknowledge that you are our servant; or if you can, go on
fighting. O intelligent one!

We will take away your life first; and then slay this four-faced
Brahmâ”. Hearing the words of the two Dânavas, resting there without any
support in the vast ocean, the high-minded Vi<u>sn</u>u spoke to them in
sweet consoling words :-- “See, O heroes! no one ever fights with one
who is tired, afraid, who is weaponless, who is fallen and who is a
child; this is the Dharma of the heroes. Both of you fought with me for
five thousands of years. But I am single handed; you are two, and both
equally powerful and both of you took rest at intervals. I will
therefore take rest for a while, and then fight with certainty. Both of
you are very powerful and very much elated in vanity. Therefore rest a
while. After taking rest for a while I will fight with you according to
the just rules of warfare.” Hearing these words of Hari, the two chief
Dânavas trusted and remained far aloof, ready to fight again.

 

Now the four-armed Vâsudeva, seeing them at a sufficient distance, began
to ponder in his mind thus :-- “How their death can be effected?
Thinking for a time, he came to know that they have been granted, by the
Supreme S’akti Devî, death at their will (Ichchâmrityu); and therefore
they are not getting tired. I fought so long with them uselessly; my
labour went in vain. How then can I now fight, with this certain
knowledge. Again if I do not fight, how these two Dânavas, elated with
their boon and

 

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

 

giving troubles to all, be destroyed? When the boon is granted by the
Devî their death is also well nigh impracticable. Who wants his own
death, even placed in very great distressed circumstances. Attacked by
terrible diseases, reduced to indigent poverty no one wants to die; so
how can it be expected that these two haughty Dânavas would want their
death themselves? Therefore it is advisable me to take refuge of that
Âdyâ S’akti, the giver of the fruits of all desires. No desires can ever
be fructified unless She is thoroughly pleased. Thus thinking, Bhagavân
Vi<u>sn</u>u saw the beautiful Devî Yoga Nidra S’iva, shining in the
air. Then the supreme Yogi, Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u, of immeasurable
spirit began to praise with folded palms that great Bhuvanes'varî Mahâ
Kâli, the giver of boons for the destruction of the Dânavas. “O Devî! I
bow down to Thee O Mahâmâyâ, the Creatrix and Destructrix! Thou
beginningless and deathless! O auspicious Chandike! The Bestower of
enjoyment and liberation I do not know Thy Sagu<u>n</u>a or
Nirgu<u>n</u>a forms; how then can I know Thy glorious deeds,
innumerable as they are. To-day Thy undescribable prowess has been
experienced by me, I being made senseless and unconscious by Thy power
of sleep. Being tried again and again by Brahmâ with great care to bring
me back to my consciousness, I could not become conscious, so much my
senses were contracted down. O Mother! By Thy power, Thou didst keep me
unconscious and Thou again hast freed me from sleep, and I also fought
so many times. O giver of one's honour! Now I am tired; but Thou hast
granted boon to the two Dânavas and therefore they are not getting
tired. These two Dânavas, puffed up with pride, were ready to kill
Brahmâ; and therefore I challenged them to fight with me and they too
are fighting fiercely with me in this vast ocean. But Thou hast granted
them the wonderful boon that they will die whenever they will; and
therefore I have now come to Thy refuge, as Thou protectest those that
come under Thy shelter. Therefore, O Mother, the remover of the Devas'
troubles! These two Dânavas are become exceedingly elated by Thy boon
and I, too, am tired. Therefore dost Thou help me now. See! those two
sinners are ready to kill me; without Thy grace, what can I do now? and
where to go?”

 

50-59. Thus praised by the eternal Vâsudeva Jagannâtha Hari, with
humility and pranams, the Devî Mahâ Kâli, resting in the air, said
smiling :-- “O Deva deva Hari! Fight again; O Vi<u>sn</u>u! These two
heroes, when deluded by My Mâyâ, would be slain by you; I will delude
them certainly, by My side long glance; O Nârâyana! then slay quickly
the two Dânavas, when conjured by My mâyâ”.

 

Sûta said :-- Hearing these loving words of Bhagavatî, Bhagavân
Vi<u>sn</u>u went to the scene of battle in the middle of that ocean,
when the

 

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

 

two powerful Dânavas of serene tempers and eager to light, became very
glad on seeing Vi<u>sn</u>u in the battle and said :-- “O four-armed
one! we see your desire is very lofty indeed; well  stand! Stand! now be
ready for battle, knowing that victory or defeat is surely dependent on
Destiny. You should think now thus :-- Though it is generally true that
the more powerful one wins victory; but it also happens sometimes that
the weak gets the victory by queer turn of Fate; so the high souled
persons should not be glad at their victories, nor should express their
sorrows at their defeat; so don’t be glad, thinking, that you on many
former occasions fought with many Dânavas who were your enemies, and got
the victory; nor be sorry that now you are defeated by the two Dânavas”.
Thus saying, the powerful Madhu Kai<u>t</u>abha came up to fight. Seeing
this, Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u struck them immediately by fist with great
violence; the two Dânavas, elated with their strength, struck Hari in
return with their fists. Thus fighting went on vigorously.

 

60-87. Now seeing the two Dânavas of great powers, fighting on
incessantly, Nârâyana Hari cast a glance expressive of great distress,
towards the face of the Devî Mahâkâli. Seeing Vi<u>sn</u>u thus
distressed, the Devî laughed loudly and began to look constantly with
eyes somewhat reddish and shot towards the two Asuras side-long glances,
of love and amorous feelings which were like arrows from the Cupid. The
two vicious Daityas became fascinated by the side-long glances of the
Devî and took great pleasures in them; being extremely agitated by these
amorous darts, looked with one steady gaze towards the Devî, of spotless
lustre. Bhagavân Hari, too, saw the wonderful enchanting pastime of the
Devî. Then Hari, perfectly expert in adopting means to secure ends,
began to speak smiling and in voice like that of the rambling cloud,
knowing the two Dânavas enchanted by Mahâmâyâ, thus :--

 

O two heroes! I am very glad at the mode of your fighting. So ask from
me boons. I will grant that to you. I saw many Dânavas before, fighting;
but never I saw them expert like you, nor I heard like this. I am
therefore, very much satisfied by your such unrivalled powers.
Therefore, O greatly powerful pair of Dânavas! I wish to grant both of
you any boon that you want. Seeing the Devî Mahâmâyâ, the gladdener, of
the Universe, the two Dânavas felt themselves amorous; and therefore
they became proud on hearing Vi<u>sn</u>u's those words and told
Vi<u>sn</u>u, with their lotus-like eyes wide open, thus :--

 

O Hari! what do you like to give us? We are not beggars; we do not want
anything from you. O Lord of the Devas! Rather we will give you whatever
you desire; we are donors; not receivers. So O Vâsudeva! Hri<u>s</u>i
Ke<u>s</u>a! We are glad to see your- wonderful fight; so ask from

 

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

 

us any boon that you desire. Hearing their words, Bhagavân Janârdan said
:-- “ If you both are so much pleased with me, then I want this that
both of you be killed by me.” Hearing these words of Vi<u>sn</u>u, Madhu
Kai<u>t</u>abha became very much wondered and thinking “we are now
cheated” remained for some time merged in sorrow. Then reflecting that
there is water everywhere and solid earth nowhere, they said :--

 

“O Janârdana Hari! We know that you are truthful; therefore now we want
this desired boon from you that you wanted to grant us before now grant
us this desired boon of ours. O Madhusûdana! We will be slain by you;
but kill us, O Mâdhava! on a solid earth, free from any water; and thus
keep your word.

 

S’ri Bhagavân Hari laughed and remembering His Sudarsan disc said :-- “O
two highly fortunate ones! Verily, I will kill both of you on the vast
solid spot without any trace of water. Thus saying, the Devadeva Hari
expanded His own thighs and showed to those Dânavas the vast solid earth
on the surface of water and said :--

 

“O two Dânavas! See, here is no water. Place your two heads here; thus I
will keep my word and you would keep your word.” Hearing this, Madhu
Kai<u>t</u>abha thought over in their minds and expanded their bodies to
ten thousand Yojanas. Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u Hari also extended his
thighs to twice that amount. Seeing this, they were greatly, suprised
and laid their heads on the thighs of Vi<u>sn</u>u. Vi<u>sn</u>u of
wonderful prowess, then cut off quickly with His Sudarsan disc the two
very big heads over His thighs. Thus the two Dânavas Madhu
Kai<u>t</u>abha passed away; and the marrow (meda) of them filled the
ocean. O Munis! For this reason, this earth is named Medinî and the
earth is unfit for eatable purpose.

 

Thus I have described to you all that you asked. The sum and substance
is this that the wise persons should serve Mahâmâyâ with all thei
hearts. The Supreme S’akti is worshipped by all the Devas. Verily
verily, I say unto you that this is decided, in all the Vedas and other
S’astras that there is nothing higher than this Âdyâ S’akti. Therefore
this Supreme S’akti should be worshipped anyhow; either in Her
Sagu<u>n</u>a form or in Her Nirgu<u>n</u>a state.

 

Thus ends the ninth Chapter of the first Skandha on the killing of Madhu
Kai<u>t</u>abha in the Mahâpurana S’rimad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâs.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](bk01ch10)
