[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch01)  [Next](bk01ch03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

** **

**Chapter II**

** **

**On questions put by S’aunaka and other Rsis**

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

 

1-5. S'rî Sûta said :-- “I am highly fortunate; I consider myself
blessed and I am purified by the Mahâtmâs (high souled persons);
inasmuch as I am questioned by them about the highly meritorious
Purâ<u>n</u>a, famous in the Vedas. I will now speak in detail about
this Purâ<u>n</u>a, the best of the Âgamas, approved of by all the Vedas
and the secret of all the S’âstras.

 

O Brahmins! I bow down to the gentle lotus feet, known in the three
Lokas, of the Devî Bhagavatî, praised by Brahmâ and the other devas
Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes’a and others, meditated always by the Munindras and
which the Yogis contemplate as their source of liberation. Today I will
devotedly describe, in detail and in plain language, that Purâ<u>n</u>a
which is the best of all the Purâ<u>n</u>as, which gives prosperity and
contains all the sentiments (Rasas) that a human being can conceive, the
S’rimad Devî Bhâgavatam.

 

May that Highest Primal S’akti who is known as Vidyâ in the Vedas; who
is omniscient, who controls the innermost of all and who is skilled in
cutting off the knot of the world, who cannot be realised by the wicked
and the vicious, but who is visible to the Munis in their meditation,
may that Bhagavatî Devî give me always the buddhi fit to describe the
Purâ<u>n</u>a!

 

I call to my mind the Mother of all the worlds who creates this
universe, whose nature is both real (taking  gross, practical point of
view) and and unreal (taking a real point of view), preserves and
destroys by Her Râjasik, Sâttvik and Tâmasik qualities and in the end
resolves all these into Herself and plays alone in the period of
Dissolution - at this lime, I remember my that Mother of all the worlds.

 

6-10. It is commonly known that Brahmâ is the creator of this universe;
and the knowers of the Vedas and the Purâ<u>n</u>as say so; but they
also say that Brahmâ is born of the navel-lotus of Vi<u>sn</u>u. Thus it
appears that Brahmâ cannot create independently. Again Vi<u>sn</u>u,
from whose navel lotus Brahmâ is born, lies in Yoga sleep on the bed of
Ananta (the thousand headed serpent) in the time of Pralaya; so how can
we call Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u who rests on the thousand headed serpent
Ananta as the creator of the universe? Again the refuge of Ananta is the
water of the

 

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

 

ocean Ekâr<u>n</u>ava; a liquid cannot rest without a vessel; so I take
refuge of the Mother of all beings, who resides as the S’akti of all and
thus is the supporter of all; I fly for refuge unto that Devî who was
praised by Brahmâ while resting on the navel lotus of Vi<u>sn</u>u who
was lying fast asleep in Yoga <u>n</u>idrâ. O Munis! meditating on that
Maya Devî who creates, preserves and destroys the universe who is kuown
as composed of the three gu<u>n</u>as and who grants mukti, I now
describe the whole of the

Purâ<u>n</u>as; now you all better hear.

 

11-16. The Purâ<u>n</u>a S’rimad Bhâgavat (Devî Bhâgavat) is excellent
and holy; eighteen thousand pure S’lokas are contained in it. Bhagavân
Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyan has divided this Purâ<u>n</u>a into twelve
auspicious Skandhas (Books) and three hundred and eighteen chapters.
Twenty chapters compose the first Skandha; twelve chapters in the second
Skandha; thirty chapters in the the third Skandha; twenty-five chapters
in the fourth Skandha, thirty-five, in the fifth; thirty-one, in the
sixth; forty, in the seventh; twenty-four, in the eighth; fifty chapters
in the ninth; thirteen, iu the tenth; twenty-four in the eleventh and
fourteen chapters are contained in the twelfth Skandha, O Munis! Thus
the Dvaipâyan Muni has arranged his chapters in each Skandha.

 

17-20. Thus the Mahâtmâ Veda Vyâs has divided this Bhâgavata
Purâ<u>n</u>a. into so many Skandhas and into so many chapters; and that
the number of verses is eighteen thousand is already stated. That is
denominated as Purâ<u>n</u>a which contains the following five
characteristics :-- (1) Creation of the universe, (2) Secondary
creation, (3) Dynasties (4) Manvantaras and (5) The description of Manus
and other kings.

 

S’iva is beyond Prâkritic attributes, eternal and ever omnipresent; She
is without any change, immutable, unattainable but by yoga; She is the
refuge of the universe and Her nature is Turîya Chaitanya. Mahâ Lakshmi
is Her Sattvikî S’akti; Sarasvati is Her Râjasik S’akti and Mahâ Kâlî is
Her Tâmasik S’akti; these are all of feminine forms.

 

21-25. The assuming of bodies by these three S’aktis for the creation of
this universe is denominated as "Sarga" (creation) by the high souled
persona (Mahârpuru<u>s</u>a), skilled in S’astras. And the further
resolution of these three S’aktis into Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes'a
for the creation, preservation, and destruction of this universe is
denominated (in this Purâ<u>n</u>a) as Pratisarga (secondary ereation.)
The description of the kings of the solar and lunar dynasties and the
families of Hira<u>n</u>ya Kasipu and others is known as the description
of the lineages of kings and their dynasties. The description of
Svâyambhûva and, other Manus

 

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

 

and their ruling periods is known as Manvantaras. And the description of
their descendants is known as the description of their families. (Thus
these are the five characteristics in the Purâ<u>n</u>as.) O best of
Munis! all the Purâ<u>n</u>as are endowed with these five
characteristics.

 

26-32. So is Mahâbhârata writen by Vedavyâsa, characterised by these
five things. This is known as the fifth Veda and Itihâsa (history.) In
this are something more than one lakh slokas. S’aunaka said :-- “O Sûta!
What are those Purâ<u>n</u>as and how many verses are contained in each?
Speak all those in detail in this holy K<u>se</u>ttra; we, the residents
of Naimisâranya are all very eager to hear this. (Why we call ourselves
as the residents of Naimisâranya, hear; you will realise then that no
other place exists in this Kali age for hearing the holy discourses on
religion) :-- When we were afraid of the Kali age, Brahmâ gave us a
Manomaya Chakra (wheel) and I said to all of us :-- Follow this wheel,
go after it and the spot where the felly of the wheel will become thin
(so as to break) and will not roll further, that country is the holy
place; Kali will never be able to enter there; you all better remain
there until the Satya age comes back. Thus, acording to the saying of
Brahmâ, we have got orders to stay here. On hearing the words of Brahmâ,
wo went out quickly keeping the wheel go on, our object being to
determine which place is best and holiest. When we came here, the felly
of the wheel become thin and shorn before my eyes; hence this
K<u>s</u>ettra is called Naimis; it is the most sanctifying place.

 

Kali cannot enter here; hence the Mahatmas, Munis and Siddhas, terrified
by the Kali age, have followed me and resorted to this place. We have
performed yajñas with Purodâsa (clarified butter as is offered in
oblations to fire) where no animals are sacrificed; now we have no other
important work to do except to pass our time here until the arrival of
Satyayuga. O S’ûta! we are extremely fortunate in all respects that you
have come here; purify us to-day by narrating to us the names of the
Purâ<u>n</u>as equivalent to the Vedas. O S’ûta! you are also a learned
orator; we, too, are ardent listeners, with no other works to bother our
heads; narrate to us to-day the auspicious holy Bhâgavata Purâ<u>n</u>a.
O S’ûta! Long live you; and no ailings, internal, external, or from the
Devas torment you. (this is our blessing to you). We have heard that in
the most sanctifying Purâ<u>n</u>a, narrated by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Dvaipâyan, all about Dharma (religion), Artha (Wealth) and Kama
(desires) are duly described as well the acquiring of Tattvajñan and
liberation are also spoken of. O S’ûta! our desires are not satisfied
the more we hear of those beautiful holy words. Now describe to us the
highly pure S’rîmad Devî

 

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

 

Bhâgavatam where all the Lilas (the dramatic acts) of the Mother of the
three worlds purifying the sins, adorned with all the qualifications are
described as yielding all the desires like the Kalpa Vrik<u>s</u>a (the
celestial tree yielding all desires).

 

Thus ends the second chapter of the first Skandha on the description of
the Purâ<u>n</u>a (the text) in Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>a S’rîmad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâs.

 

Her ends the Second Chapter of S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam on questions put
by Saunaka and other Ri<u>s</u>is.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](bk01ch03)
