[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk02ch06)  [Next](bk02ch08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SECOND BOOK**

 

**Chapter VII**

** **

**On shewing the departed ones**

 

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

 

Sûta said :--  The chaste Draupadi was the common wife of all the five
very beautiful sons of Kunti; and she bore five sons, one to every
husband. Arjuna had one wife more; she was Subhadrâ, the sister of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a. By the order of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, Arjuna stole her away
(took her by force). The great hero Abhimanyu was born of Subhadrâ. This
Abhimanyu and the five sons of Draupadi were killed in battle.
Abhimanyu's wife Uttarâ was the charming daughter of the king
Virâ<u>t</u>. She gave birth to one dead child, after all the boys, the
descendants of the family were extinct. The above child died out of the
arrows of As'vatthâmâ. The extraordinarily powerful S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a
Himself made alive again this his sister's dead grandson. As this son
was born after the family had become extinct, he became known in the
world by the name of Parîksit. When the sons were all destroyed,
Dhritarâstra became very sorry, and, tormented by the arrow-like words
of Bhîma, remained in the kingdom of the Pâ<u>nd</u>avas. Gândharî, too,
exceedingly distressed on the bereavement of the sons, remained there
also. Yudhisthira, day and night, served Dhritarâstra and Gândhâri. The
greatly religious Vidura always used to console, by the advice of
Yudhisthira, his brother Dhritarâstra, who possessed the eye of wisdom
and he remained by his brother's side. Dharma\`s son Yudhisthira used to
serve his uncle Dhritarâstra in such a way as he might forget the pain
of the death of his sons. But Bhîma used to pierce his heart by

 

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

 

his arrow-like words that he pronounced so loud as to reach the ears of
the old king Dhritarâstra. Bhîma used to-say :-- “In the battle field I
killed all the sons, of the wicked blind king (Dhritarâstra) and it was
I that sucked well and drunk, full to the brim, the blood of the heart
of Duhs'âsana. Now this blind king eats shamelessly like a crow and a
dog, the mass of food (Pi<u>nd</u>a) given by me, and thus is bearing
uselessly the burden of life. Daily Bhîma used to tell, thus, harsh
words to him; whereas the religious Yudhîsthira used to console him,
saying “Bhîma is a quite illiterate brute” and so forth. The king
Dhritarâstra remained there with a grieved heart for eighteen years; the
one day he proposed to the Dharma's son Yudhîsthira about his intention
to dwell in forest thus :-- “To-day I wish to perform Tarpa<u>n</u>as in
the names my sons. True it is, that Bhîma performed the funeral
obsequies of them all; but, having in view of the former enmity, he did
not do anything for my sons. If you give me some money, I will, then,
perform the funeral obsequies of my sons and then retire to the forest
to perform tapasyâ that I can go to Heaven.” Vidura also asked
Yudhîsthira privately pay to Dhritarâshtra the sum that he wanted;
Yudhîsthira also intended to pay the required money. Then Yudhîsthira,
the lord of the world call his younger brothers and addressed them as
follows :-- “O highly fortunate ones! Our revered uncle is desirous to
perform the funeral obsequies of his sons; so we will have to give him
some money for the purpose.” Hearing these words of his elder brother of
indomitable valour, Pavana's son, the mighty armed Bhîma became very
angry and spoke out follows :-- “O highly lucky one! Is it that we will
have to give wealth for the spiritual benefit of Duryodhana and others?
What a great stupidity can there be than the fact that such a malevolent
blind king is deriving so great happiness at your hands? O Ârya! It is
by your bad counsel that we suffered endless troubles in the forest and
the extremely good Draupadi was brought before the public in the hall by
Duhs'âsana. O one of good vows! It is for your satisfaction alone that
we, though we were very mighty, had to remain in the house of Matsya Râj
Virât as servants. Had you not been our elder brother and not been
addicted to the gambling, would it have been possible I, who killed
Jarâsandha, would have been a cook to Virât Râj! Never we had been put
to so great a trouble! Never would the mighty armed Arjuna, the Vâsava's
son, have acted the part of an actress (a dancer), dressing himself in a
female garb, under the name Vrihannalâ. Alas! What more painful could
there be by assuming a human birth that the hands of Arjuna, that
wielded always the Gândîva bow, would have worn bracelets befitting a
woman? I would have been happy then

 

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

 

had I, seeing the braid of hair on Arjuna's head and the collyrium in
his eyes, cut off the head of Dhritarâstra!

 

O Lord of the earth! Without asking you, I set fire on the house, named
Jatugriha (a lac-house, as built by Duryodhana in order to burn up the
Pâ<u>nd</u>avas) and therefore the vicious Virochana, who wanted to burn
us, was himself burnt up. Again, O Lord of men! similarly, without
asking you, I slew Kichaka; this is now the one thing I regret that I
could not have killed in the same way the sons of Dhritarâstra before
the public hall. O king of kings! It was simply your stupidity that you
liberated Duryodhana and other sons, the great enemies of the
Gandarbhas, when they had been imprisoned by them. Again to-day you are
willing to give wealth for the spiritual benefit of those Duryodhana and
others! But, O Lord of the earth, I would never give wealth, even if you
request me specially to do this.

 

Thus saying, Bhîma went away. Dharma's son Yudhisthira then consulted
with the other three brothers and gave abundance of wealth to
Dhritarâstra. With this sum, the Ambikâ's son Dhritarâstra duly
performed the Srâdh ceremony of his sons and gave away lots of things to
the Brâhma<u>n</u>as. The king Dhritarâstra, thus performing all the
funeral obsequies, became ready to go early to the forest with Gândhârî,
Kunti and Vidura. By the help of Sanjaya, the highly intelligent
Dhritarâstra became informed of the roads of the forest, and then went
out of the house. Sûrasena's daughter Kunti, though stopped by her sons,
followed them. Bhîma and other Kauravas went along with them weeping up
to the banks of the Ganges and thence returned to Hastinâpura.

 

The ascetics went to the auspicious S’atayûpa hermitage on the banks of
the Ganges and building a hut practised tapasyâ with their hearts
concentrated. Thus six years elapsed when Yudhisthira, troubled by their
bereavements, said to his younger brothers :-- “ I dreamt that our
mother Kunti got very lean and thin. Now my mind wants bitterly to see
mother, uncle, aunt, the high souled Vidura and the highly intelligent
Sanjaya. If you approve, I want to go to there.” Then the five brothers,
Pân<u>d</u>u's sons, became desirous to see Kunti, and taking with them
Draupadî, Subhadrâ, Uttarâ, and other persons went to the Satayûpa
hermitage and saw the persons there; but not seeing Vidura, Yudhisthira
asked :-- “Where is Vidura?” Hearing this Dhritarâstra said :-- “Vidura
has taken up Vairâgyam (dispassion) and has gone alone to a solitary
place and is meditating in his heart the eternal Brahmâ.” Next day while
the king Yudhisthira was walking along the banks of the Ganges, he saw
in the forest Vidura, engaged in his vow and become lean and thin by his
tapasyâ; he then exclaimed :-- “I am the king Yudhisthira;

 

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

 

I am saluting you.” The holy Vidura heard and remained motionless like a
log of wood. Within an instant a wonderful halo came out of Vidura's
face and entered the mouth of Yudhisthira, both of them being Dharma's
parts. Vidura then died; Yudhisthira expressed great sorrow. When the
Vidura's body was going to be set on fire, a celestial voice was heard
:--“O king! He was very wise; so he ought not to be burnt; you can go
away as you like.” Hearing this, Yudhisthira bathed in the pure Ganges
and returned to the As'rama and informed everything in detail to
Dhritarâstra. While the Pâ<u>nd</u>avas were staying in the hermitage
with the other inhabitants of the city, Vedavyâsa, Nârada, and other
high-souled Munis came there to Yudhisthira. Kunti then spoke to the
auspicious Vyâsa :-- “O Krisna! I saw my son Karna, only just when he
was born; my mind is being very much tormented for him; so, O great
ascetic! Show him once to me. O highly fortunate One! You alone can do
this; so O Lord! Satisfy my heart’s desire.” Gândhârî said :-- “O Muni!
I did not see while Duryodhan went to battle; so, O Muni! Show me
Duryodhana with his younger brothers.” Subhadrâ said :-- “O Omniscient
one! I want very much to see the great hero Abhimanyu, dearer to me than
my life even; O great ascetic! Show him once to me.” (33-57.)

 

Sûta said :-- Satyavatî's son Vyâsa Deva, hearing their words, held
Prânâyama (deep breathing exercise) and meditated on the eternal Devî,
the force of Brahmâ. When the evening time came, the Muni invited
Yudhisthira and all others to the banks of the Ganges. He then bathed in
the Ganges and began to chant hymns in praise of the Devî Brahmâmayî
Prakriti, resting on the Puru<u>s</u>a, the Dweller in the Mani Dvîpa,
with attributes, at the same time transcending them, thus :-- “O Devî!
When Brahmâ was not, Vi<u>sn</u>u was not, Mahes'vara was not, nor when
existing lndra, Varuna, Kuvera, Yama, and Agnî, Thou alone existed then;
my salutation to Thee.

 

When there existed not water, Vâyu, ether, earth and their Gu<u>n</u>as,
taste, smell, etc., when there were no senses, mind, Buddhi, Ahamkâra;
when there existed no Sun, Moon nor anything, Thou alone existed then;
so, O Devî! I bow down again and again to Thee. O Mother! Thou holdest
all these visible Jîva lokas in the cosmic Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha; again
Thou bringest this Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha, the sum-total of Linga Sarîras
(the subtle bodies), with the Gu<u>n</u>as Sattva, Rajas and Tamas to a
state of equilibrium named Sâmyâvasthâ and remainest quite independent
and apart for a Kalpa period. At that time even those that are possessed
of the power of great discrimination and dispassion cannot fathom Thy
nature. O Mother! These persons are praying to me to see their dead

 

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

 

ones; but I am quite incapable to do that. So kindly shew them their
departed ones early.” While Vyâsa praised thus the Devî, the Devî
Mahâmâyâ, the Lady of the Universe, of the nature of Universal
Consciousness called all the departed ones from the Heavens and showed
them to their relatives. Then Kunti, Gândhârî, Subhadrâ, Uttarâ, and the
Pa<u>nd</u>avas became very glad to see their relatives come to them
again. Vyâsa, of indomitable valour, again remembering Mahâmâyâ, bade
good bye to the departed ones; it seemed then, a great magic had
occurred. The Pa<u>nd</u>avas and the Munis bade good bye to each other
and went to their respective places. The king Yudhisthira talked on the
way about Vyâsa and ultimately came to Hastinâ. (58-68.)

 

Thus ends the seventh chapter of the Second Skandha on shewing the
departed ones in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](bk02ch08)
