[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk02ch12)  [Next](bk03ch02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

** **

**Chapter I**

** **

**On the questions put by Janamejaya**

 

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

 

1-10. Janamejaya said :-- “O Bhagavân! What is that great Yajña
(sacrifice) named Ambâ Yajña about which you referred just now? Who is
the Ambâ? Where was She born? From whom and what for did Her birth take
place? What are Her qualities? What is Her form and nature? O Ocean of
mercy! You are all-knowing; kindly describe everything duly. Along with
this, describe in detail the origin of Brahmânda. O Brahmâ<u>n</u>a! You
know every thing of this whole Universe. I heard that Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u and Rudra are the three Devatâs, who are successively
originated to create, preserve, and destroy this Universe. Are these
three highsouled entities independent? or Do they do their respective
duties, being subservient to another Person? Now I am very eager to know
all these. So Pârâs'ara's son! Describe all these to me. Are these
highly powerful Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes'vara subject to Death
like ordinary beings? Or are they of the nature of everlasting
Existence, Intelligence and Bliss? Are they subject to the three fold
pains arising from their own selves from elements and from those arising
from gods? Are they subject Time? How and wherefrom were they
originated? Do they feel the influence of pleasure, pain, sleep or
laziness? O Muni! Do their bodies consist of seven Dhâtus? (blood, etc.)
or are they of some other kinds? A great doubt has arisen in me on all
these points. If these bodies be not made up of five elements, then of
what substance are they built of? And of what gu<u>n</u>as are their
senses built also? How do they enjoy objects of enjoyments? How long is
their longevity? O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! where do they, Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u,
and Mahes'vara, the best of the gods live? And of what nature are their
powers and prosperities? I like very much to hear all these. So describe
all these in detail to me.”

 

11-24. Vyâsa said :-- “O highly intelligent king! The questions that you
have asked me today whence and how Brahmâ, etc., were born ? etc., are

 

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

 

very difficult. In ancient days, once, on an occasion, I asked many
questions like you to the Muni Nârada. At first he was greatly suprised
to hear my queries, afterwards he gave due replies to them. O king! I
will answer to you in the same way; listen. Once I saw that the
all-knowing, peaceful Nârada, the knower of the Vedas was sitting on the
banks of the Ganges. I became very glad and fell at his feet. By his
order I took one excellent seat. Hearing, then, of his welfare and
seeing him sitting on the sands I asked him :-- “O highly intelligent
One! Who is the Supreme Architect of this widely extended Universe?
Whence is this Brahmânda born? Is it eternal or temporary? When it is an
effect, then it is natural that it cannot be created without a cause.
Now when the cause, the creator, is certain, is he one or many? O sage!
as regards this wide Samsâra, I have expressed my doubt; now answer me
what is the Real and True, and thus remove my doubts. Many believe Mahâ
Deva, the Lord of all the other Devas as the Supreme God, the Cause of
all. He is the source of deliverance to all the Jîvas; devoid of birth
and death; always auspicious; peaceful in Himself and  the controller of
the three gu<u>n</u>as. He is the one and only cause of creation,
preservation and destruction. Some Pundits believe Vi<u>sn</u>u as the
God of all and praise Him as such. It is Vi<u>sn</u>u that is the
powerful Supreme Self, the Lord of all and the First Person
Âdipuru<u>s</u>a. It is He that has no birth nor death, the Deliverer of
the whole Jîvas, Omnipresent; His faces are everywhere; He is the
Granter of enjoyments and liberation to the devotees. Some others call
again Brahmâ, the Cause of all. It is He that is omniscient and the
Stimulator of all beings.

 

The four-faced Brahmâ, the best of all the Devas is born from the navel
lotus of some One of endless force. He resides in Satyaloka; He is the
Creator of all and the Lord of all the Devas. Again some other Pundits
call the Sun, Sûrya as God. In the morning and in the evening they chant
His hymns, without any lack of slackness and laziness. Again there are
some others, who say that Indra is the lord of all the Jîvas; He is
thousand-eyed; it is Indra, the husband of S’achî, that is the God of
all. Those who perform Yajñas (sacrifices) worship Vâsava, the king of
the Devas. He drinks Soma juice Himself and those who drink Soma are his
beloved. He is the one and only Lord of Sacrifices. Thus all men
worship, according to their respective wishes, Varu<u>n</u>a, Soma,
Agni, Pavana (wind), Yama (the god of Death), Kuvera, the lord of
wealth; there are some again who worship the elephant-faced
Ga<u>n</u>apati, the Fructifier of all actions, the Granter of desires
of all the devotees, and the Giver of success to all in all enterprises,
no sooner He is remembered. Some Âchâryas (professors) say again that
the All auspicious the Âdi Mâyâ, the Great S’akti Bhavânî, the Giver of
everything, Who is the nature of with and without attributes

 

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

 

Who is not different from Brahmâ, who is both Puru<u>s</u>a and
Prakriti, the Creatrix, the Preservatrix and the Destructrix of all, the
Mother of all the gods, beings and lokas, is the Great Goddess of this
Brahmâ<u>n</u>da. She is without beginning and end, full, present in all
the beings and everywhere. It is this Bhavanî that assumes the various
endless forms such as Vaisnavî S’ânkarî, Brâhmî, Vâsavî, Vâru<u>n</u>î,
Vârâhî, Nara Simhî, Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî the one and secondless Vedamâtâ,
and others. It is this Vidyâ nature that is the One and the only Root of
this tree of Samsâra (universe).

 

The mere act of remembering Her destroys heaps of afflictions of the
devotees and fulfills all their desires. She gives Mok<u>s</u>a to those
who are desirous of liberation and gives rewards to those who want such.
She is beyond the three Gu<u>n</u>as and still She emanates them.
Therefore the Yogis that want rewards meditate Her, Who is of the nature
of Vidyâ and Who is devoid of attributes. The best Munis, the knowers of
the truths of Vedanta meditate on Her as formless, immutable, stainless,
omnipresent Brahmâ devoid of all Dharma. She is described in some Vedas
and Upanishads as full of Light (Tejas). Some intelligent persons
describe God as of infinite hands, infinite ears, infinite legs,
infinite faces, peaceful, Virâ<u>t</u> Puru<u>s</u>a and describe sky as
the Pada (place) of Vi<u>sn</u>u. Other knowers of the Purâ<u>n</u>as
describe Him as Puru<u>s</u>ottama. There are some others again who
declare that this creation cannot be done by a single individual. Some
atheists say that this inconceivable infinite Universe can never be
created by one God. So there is no such definite God that can be called
its Creator. Though without any creator, this Brahmâ<u>n</u>da is sprung
from the Nature and conducted by Her. The followers of the Sâmkhya
system say that Puru<u>s</u>a is not the creator of this Universe; they
declare that Prakriti is the Mistress of this Universe O Muni! Thus I
have expressed to you what the Muni Kapila, the Achârya of the Sânkhyas
and the other philosophers declare as their opinions; various doubts,
thus, reign always in my breast. Owing to these doubts my mind is so
confused that I cannot arrive at any definite conclusion. My mind is
very much unsettled as to what is Dharma and what is Adharma. What are
the characteristics of Dharma? I cannot make out them. For the Devas are
all sprung from the Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a and are always attached to the
true Dharma; yet they are frequently troubled by the sinful Dânavas.
How, then, can I place my confidence on the permanence of the Dharma? My
forefathers, the Pâ<u>nd</u>avas were always endowed with good
behaviours and good actions and they remained always in the path of the
Dharma; yet they suffered a good deal of troubles and sufferings. In
these cases it is very difficult understand the greatness of Dharma. So,
O Father! Seeing all these, my mind is thrown into a sea of doubts and
troubles. O Great Muni!

 

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

 

There is nothing impracticable with you; so remove my doubts. O Muni! I
am always plunged and raised and plunged again in this sea of delusion.
So save me by lifting me on a boat of wisdom and carry me across this
ocean of samsâra (this world).

 

Thus ends the first chapter on the third Skandha on the questions put by
Janamejaya in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>a S'rîmad Devî Bhagâvatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâs.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](bk03ch02)
