[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch24)  [Next](bk03ch26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXV**

 

**On the installation of the Devî in Ayodhyâ and Benares**

 

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

 

1-4. Vyâsa said :-- The king Sudars’ana, surrounded by his friends, on
coming to the palace at Ayodhyâ, bowed down to Lîlâvatî, the mother of
S’atrujit, and said :-- “O mother! I swear by touching your feet, that I
have not killed in battle your son S’atrujit nor your father Yudhâjit;
it is the Devî Durgâ that has killed them; I am not to be blamed a bit
in this. O mother! You need not be sensitive in this; there is no remedy
for what will inevitably come to pass; therefore you do not be sorry for
the death of your son; you must know that the Jîvas enjoy pleasure and
pain as the results of their own Karmas.

 

5\. O mother! I am your servant; you are entitled to the same respect
and worship as Manoramâ, my own mother; there is no difference
whatsoever between her and you.

 

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

 

6\. O mother! One must bear the effects of one’s Karma, good or bad;
therefore when pleasure or pain arises, you should not be glad or
otherwise.

 

7\. When pain arises, more pain is said to be conceived and when
pleasure arises, more pleasure is seen. But the learned say that man
ought not to subject himself to excessive pleasure or pain.

 

8\. O mother! This whole world is under Fate, Destiny; nothing of it is
yours. Therefore the intelligent persons ought not to grieve their
hearts at any time with sorrow.

 

9\. As the wooden dolls dance in a stage as danced by the actor, so the
individual souls here work as the results of their past Karmas; there is
no doubt in this.

 

10\. O mother! I know that the effect of one’s own Karma, must have to
be borne; it is, on that account, that I never felt sorrow in my exile
in the forest.

 

11\. You are quite aware that my mother’s father was killed here, and my
mother, becoming very much afraid and sorrowful, took me and escaped to
the forest.

 

12-13. The robbers robbed us of everything save our clothes on our
bodies; I was then very young; my mother was without any shelter; she
carried me with this minister Vidalla and my helpless nurse to the
hermitage of Bhâradvâja.

 

14\. There the kind hermit and his wife and the other wives of the
hermits protected our lives in that forest, with the roots and fruits,
that can be obtained there in that forest. Thus our time passed.

 

15\. Mother! I had felt no pain then; nor do I feel any pleasure at
present, when wealth is flowing unto me. What more to say, I have no
feeling of jealousy or envy whatsoever in my mind.

 

16\. O mother! Rather it is better, in my eyes, to subsist on roots and
fruits than to enjoy kingdoms; for the kings go to hell; but the
ascetics living on roots and fruits never meet with that result.

 

17\. The wise should undoubtedly practice Dharma and control their
passions and thus save themselves from being led into hells.

 

18-19. O mother! The human birth in this auspicious Bhâratvar<u>s</u>a
is seldom obtained. The enjoyments in eating and drinking are possible
in every womb, but it is highly incumbent on us when we have got the
privilege of this human birth, to earn Dharma, leading to the Heavens
and salvation which can be very rarely attained in being born in other
wombs.”

 

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

 

20-21. Vyâsa said :-- When Sudars’ana had told thus, Lîlâvatî became
very abashed; she cast aside the sorrow for the death of her son, told
him with tears in her eyes :-- “O my son Sudars’ana! I am very much
guilty on account of my father Yudhâjit killing your mother’s father and
taking hold of the sovereignty of this kingdom.

 

22\. I could not then hinder my father and son; whatever unlawful evil
and cruel deeds were then committed, all were done by my father
Yudhâjit. Therefore, my child, I am not to be made guilty in any way in
these doings.

 

23\. Both my father and son were killed out of the wickedness of their
own actions; how can you account for those wicked things? Child! I am
not expressing sorrow at the death of my son; I have been pained by his
doings.

 

24-25. O noble souled one; You are my son; Manoramâ is my sister; Child!
I am not at all offended with you nor am I the least sorry for your
obtaining the kingdom; Child! you are very fortunate; therefore you have
obtained, by the grace of Bhagavatî, this kingdom without any enemies;
now rule your subjects according to the prescribed rules of Dharma.”

 

26-28. Vyâsa said :-- O king! The king Sudars’ana heard Lîlâvatî and
bowed down at her feet. Then he went to the beautiful palace where
Manoramâ had previously gone and began to live there. Inviting the
ministers and the astrologers, he asked them what was the auspicious day
and the auspicious moment, that he can establish Durgâ Devî on a
beautiful golden throne and he would worship Her.

 

29\. “O ministers! First I will install on the throne the Devî, the
Awarder of the four main objects of human pursuits (viz. virtue, wealth,
enjoyment and final beatitude) and then I will govern my kingdom like
the kings S’rî Râma Chandra and others.

 

30\. All the people of this city of Ayodhyâ ought also to worship this
Auspicious S’akti, the Highest Energy, the Giver of all desires and
Siddhis, and that is respected and adored by all.”

 

31\. The ministers, on hearing his words, had a beautiful palace built
by the engineers, artists and workmen and proclaimed in the city the
king’s proclamation.

 

32\. Then the king Sudars’ana had an image of the Devî nicely built and
got that installed with the help of the Pundits, versed in the Vedas, on
an auspicious day and at an auspicious moment.

 

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

 

33\. The intelligent king performed the worship and Homa ceremony,
according to the prescribed rules, and thus finally settled the ceremony
of invocation of the Deity into the new image and established it as an
idol in the temple.

 

34\. O Janamejaya! There the soundings of the various drums and other
musical instruments, the chanting of the Veda mantrams by the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, and sweet music were heard; and various sorts of
festivities and rejoicings were celebrated.

 

35\. Vyâsa said :-- Thus completing the installation ceremony of the
Durgâ Devî by the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, versed in the Vedas, the king
Sudars’ana duly worshipped the image in various ways, etc.

 

36\. Thus gaining his father’s kingdom and worshipping the Devî, he and
the Devî became celebrated throughout the kingdom.

 

37\. The religious largehearted Sudars’ana, on gaining his kingdom,
brought all the other feudatory princes under his control by the sheer
force of his religious character.

 

38\. The subjects became happy and got honor in the reign of Sudars’ana,
as they got before in the reigns of Dilîp, Raghu and Râmachandra.

 

39\. The virtue of all the citizens under Var<u>n</u>âs’rama shone
complete with all its four pâdas; and there remained none in the world
irreligious.

 

40\. In villages after villages, the chief townsmen began to build
temples, worship the Goddess there with all their jolliness. Thus
everywhere in the Kosala kingdom spread the Devî worship.

 

41\. On the other hand, the king Subâhu established the Idol in Benares,
had temples built and worshipped there the Devî.

 

42\. The inhabitants of Kâs’î became then filled with devotion and
intense love towards the Devî and duly worshipped Her, as they used to
do to S’iva in the temple of Vis’vanâtha.

 

43\. Thus the Durgâ Devî became very widely celebrated in this world. O
king! Thus in different countries, the devotion began to increase
towards the Goddess.

 

44\. The Devî Bhagavatî Bhavânî became in every way an object to be
worshipped and adored by all people and everywhere in
Bhâratavar<u>s</u>a.

 

45\. The people began to recite slowly, meditate, and chant hymns as
advocated by the Âgamas constantly and became deeply attached to the
S’akti worship and began to be looked upon with the highest honour by
others.

 

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

 

46\. O king! From that time all the people used to worship, perform Homa
ceremony and sacrifice duly in honour of the Devî in every Navarâtri
(for the first nine days of the bright half in the months of Âs’vin and
Chaitra).

 

Here ends the 25th Chapter on the installation of the Devî in Ayodhyâ
and Benares in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](bk03ch26)
