[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch09)  [Next](bk03ch11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

** **

**Chapter X**

** **

**On the story of Satyavrata**

 

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

 

1\. Janamejaya said :-- O Mahar<u>s</u>i! Who was Satyavrata, the
Brâhmi<u>n</u> whose name you have just taken? In what country was he
born? Of what nature was he? Please describe all these to me and satisfy
my curiosity?

 

2\. How did he hear that sound “Ai”; how did he repeat that word? How
came out the success to him, that illiterate Brâhma<u>n</u>, at that
very instant?

 

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

 

3\. And how is it that that Great Goddess, who is omniscient and
omnipresent, was pleased with him, kindly describe this interesting
incident in detail.

 

4\. Sûta said :-- Vyâsa, the son of Satyavatî, thus asked by the king,
addressed in the following pure, sweet, and highly liberal words.

 

5\. Vyâsa said :-- Hear, O king! You are the best and foremost in the
Kuru clan; what I before heard in the assembly of the Munis, I am now
relating that ancient story, highly beneficial to you.

 

6\. O best of the Kurus! Once in my peregrinations in the holy places of
pilgrimages, I came to the Naimisâranya forest, that highly sacred place
frequented by the Munis.

 

7-8. That time there were staying Sanaka, Sanâtana and the other sons of
Brâhma who were liberated while living. I went there and bowed down to
the Munis and took my seat. Then the religious conversations ensued
there in the assembly, when the great sage Mahar<u>s</u>i Jamadagni
began to question the Munis in the following terms :--

 

9\. O high-minded excellent ascetics and Munis! There has arisen a great
doubt in my mind; I am desirous to have that doubt solved in this
assembly of the Mahar<u>s</u>is.

 

10-12. O all-knowing Mahar<u>s</u>is that have fulfilled your vows! O
Givers of one's honour! Now my question is this :-- Of the following
Devas Brâhma, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Rudra, Indra, Varu<u>n</u>a, Fire, Kuvera,
Wind, Visvakarmâ, Kârtikeya, Ganesa, the Sun, the two As'vins, Bhaga,
Pûsâ, Moon, and the other planets, who is the first and best to be
worshipped, that can easily be served; who is very quickly satisfied and
grants the desired boons; kindly tell me this as early as possible.

 

13\. Thus questioned by the Muni Jamadagni, Mahar<u>s</u>i Lomas'a, one
in the assembly, spoke :-- O Jamadagni! Hear in reply to your question.

 

14-15. The Goddess of Energy is the best of the Devas, most excellent
and highest to be worshipped. Those who want welfare, they ought to
worship this Supreme Force. She is the Parâ Prakriti, the Highest
Nature, the Brâhma, conditioned by Mâyâ (Time, space, and causation).
She grants all the desires, does good to all, pervades everywhere, and
is the Mother of Brâhma and the other high souled Devas. She is the
First Prakriti, and is the Root of this gigantic Tree of Universe.

 

16\. If any one calls the Devî in remembrance or distinctly utters Her
Name, She fulfills all the desires of the human beings. If anybody
worships Her, She is at once filled with mercy and becomes ready to
grant boons.

 

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

 

17\. O Munis! How, once on a time, at Brâhmi<u>n</u>, uttering one
letter of Her mystical mantra, obtained Her Grace, I am now describing
that most auspicious history before you. Be pleased to hear.

 

18\. Once on a time, there lived in the country of Kosala,\* a famous
Brâhmi<u>n</u>, named Deva Datta. He had no issues and therefore started
duly according to the prescribed rules a sacrifice called
Puttre<u>st</u>i for the sake of obtaining children.

 

\*Kosala is a country situated, according to Râmâya<u>n</u>a, along the
banks of the Sarayû (or Gogrâ). It was divided into Uttara-Kosala and
Dakshina Kosala. The former is also called Ganda and it must have
therefore signified the country, north of Ayodhyâ comprising Gonda and
Bahraich. Aja and Dasaratha, etc., are said to have ruled over the
province. At the time of Râma's death, his two sons Kusa and Lava
reigned respectively at Kusâvati in Southern Kosala in the defiles of
the Vindhyas and at Srâvasti in northern Kosala.

 

19-20. On the banks of the Tamasâ river, the Brâhmi<u>n</u> erected a
temporary building (or an open shade) for performing the ceremony, and
there built an altar and invited the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, versed in the
Vedas, and clever in performing sacrificial rites. There he placed the
fire and began to perform according to the strict rules, the
Puttre<u>st</u>i sacrifice.

 

21-22. In that sacrifice, Suhotra, the best of the Munis acted the part
of Brâhma (1); Yâjñyavalkya acted the part of Adhvaryu (2); Brihaspati,
that of Hotâ (3); Paila, that of Prastotâ (4); Govila, that of Udgâtâ
(6); and the other Munis acted as assistants. These all were duly paid
their remunerations.

 

\(1\) One of the four priests employed at a Soma sacrifice as a
superintendent.

\(2\) Any officiating priest technically distinguished from Hotri,
Udgâtri and Brâhma<u>n</u>. His duty was to measure the ground, build
the altar, prepare sacrificial vessels, to fetch wood and water, light
the fire, bring the animal and immolate it and while doing this to
repeat the Yajurveda.

\(3\) A sacrificing priest who offers the oblations. Or one who recites
the prayers of the Rigveda at a sacrifice.

\(5\) One of the four principal priests at a sacrifice, one who chants
the hymns of the Sâmaveda.

 

23-24. The Hotâ Govila, the excellent reciter of the Sâma hymns, began
to sing in accented tones called svarita (the accents are three Udâtta,
Anudâtta and Svarita) and the Rathantara Sâma in 7 tunes.

 

Then he began to draw breath frequently; and consequently there was a
break in time in the accent of Govila. Seeing this, Deva Datta was angry
and immediately said to Govila.

 

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

 

25\. Well, Govila, you are the foremost of the Munis and still you are
doing your work like a quite illiterate man. I fear obstacles may arise
in the getting of my son in this my sacrifice of Puttre<u>st</u>i.

 

26\. Govila then became much enraged and told Deva Datta “your son will
be illiterate, hypocrite, and dumb.”

 

27\. Behold! Every being is subject to breathing and respiring; it is
very hard to control them; there is no fault of mine in the accents of
my songs being thus broken; it is strange that you, being intelligent,
cannot understand this.

 

28\. Being afraid to hear the curse from Govila, Deva Datta became very
sorry and said “O Muni! I have done no serious offence; why are you so
offended without any cause. See! The Munis are void of anger and they
always give delight to others.”

 

29-30. O best of Brâhmans! My offence is very trifling; why have you
inflicted on me so severe a curse? I was already under the mental agony,
since I had no issues; and now you have made me suffer move pain.

 

31\. For the Vedic Pundits declare that it is better not to have any son
than to have an illiterate stupid son; the more so, when a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>'s son is illiterate, he is blamed by one and all.

 

32\. An illiterate son is like a S’ûdra or a beast; he is unfit for any
action. O Brâhmin! What shall I do with an illiterate son?

 

33\. An illiterate Brâhmi<u>n</u> is like a S’ûdra; consequently not an
object to be engaged in any act of worship or of gifts, he is not
deserving to do any action.

 

34\. A Brâhma<u>n</u>, bereft of the knowledge of the Vedas, living in a
country is treated as a S’ûdra by the king of the place and is liable to
pay taxes.

 

35\. Whoever wants to have any fruit in any action will never invite an
illiterate Brâhmi<u>n</u> to take his seat in the ceremony relating to
the Pitris or the Devas.

 

36\. The king will consider an illiterate Brâhmin as if a S’ûdra and
will never engage him in any religious ceremony but will order him to do
the work of a farmer in cultivating fields.

 

37\. Rather to perform the funeral ceremonies by erecting a
Kus'aba<u>t</u>a than to engage an illiterate Brâhmi<u>n</u> for the
purpose.

 

38\. One should give food to an illiterate Brâhmi<u>n</u> just
sufficient to fill his belly and no more. If he does not do that, the
giver and especially the receiver are subject to go down to hell.

 

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

 

39\. Fie to a kingdom where honour is shown to the illiterate stupid
Brâhma<u>n</u>as.

 

40\. Where no difference is observed when seats, worship and gift are
given to various persons, sages should draw their inference how the
literate and illiterate persons are treated there.

 

41\. When the illiterate fools become haughty, when they are paid
honours and gifts, the literary persons should never dwell there.

 

42\. The wealth of the wicked goes to the enjoyments of the bad persons;
for the Nim trees, though abounding richly in fruits, are enjoyed only
by crows.

 

43\. Again, on the other hand, if the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, versed in the
Vedas, study the Vedas even after they have taken their food, still his
father and forefathers are happy and play cheerfully in their heavens.

 

44\. Therefore O Govîla! You being the foremost of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>
who are versed in the Vedas, what have you said just now? See in this
world, death is rather to be preferred then to have an illiterate son.
How is it, then, that you have cursed me that I would get an illiterate
son, when you are the best one, highly qualified with knowledge.

 

45\. O high minded one! You are capable to relieve the distressed; I am
bowing down to your feet; shew your mercy and re-consider your curse.

 

46\. Lomas'a said :-- O Munis! Devadatta, saying these words, fell
prostrate at his feet and began to eulogise him in very pitiful words,
being very much grieved and with tears in his eyes.

 

47\. Seeing him thus distressed, Govila was moved with pity. The persons
that are noble have their anger satiated after a short while; the anger
of the ignoble lasts for a long time.

 

48\. The water is naturally cool; but it gets hot in contact with fire
heat; and no sooner the heat is drawn away, water gets again cooled
quickly.

 

49\. The merciful Govila then addressed the distressed Devadatta “your
son though at first illiterate, will afterwards be very learned.”

 

50\. The Brâhmi<u>n</u> Devadatta was very glad on getting this boon;
then completing the sacrifice, rewarded the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s with their
due dakshi<u>n</u>âs and dismissed them.

 

51\. In due course of time, his fair chaste wife Rohi<u>n</u>î, like the
asterism Rohi<u>n</u>î became pregnant.

 

52\. Devadatta performed the Garbhâdhân (1) and Pumsavan (2) ceremonies
and other purificatory rites duly.

 

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

 

53\. He performed the Sîmantonnayana ceremony according to rules and
considered his Puttrve<u>st</u>i sacrifice successful and made various
offerings to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s.

 

N. B. -- (1) One of the Samskâras, purificatory ceremonies, performed
after menstruation to ensure or facilitate conception (this ceremony
legalises in a religious sense the consummation of marriage).

\(2\) It is a ceremony performed on a woman's perceiving the first signs
of a living conception, with a view to the birth of a son.

\(3\) “Parting of the hair” one of the twelve Samskâras or purificatory
rites observed by women in the fourth, sixth, or eighth month of their
pregnancy.

 

54-55. In the auspicious lagna when Rohi<u>n</u>î asterism was present
and in the auspicious day, his wife Rohi<u>n</u>î gave birth to a male
child. Devadatta performed the nativities of the new born child and saw
its face. Next that knower of the Purâ<u>n</u>as, Devadatta kept the
name of the child as Utathya.

 

56\. When the son was eight years old, Devadatta performed the Upanayana
(thread) ceremony duly.

 

57-58. Next the child was made to accept the vow of Brâhmachâri; and
Devadatta made him study the Vedas; but the child could not pronounce a
single word and used to sit simply like a stupid boy. Though tried in
various ways to read and write, that wicked boy never paid the slightest
attention, simply sat idly. Seeing this, his father was very sorry and
much grieved.

 

59\. Thus twelve years passed. Yet the boy could not learn how to
perform his Sandhyâ Bandanâ duly.

 

60\. The rumour went abroad that Utathya, the son of Devadatta turned
out very illiterate. All the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, ascetics, and other
persons came to learn this fact.

 

61\. Wherever Utathya used to go in any forest on hermitage, the people
used to laugh at him, ridiculed his father and mother and began to chide
that illiterate son.

 

62\. Thus blamed by father, mother and all other persons, dispassion
occupied the heart of Utathya.

 

63\. Once when rebuked by his father and mother that it was better to
have a blind and lame son instead of an illiterate brute, Utathya took
recourse to renunciation and went to a dense forest.

 

64-65. On the banks of the Ganges in a beautiful spot free from
obstacles, he built a beautiful hut and began to subsist on the roots
and

 

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

 

fruits of the forest and with collected mind. Having made the excellent
vow “I will never speak untruth” and holding the vow of celibacy, he
lived in that beautiful hermitage.

 

Thus ends the 10th chapter in the 3rd Skandha of S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa relating to the
story of Satyavrata.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](bk03ch11)
