[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch25)  [Next](bk03ch27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXVI**

 

**On the narration of what are to be done in the Navarâtri**

 

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

 

1\. Janamejaya said :-- “O Best of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s! What are men to
do in the time of Navarâtra? Especially in the Navarâtra ceremony during
the autumnal season how is the ceremony to be performed? Kindly relate
all this with the prescribed rules and regulations.

 

2\. O intelligent one! What are the fruits therein of the Navarâtra
ceremony? and what are the rules to be observed? Kindly describe all
these to me.”

 

3-5. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Hear about the vow of auspicious Navarâtra.
This has to be performed with loving devotion in the vernal season; but
its special season is autumn. The two seasons, autumn and spring, are
famous as the teeth of Yama, the God of Death; and these are the two
seasons, very hard for the persons to cross over. Therefore every
goodfaring man should everywhere perform this vow very carefully.

 

6-8. O king! The people are very much afflicted with various terrible
diseases in these two seasons autumn and spring and many lose their
lives during these portions of the year. Therefore the wise should
unquestionably worship with great devotion the Chandikâ Devî in these
auspicious months of Chaitra and Âs’vin.

 

9-11. On the day previous to the commencement of the vow, when the
Amâvasyâ tithi commences, one should collect the materials that will be
required in the worship and should eat only once in that tithi what is
called Habi<u>s</u>yânna (sacred food, boiled rice with ghee) and should
on that day prepare an open shade in a temporary building, twenty four
(24) feet in dimensions, on a level piece of ground, that is considered
holy; it is to be equipped with a post and a flag. Next, this is to be
heaped over with yellow earth and cow dung. Then a raised platform
called the Vedî, six feet wide and one and a half foot high, level and
hard, is to be erected, and provided with an excellent space thereon for
the seat of the Devî. Provisions are to be made also for ornamented gate
ways and an awning over the top.

 

12-17. One should invite then, those Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, that observe fully
the customs and usages, who are self restrained and versed in the Vedas
and Vedângas, especially those who are skilled in the ceremony of
worshipping the Devî.

 

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

 

Next, in the Pratipad tithi (the first day of the bright half), one
should take one’s morning ablutions in a river, or in a lake, tank or a
well or in one’s own residence, according to rules, and one should
perform one’s every day practices of Sandhyâ Bandanam. Afterwards he
should appoint the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s and give them water for washing their
feet and Arghya (offerings of grass, rice, etc.,) and Madhuparka (an
oblation of honey and milk, etc.) and give then, as his means permit,
clothings and ornaments to them. If he happens to be rich, he should
never show his miserliness here in making these gifts; for if the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s be satisfied, they will try their best to make the
ceremony a complete success. O king! The Chan<u>d</u>î paths (the
reading of the book called Chan<u>d</u>î) and Bhâgavata paths (the
reading of some portions of the book named Bhâgavat) are done on this
occasion, for the satisfaction of the Goddess; and either nine
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s or five or three or at least one Brâhmi<u>n</u> should
be appointed for the purpose. Moreover one other Brâhmi<u>n</u>, of a
restrained and calm nature, is to be appointed, who would observe the
fasting on the day previous (pârâya<u>n</u>a). All these being done, the
able man is to perform the ceremony preparatory to the solemn Devî
worship, (in which the priest utters the Vedîc mantra Svasti-vâchana,
Svasti na Indro vriddhas’ravâh, etc.). Om Hrîm S’rîm Dûm Dûrgâyai namah
is the nine lettered Dûrgâ mantra.

 

18-20. O king! When the ceremony has been thus commenced, one should
place on the Vedî (a raised platform; an altar), the throne fitted with
double silken clothes; and, on that throne, he should place the image of
the Devî. The Devî, the Eternal World-Mother, is to be four-armed or
eighteen armed, (4 or 18) fully provided with all the weapons,
ornamented with garlands of pearls and jewels, decorated with various
ornaments of gems and precious stones, wearing excellent heavenly
clothings, all the parts of the image being artistically finished and
endowed with all the auspicious signs, mounted on a lion, and holding
conch shell, wheel, club, and lotus in Her hands.

 

Note :-- The Devî, here, is represented with four (4) or eighteen (18)
hands.

 

21-22. In the absence of the image, one should place an earthen
water-pot, on that throne, thoroughly purified by the Vedîc Mantras,
filled with gold and jewels, and filled fully with the water, brought
from a sacred river or a sacred place of pilgrimage and with five young
shoots of plants, the extremities of branches bearing new leaves
immersed in water. Beside the water-pot on the throne, there should be a
symbol (Diagram or Yantra) with the nine lettered Mantram (Om Hrîm S’rîm
Cha<u>nd</u>ikâyai namah) in it for the purpose of worship.

 

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

 

23\. One should place on one’s side all the materials of worship in
their due places, and then have the music and other sounding drums
played, for the good fortune and prosperity of the family.

 

Note :-- Look for the mantras in the book Mantramaho Dadhi.

 

24\. O king! If the first day be the Nandâ tithi (i.e., the first day of
the bright half with the asterism Hastâ in the ascendant), then that is
the best time for worshipping duly the Holy Goddess. There is no doubt
that special fortunate results would arise on this.

 

25\. On the previous night, one should observe fasting, or on the
previous day one should take only one meal of Habi<u>s</u>yânna (boiled
rice and ghee) and on the next day one should make a Sankalpa (an avowal
of the purpose to perform a rite) and then begin worship.

 

26\. One should pray before the Goddess thus, “O Mother, Mother of the
World! I will perform this excellent Navarâtra vow; be pleased to help
me in every respect.”

 

27\. One is to observe, as far as possible, all the rules enjoined in
this vow and then utter the mantras and do the worship according to the
prescribe rules.

 

28-31. First of all, one should worship duly the Goddess Jagaddhâtri,
presenting Her Chandan (sandal paste), Aguru (a fragrant wood, the aloe
wood), Camphor, the flowers Mandâra (one of the five trees of the
celestial regions), Karaja a kind of fragrant flower)! As’oka, Champaka,
Karavir, Mâlatî, and Brâhmî and various lovely sweet scented flowers and
good Bel leaves, Dhûpa (incense, a fragrant gum burnt before idols) and
lamps. Next one should present the fruits cocoanut, Mâtulinga, the
pomegranate, bananas, oranges, the jack fruits, Bel and various other
delicious fruit and then, offering Her arghya, present boiled rice and
other food with a heart, full of devotion.

 

32\. Those who eat meat, they can sacrifice animals in this worship of
the Devî; and, for this purpose, goat and wild boars are the best.

 

33-34. O sinless one! The goats, etc., offered as a sacrifice before the
Devî attain to unending heavens. Therefore persons offering the
sacrifices of goats do not incur any sin. O king! The goats, etc., and
other beast offered as a sacrifice before the Devas undoubtedly go to
the heavenly regions; therefore, in all the S’âstras, it has been
decided that this killing of animals in a sacrifice is considered as
non-killing.

 

35\. Now, for doing the Homa ceremony one should prepare, according to
one’s requirements, a triangular pit from one to ten hands in dimension
and a triangular level piece of ground covered with sand.

 

36\. Daily, thrice, one should worship the Devî with various lovely

 

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

 

articles and finally make a great festivity with dancing, singing and
music.

 

37\. Everyday he should sleep on the ground and worship the virgins
(young girl from the age of two to the age of ten) with nectar like
sweetmeats and beautiful clothings aud ornaments.

 

38\. Everyday one virgin or increased by one, two, or three every day or
nine virgins in all the days respectively are to be worshipped.

 

39\. O king! One should perform worshipping this Kumârî (virgin) Pujâ
for the satisfaction of the Devî, as his means allow; never one is to
shew miserliness in this.

 

40\. O king! Hear the rules of the virgin worship that I am going to
tell you. The virgin, aged one year, is not to be worshipped; for they
are quite ignorant as to smell and tasting various delicious things.

 

41-43. The virgin aged two years is named the Kumârî; aged three years
is named the Trimurtî four years, is called the Kalyânî; five years,
Rohi<u>n</u>î; six years, Kâlikâ; seventh year, Chandikâ; eighth year,
S’âmbhavî; ninth year, Dûrgâ; and a virgin, aged ten years, is called
Subhadrâ. Virgins aged more than ten years are not allowed in all
ceremonies.

 

44\. One should worship these virgins, taking their names and observing
all the rules. I am now mentioning the different results that arise from
the worship of these nine classes of virgins.

 

45\. The worship of Kumârî leads to the extinction of miseries and
poverty, to the extirpation of one’s enemies and the increment of
riches, longevity and power.

 

46\. The Trimurtî Pujâ yields longevity, and the acquisition of the
three things, Dharma, wealth, and desires, the coming in of riches, sons
and grandsons.

 

47\. Those who want learning, victory, kingdom and happiness, they
should worship the Kalyânî, the fructitier of all desires.

 

48-49. Men should worship Rohi<u>n</u>î duly for the cure of diseases.
For the destruction of enemies, the worship of the Kâlikâ with devotion
is the best. For prosperity and riches, Chandikâ is to be worshipped
with devotion. O king! For the enchanting and overpowering of one’s
enemies, for the removal of miseries and poverty, and for victory in
battles, S’âmbhavî worship is the best.

 

50-51. For the destruction of awfully terrible enemies and for happiness
in the next world, the worship of Dûrgâ is the safest and best. People
worship Subhadrâ when they want their desires to be fulfilled.

 

52\. People should, with great devotion, worship the Kumârîs (virgins)
with the mantrams “S’rîrastu” or other mantrams, beginning with “S’rî”
or with the seed mantrams.

 

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

 

53\. The Goddess who can create without any difficulty all the sacred
tattvas of the Kumâr Kârtikeya and who effects, as if in sport, the
creation of all the Devas Brahmâ and others; I am worshiping the same
Kumârî Devî.

 

54\. She who is appearing under the three forms as differentiated by the
three gu<u>n</u>as Sâttva, Râjas, and Tâmas, and who is appearing in
multiple forms, owing to the differentiations of the three gu<u>n</u>as
again into various minor differences, I am worshipping Her the Trimûrtî
Devî.

 

55\. She who being worshipped always fares us with auspicious things, I
am worshipping Her, with devotion, the Kumârî Kalyânî, the awarder of
all desires.

 

56\. I am worshipping the Rohi<u>n</u>î Devî with a heart, full of
devotion who is germinating all the karmas in seed forms, that have
accumulated owing to past deeds.

 

57\. She who, at the end of a Kalpa gathers unto Her in the form of Kâlî
all this Universe, moving and unmoving, I worship that Kâlikâ Devî with
devotion.

 

58\. She, who is furious and wrathful and hence is called Chandikâ and
who killed the two Demons Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a I bow down to
Her humbly with devotion, to that Chandikâ Devî, who destroys the
terrible sins.

 

59\. I worship that S’âmbhavî Devî, the giver of all pleasures and
happiness, whose form is the Veda Brahmâ, and whose origin is without
any cause, and whe is so recited in the Vedas.

 

60\. She who saves from danger her devotees and who always delivers from
various difficulties and troubles, whom all the Devas are incapable to
know, I worship with devotion that Dûrgâ Devî the destroyer of all
calamities.

 

61\. I, with my mind devoted, offer my salutations to that Subhadrâ
Devî, Who procures all auspiciousness to Her devotees and removes all
inauspicious incidents.

 

62\. Thus, in the mantrams, above described, people should always
worship the virgin girls, giving them clothings, ornaments, garlands,
scents, and various other articles.

 

Here ends the 26th Chapter on the narration of what are to be done in
the Navarâtri in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](bk03ch27)
