[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch04)  [Next](bk03ch06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

** **

**Chapter V**

** **

**On the chanting of hymns by Hara and Brahmâ**

 

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

 

1\. Brahmâ said :-- O Nàrada! Thus speaking, Vi<u>sn</u>u stopped;
Sankara, the Destroyer, then stepped in and, bowing down to the Devî
said :--

 

2\. S’iva said :-- O Devî! If Hari be born by Thy power and the
lotus-born Brahmâ have come into existence from Thee, why, then, I who
of Tamo Gu<u>n</u>a be not born of Thee! O Auspicious One! Thou art
clever in creating all the Lokas! What wonder is there in My being
created by Thee.

 

3\. O Mother! Thou art the earth, water, air, âkâsa and fire. Thou art,
again, the organs of senses and the organs of perception; Thou art
Buddhi, mind and Ahankâra (egoism).

 

4\. Those who say that Hari, Hara, and Brahmâ are respectively the
Preserver, the Destroyer and the Creator of this whole Universe do know
anything. All the three, above mentioned, are created by Thee; then they
perform always their respective functions; their sole refuge being
Thyself.

 

5\. O Mother! If the Universe be created of the five elements, earth,
air, ether, fire, and water, having the properties of touch, taste,
etc., then how these five elements possessing attributes and of the
nature of effects, can come into manifestation, without their being born
from Thy Chit portion (Intelligence)?

 

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

 

6\. O Auspicious Mother! It is Thou in the shape of Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u
and S’iva, That art creating this Universe and it is Thou that hast
assumed the form of this whole Universe, moving and non-moving. Thus
Thou playest, as it wills Thee, under various forms, again and again.
Thou dost cease from play (during pralaya) as it likes Thee.

 

7\. O Mother! When Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and I become desirous to create
the world, we execute our duties by taking the dust (earth, etc.) of Thy
lotus feet.

 

8\. O Mother! It it were not Thy mercy, then how Brahmâ could have
become endowed with Rajogu<u>n</u>a, Vi<u>sn</u>u with Sattvagu<u>n</u>a
and I with Tamogu<u>n</u>a?

 

9\. O Mother! If there were no differences observed in Thy mind, then
why hast Thou created in this world rich and poor, king and councillors,
servants, etc., various classes of beings? Why hast Thou not created all
alike happy or all alike miserable?

 

10\. So Thou wilt have to show Thy mercy towards me. Thy three
gu<u>n</u>as are capable at all times to create, preserve and destroy
the world; then Hari, Hara and Brahmâ, whom Thou hast created as the
cause of the three worlds, is simply Thy will.

 

11-12. O Bhavâni! If Thy Gu<u>n</u>as had no power in the acts of
creation, etc., then how can the fact that while we three Hari, Brahmâ
and I were coming in the aeroplane, we saw on our way new worlds created
by Thee, become possible? Kindly dost Thou say on this. O World-Mother!
It is Thou that desirest to create, preserve, and destroy this world by
Thy part Mâyik power. Thou art always enjoying with Puru<u>s</u>a, Thy
husband. O S’iva! We cannot fathom Thy inscrutable ways.

 

13-15. O auspicious one! How can we understand Thy sport? O Mother! We
are transformed into young women before Thee; let us serve Thy lotus
feet. If we get our manhood, we will be deprived from serving Thy feet
and thus of the greatest happiness. O Mother! O Sire! I do not like to
leave Thy lotus feet and get my man-body again and reign in the three
worlds. O Beautiful faced one! Now that I have got this youthful
feminine form before Thee, there is not a trace of desire within me to
get again my masculine form. What use is there in getting manhood, what
happiness is there if I do not get sight of Thy lotus-feet!

 

16-18. O Mother! Let this unsullied fame of mine be spread over in the
three worlds that I have got, in this young womanly form, the chance of
serving Thy lotus feet that has got this effect that the idea of world
goes away. Who is there that will leave Thy service and desire to enjoy
the foeless kingdom in the world? Oh! even a moment appears a Yuga to
him who has not got Thy lotus feet with him! O Mother! Those that

 

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

 

leave the worship of Thy lotus feet and become engaged in performing
tapasyâ are certainly deprived of the best thing by the Creator, though
their minds be pure and holy. Their power from their Tapasyâ may be
acquired and they be entitled for Mukti; yet they get dire defeat from
not having Thee.

 

19\. O Unborn One! Austerities, control of passions, enlightenment or
performance of sacrifices, as ordained in the Vedas, nothing can save,
from this ocean of Samsâra. It is the devotional worship only of Thy
lotus feet that can make one attain the Beatitude. O Devî! If Thou be
extremely merciful towards me, then initiate me in that wonderful holy
mantra of Thine; I will repeat that omnipotent par-excellent
nine-lettered mantra of the Chandikâ Devî and be happy.

 

20-26. O Mother! In my former birth I got the nine-lettered mantra but
now I have forgotten it O Tari<u>n</u>î! O Saviour! Give me today that
mantra and save me from this ocean of world. Brahmâ said :-- When S’iva
of wonderful fire and energy, said this, the Devî Ambikâ clearly uttered
the nine lettered mantra. Mahâdeva accepted the mantra and became very
glad. He fell down at the feet of the Devî, and then and there began to
repeat the nine-lettered mantra together with Vîja (seed) that yields
desires and liberation and can be easily pronounced. When I saw
S'ankara, the Auspicious One to all the Lokas, in that state, I fell
down also at the feet of the Devî and spoke to Mahâ Mâyâ :-- O Mother!
It is not that the Vedas are unable to ascertain Thy nature; for, in the
performances of sacrifices and other minor actions, they do not mention
Thy full Nature, the Ordainer of all but mention simply Indra and minor
deities and Svâhâ Devî, a portion of Thy essence as the presiding
deities of the sacrificial offerings and oblations. So, O Devî! It is
Thou that hast been extolled in this Universe as the Universal
Consciousness, all knowing and transcending all the Devas and all the
Lokas.

 

Note :-- The nine lettered mantra is “Om Hrîm S'rîm Chan<u>d</u>ikâyai
nama<u>h</u>.”

 

27\. I have created this greatly wondrous Universe; I am the Lord of
this Brahmân<u>d</u>a. Who is there more powerful than me in these three
worlds? When I am Brahmâ, transcending all the Lokas, then I am blessed;
there is no doubt in this. By reason of this vanity I am plunged in this
widely extended ocean of Samsàra.

 

28-31. That now I have been able to get the dust of Thy lotus feet, has
now made me really proud; and truly I am blessed today and by Thy grace
this manifestation of pride on my part has become quite justified. Thou
destroyest the fear of this Samsâra and givest Mukti. So, O Goddess!
pray unto Thee that Thou dost cut asunder this iron chain of my
delusion,

 

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

 

full of great troubles and make me devoted to Thee. O Auspicious One! I
am born from the lotus discovered by Thee; now I am extremely anxious
how I can get Mukti. I am Thy obedient servant; I am merged in the
delusion of this ocean of world. Save me O S’iva! from this Samsâra.
Those who do not know Thy character, think that I am the Creator and
Lord of this Universe; those, who do not worship Thee and worship Indra
and other Devas and perform sacrifices to attain Heaven are certainly
ignorant of Thy glory. O Prime Mâyâ! Thou art the Eternal Mahâ Mâyâ! It
is Thou that dost want to play this worldplay, and for that purpose hast
created me as Brahmâ. Then I created these four sorts of beings,
engendered by heat and moisture (said of insects and worms), those that
are oviparous, those that are sprung from germs or shoots, and those
that are born from womb, viviparous and exhibit my pride “That I am
omniscient” So forgive this sin of mine, this my pride.

 

32-37. O Mother ! Those ignorant persons blinded by passion, who take
recourse to the eight-fold Yoga and Samâdhi and labour under it, do not
know for certain, they would get Mok<u>s</u>a, if they utter Thy name,
even under a pretext. O Bhavânî! are they not deluded by error and
blinded by passion for this world, who discriminate only the Tattvas
(essences) and forget Thy name? For it is Thou that dost give Mukti from
this world. O Thou Unborn! Can Hari, Hara, etc., and other ancient
persons who have realised the highest Truth, forget, even for a second
Thy holy character and Thy names S’iva, Ambikâ, S'akti, Isvarî and
others? Canst Thou not create, by Thy glance merely, this fourfold
creation? In fact, for mere recreation and will, it is Thou that hast
made me as a Creator from the earliest times. Is it not that Thou didst
save Hari in the ocean from the two Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha? Is it
not again the fact that Thou destroyest Hara even who is the great
destroyer, when Thou dissolvest the creation? Otherwise why is it that
Hara becomes born from my eye-brows at the time of fresh creation? So
Hari is not the Preserver of all. Hara is not the Destroyer of all. Had
they been such, why would they be preserved and destroyed respectively
by Thee? So Thou alone art the Creatrix and Preservatrix of all. O
Bhavânî; no one has heard of or seen Thee taking birth; nobody knows
whence Thou art born. Thou art, indeed, the One and only S'akti! Only
the four Vedas can make one understand Thy Nature. O Mother! It is only
by Thy help that I am able to create this creation; Hari, to preserve;
and Hara, to destroy.

 

Without Thy aid, we are able to do nothing. There is nobody, in this
world, born or that was born or that will be born, who does not become
doubtful as we are. This Thine wondrously variegated Universe, full of
Thy Lîlâ, consisting in variety, is the common ground of dispute of the
imperfect intellects; who are not deluded here! In this Samsârâ, full

 

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

 

of things, visible and invisible, there is another one who is more
ancient than Thee; there is another Highest Person who is Thy
substratum. If it be argued nicely, it will be seen that there is no
other third Person that can be proved as far as evidences or proofs go
to measure it. The wise persons, knowing all the laws, declare that
there is the One God attributeless, inactive, without any object in
view, without any upâdhis or adjunct without any parts, who is the
witness of Thy widely extended Leelâ “One alone exists; and that is
Brahmân, and there is nothing else.” This is the saying of the Vedas.
Now I feel in my mind a doubt as to the discrepancy with this Veda
saying. I cannot say that the Veda is false. So I ask Thee :-- Art Thou
the Brahmân, the one and the secondless that is mentioned in the Vedas?
or Is the other Person Brahmâ? Kindly solve this doubt of mine. My mind
is not completely free from doubts; this little mind is still discussing
whether the Reality is dual or one; I cannot solve myself. So dost Thou
say from Thy mouth and cut my doubts asunder. Whether Thou art male or
female, describe in detail to me. So that, knowing the Highest S'akti, I
be freed from this ocean Samsâra.

 

Thus ends the fifth chapter of the Third Skandha on the chanting of
hymns by Hara and Brahmâ in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S'rîmad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](bk03ch06)
