[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch10)  [Next](bk03ch12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XI**

 

**On the merits of the Devî in the story of Satyavrata**

 

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

 

1-5. Lomas’a said :-- O Munis! Utatthya, the son of Devadatta, was quite
ignorant of anything of the Vedas, Japam (muttering of mantra),
meditation of the deity, worship of the Devas, Âsana (Posture),
Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma (withholding the breath by way of religious austerity),
Pratyâhâra (restraint of mind), Bhûtas’uddhi (purification of the
elements of the body by respiratory attraction and replacement), mantra
(a mystical formula regarding some deity), Kîlaka (chanting of a mantra
to serve as a pin of protection), Gâyattrî (the famous mantra of the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s), Saucha (cleanliness, external and internal), rules how
to bathe, Âchamana (sipping of water and reciting mantrams before
worship), Prâ<u>n</u>âgnihotra (offering of oblations to the fire of
Prâ<u>n</u>a or to the fire of life), the offering of a sacrifice,
hospitality, Sandhyâ (the morning, mid-day or evening prayer),
collecting fuels for oblations, and offering of oblations. Daily he rose
in the morning and somehow rinsed his mouth and washed his teeth and
bathed in the Ganges river without any mantrams (like a Sûdra).

 

6\. That stupid fellow ate indiscriminately, did not know what to eat
and what not to eat. During the mid-day he collected the fruits from the
forest and used to eat them.

 

7\. But he always spoke truth while he stayed there; never did he say
any untruth. The people of that place, seeing this, named him Satyatapâ.

 

8-9. That Utatthya did no good or bad to anybody; he slept peacefully
and blissfully; but be used to think when he would die; thus his
troubles would be ended; he felt that the life of an illiterate
Brâhma<u>n</u> is a curse; his death would be a better alternative.

 

10\. He used to think thus :-- Fate has made me a fool; I do not find
any other cause for it. Oh! I got the exceedingly good birth amongst
men; but all this has been rendered in vain by Fate.

 

11\. Oh! As a fair woman, if barren, a cow if giving no milk, and a tree
without any fruits are all useless, so Fate has rendered my life, too,
quite useless.

 

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

 

12\. Why am I cursing Fate? This is all the fruits of my past Karma. In
my previous life I never wrote a book and presented to a good
Brâhmi<u>n</u>; hence I am illiterate in this birth.

 

13\. In my former birth I did not impart any knowledge to my favourite
pupils; hence I am wicked and a cursed Brâhmi<u>n</u> in this birth.

 

14\. I never performed any religious asceticism in any holy place, I did
not serve the saints, I never worshipped the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s with any
offerings. For all these reasons I am now born of perverted intellect in
the present birth.

 

15\. Many a son of the Munis have learnt the meanings of the Vedas and
the S’âstras; and I am whiling away my time thus in a quite illiterate
condition by some wretched combinations of incidents.

 

16\. I do not know how to perform Tapasyâ; what is the use, then, of my
attempting to do so? I am of very bad luck, and thus my good resolve
will not be crowned with success.

 

17\. I consider Fate to be the strongest of all; Fie on one’s own
prowess! For actions done with effort and hard labour are frustrated
entirely by Fate.

 

18\. Time can never be overstepped; See! Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Rudra,
Indra, and others are all under the influence of the Great Time.

 

19\. O Ri<u>s</u>is! Thus arguing in his mind, that Brâhmi<u>n</u> son
Utatthya stayed there in that hermitage on the bank of the holy Ganges.

 

20\. And gradually he became thoroughly unattached to all the things
and, being peaceful, passed away his time in that forest without any
habitations and men, with great difficulty.

 

21\. Thus passed away fourteen years in that forest where the Ganges was
flowing. Still he did not learn how to worship the Supreme Deity, how to
make Japam, nor did he learn any mantrams. Simply he lived there and
whiled away his time.

 

22\. People surrounding that place knew this much only of him that this
Muni spoke truth only and hence his name was Satyavrata. This one name
made him celebrated that he is Satyavrata; never did he say any untruth.

 

23\. Once on a time, a hunter named Ni<u>s</u>âda, exceedingly clever in
hunting, came accidentally with bows and arms in his hands, while
hunting a deer in that wide forest. He looked like a second God of Death
(Yama) and seemed to be very cruel.

 

24\. That savage mountaineer, drawing his bow so as to touch the ear,
pierced a boar with his sharp arrows. The boar, being very much
terrified, fled with enormous rapidity to the Muni Satyavrata.

 

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

 

25\. On seeing the distressed condition of the boar trembling with fear
and his body besmeared with blood, the Muni was moved with mercy.

 

26\. While the boar, pierced with arrows and besmeared with blood, was
running away in front of him, mercy took possession of the Muni,
therefore the Muni began to tremble and agreeably to the human nature
exclaimed “Ai” “Ai” (go to that direction), the seed mantram of the
Goddess of learning with “m” left out (Aim, Aim).

 

27\. That illiterate Brâhmi<u>n</u> son never heard before that “Ai” was
the seed mantram of the Sarasvatî Devî; nor did he come to know of it by
any other means. Accidentally it came out of his mouth, and he uttered.
And afterwards that Mahâtmâ seeing the boar's distressed condition was
merged in deep sorrow.

 

28\. The boar entered trembling into the Muni's hermitage very much
distracted and being very much pained with arrows. Being unable to find
any other way the boar hid himself in the dense bushes.

 

29\. Instantly there appeared then, before the Muni, the terrible savage
hunter, like a second God of Death, with string stretched to his ear, in
pursuit of that boar.

 

30-33. On seeing the Muni Satyavrata sitting there alone and silent on
the Kus’a grass seat, the hunter bowed down to him and asked “O
Brâhmi<u>n!</u> Whither has that boar gone. I know very well everything
about you that you never speak untruth; therefore I am enquiring about
the boar pierced by my arrows. My family members are all very hungry;
and to feed them, I am come out in this hunting. This is the living,
ordained by the Fate; I have got no other means of maintaining the
livelihood of my family. This I speak truly to you; whether it is bad or
good, I will have to maintain my family with it. O Brâhma<u>n</u>! You
are famous as Satyavrata; my family members are starving; kindly reply
quickly where that boar has gone?”

 

34\. Thus asked by the hunter, the Mahâtmâ Satyavrata was merged in an
ocean of doubt; he began to argue “If I say I have not seen the boar
then my vow to speak the truth will certainly be broken.

 

35\. The boar struck with arrows has gone this way, it is true. How can
I tell a lie? Again this man is hungry and is therefore asking, he will
instantly kill the boar no sooner he finds him. How then can I speak
truth?

 

36\. Where speaking out the truth causes injury and the loss of lives,
that truth is no truth at all; moreover, even untruth, when tempered
with mercy for the welfare of others, is recognised as truth. Really
speaking, whatever

 

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

 

leads to the welfare of all the beings in this world, that is truth; and
every thing else is not truth.

 

37\. O Jamadagni! Thus placed between the horns of a religious dilemma
what shall I do now so as to meet both the ends -- to save the life of
the boar, to do the welfare, as well as not to speak untruth.”

 

38\. When Satyavrata saw the boar wounded by the arrow of the hunter,
he, moved with pity, uttered the seed mantra of the Goddess of Learning;
and now that most auspicious Goddess, on account of his uttering Her
seed mantram, was very pleased and gave him the knowledge, difficult to
be attained otherwise.

 

39\. The door of all his knowledge opened out at once, and he became at
once instantly the seer, the poet like the ancient Muni Vâlmikî.

 

40\. Then that religiously disposed, merciful Brâhma<u>n</u>, aiming at
Truth, addressed that hunter before him with bows in his arms, thus :--

 

41\. That force which sees (as witness) never speaks; and that force
which speaks, never sees. O hunter! Why are you asking me repeatedly,
impelled by your own selfish desire?

 

42\. The hunter, the killer of the animals, on hearing this was
disappointed in the matter of finding out the boar and went back to his
home.

 

43\. That Brâhmi<u>n</u> turned out a poet like Varu<u>n</u>a and he
became celebrated as Satyavrata, the speaker of truth, in all the
worlds.

 

44\. He began to recite the Satyavrata mantram duly, and, by its
influence, became a Pundit, rivalled by none in this world.

 

45\. During every festival the Brâhma<u>n</u>s chanted his praise and
the Munis used to narrate his story in detail.

 

46\. On hearing his fame spreading all around, his father Devadatta who
forsook him before, recalled him to his hermitage and took him again in
his family with great honour and affection.

 

47\. Therefore O King! You should always worship and serve that Great
Goddess, the Prime Energy, the Cause of all this Universe.

 

48\. O King! With due Vedic rites you perform that sacrifice to that
Goddess which will surely yield results at all times and all desires. I
already spoke to you about this.

 

49\. That Great Goddess is known as Kâmadâ (the giver of all desires);
for She grants all desires when men with devotion remember Her, worship
Her, take Her name, meditate Her and eulogise Her.

 

50-56. O King! The wise sages ought to see the persons diseased,
distressed, hungry, those without any wealth, the hypocrite, the cheat,
the afflicted,

 

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

 

the sensual, the covetous, the incapable, always suffering from mental
troubles; again those who are wealthy with their children and
grand-children, prosperous, healthy, with enjoyments, versed in the
Vedas, literary, kings, heroes, those who command over many, those
attended with relations and kinsmen and endowed with all good qualities;
and then judge for themselves that those people did not worship the
Goddess and therefore they were sufferers and these people worshipped
the Goddess and hence they were happy in this world.

 

57\. Vyâsa said :-- Thus I heard from the mouth of Lomas'a Muni, in
assembly of the sages, the good merits of the Great Goddess.

 

58\. O King! Consider all these and you will find that the Highest
Goddess, the Bhâgavatî is to be worshipped always with devotion and
unselfish love.

 

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter on the merits of the Devî in the story of
Satyavrata in the Third Skandha of the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S'rî mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](bk03ch12)
