[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch23)  [Next](bk04ch25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXIV**

 

**On the stealing away of Pradyûmna**

 

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

 

1-2. Vyâsa said :-- On the other hand, there, at the house of Nanda,
early in the next morning, commenced the grand birth day festivity.
Kamsa came

 

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

 

to know, afterwards, by his spies as will as by general rumour, that at
Gokula, in the house of Nanda, a very joyous festival on a grand scale
was being performed; he also knew before that the other wives of
Vâsudeva, his animals and his servants were all staying at Nanda’s
residence in Gokula.

 

3-4. O Bhârata! Thus all these gave reasons to Kamsa to suspect the
place Gokula. Especially Nârada told him before that the residents, the
cowherds at Gokula, Nanda and others, their wives, Devakî and Vâsudeva
were all Devas incarnates; and consequently they were his enemies.

 

5-7. Thus being brought to more confidence by Nârada’s words, that
vicious Kamsa, the disgrace to his family, was very angry and sent there
his demons Pûtanâ, Baka, Vatsa, the great Asura, the powerful Dhenuka,
Pralamba. They were all killed by Kri<u>sn</u>a, of unsurpassable
prowess. S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a held aloft also the hillock Gobardhana (to
protect the cow herds and cows, etc.) Hearing all these, Kamsa became
certain also of his own death.

 

8\. Lastly when the evil minded Kamsa heard that the Daitya Kes’î was
also slain, then he made arrangements for a sacrifice, known as
Dhanuryajña; and under this pretext wanted to bring over there at
Mathurâ the two brothers Kri<u>sn</u>a and Balarâma.

 

9\. The evil minded Kamsa to effect the death of those two, Râma and
Kri<u>sn</u>a, of unsurpassable prowess, sent Akrûra to Gokula to bring
them over to Mathurâ.

 

10\. Akrûra, the son of Gandinî, under the orders of Kamsa, went to
Gokula and brought the two boys on a chariot to Mathurâ.

 

11-12. On arriving at Mathurâ, Râma and Kri<u>sn</u>a first broke the
bow; killed Râjaka, the elephant Kubalaya, Châ<u>n</u>ûr,
Mu<u>st</u>ika, S’ala, Tos’ala and other athletes and warriors. Last of
all, Hari, the Lord of the Devas, holding Kamsa by his hair, killed him
with utmost ease.

 

13\. The enemy-destroyer Kri<u>sn</u>a removed the sorrows of his father
and mother and released them from their prisons and gave over the
kingdom of Mathurâ to Ugrasena (the father of Kamsa).

 

14-15. The high minded Vâsudeva, then, with the triple girdle made of
Munja grass, performed the Upanayana ceremonies (wearing the sacred
thread round the body) of Râma and Kri<u>sn</u>a and made them accept
the vow of Brahmacharya. They then departed to the hermitage of the holy
Muni S’andîpana to acquire knowledge. Learning all the vidyâs
(knowledges) there, they returned quickly to Mathurâ.

 

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

 

16\. The two sons of Ânakadundubhi stayed there and on attaining their
twelfth year, became proficient in all the branches of learning and
became very powerful.

 

17\. That time Jarâsandha, being grieved at the killing of his
son-in-law Kamsa, collected a strong and numerous army and marched to
Mathurâ.

 

18\. Seventeen times Jarâsandha, the king of Magadha, attacked Mathurâ
and seventeen times he was defeated by the ingenuity of that highly
intelligent S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, who was of firm resolve and was then
residing in Mathurâ.

 

19\. Lastly, Jarâsandha sent the Kâlayavana (Black Yavana) to invade
Mathurâ. These Yavanas were brave and the lords of all Mlechchâs
(untouchables) and extremely terrific to the Yâdavas.

 

Note: Kâlayavana - A king of Yavanas and enemy of Kri<u>sn</u>a and an
invincible foe of the Yâdavas. Kri<u>sn</u>a finding it impossible to
vanquish him in the field of battle, cunningly decoyed him to the cave
where Muchukunda was sleeping who burnt him down.

 

Yavana means a Greek, an Ionian; then any foreigner, or barbarian (the
word is applied at present to a Mahomedan or a European also).

 

20-21. Hearing that Kâla Yavana was coming to attack the Yâdavas,
Kri<u>sn</u>a the destroyer of Mâdhu, called all the Yâdavas and
Baladeva and addressed them thus :-- “O blessed ones! Now a cause of
great terror has appeared amongst us; Kâla Yavana is being sent by our
powerful enemy Jarâsandha to attack Mathurâ. Now what to do? It is
better to save one’s life by leaving aside all our homes, wealth and
army.

 

22\. You should all know that is the place of our fathers and
forefathers where we can safely and happily dwell; where there is a
constant source of anxiety and uneasiness that, though the place of our
fathers and forefathers, ought to be avoided; never ought anyone to
dwell there.

 

23\. If you want to dwell at ease and comfort, you ought to dwell in
that country or place which is adjacent to a sea or a mountain; where
there is no fear from an enemy, the sages will always remain there.

 

24\. See! The Bhagavân Hari, being afraid, as it were, of his enemy has
taken refuge on the body of the thousand headed S’e<u>s</u>a serpent as
his sleeping place and is sleeping at ease and comfort on the ocean. It
seems likely that the enemy of Trîpurâ, the great S’iva is also dwelling
on the Kailâs’a mountain.

 

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

 

25\. We, too, are being constantly worried by our enemies here;
therefore we ought not to live here any longer. We should all go to
Dwârkâ city with our friends, relatives and wealth.

 

26\. Garu<u>d</u>a, the king of the birds, has given us the detailed
information of the city Dwârkâ. That beautiful city is situated on the
sea shore in the vicinity of the Raivataka mountain.”

 

27\. Vyâsa said :-- The Yâdava chiefs, hearing S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a’s
utterances fraught with their welfare, were ready to depart to that
place Dwârkâ, attended by their friends, relatives, and appurtenances.

 

28\. They then collected their camels, mares, and buffaloes and filled
their conveyances with wealth, gems and precious stones and marched out
of their place.

 

29\. Râma and Kri<u>sn</u>a went in front; the Yâdavas and other
subjects then marched in groups (several parties).

 

30\. Marching some days, they all reached Dvârâvatî. Then the portions
of the city that were dilapidated or destroyed, S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a had
them repaired by engineers, artisans and craftsmen.

 

31\. Placing the Yâdavas there, Kes’ava and Baladeva quickly returned to
Mathurâ and began to stay in that desolated city.

 

32\. The extremely powerful king of the Yavanas arrived then at 
Mathurâ. Kri<u>sn</u>a knowing that the Yavana chief had come there,
went out of the city.

 

33\. The Bhagavân Madhusûdana, the destroyer of the boastings of Asuras
and other people, dressed in yellow robes, appeared on foot before the
Kâlayavan with smile on his lips.

 

34\. Seeing the lotus-eyed Kri<u>sn</u>a before him, the treacherous
Lord of the Yavanas, pursued him on foot to catch hold of him.

 

35\. Where the powerful Râjar<u>s</u>i Muchukunda was sleeping soundly,
the Bhagavân Hari led Kâlayavana there.

 

36\. There S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, saw Muchukunda and vanished away at once;
the king of the Yavanas on arriving there found the Râjarsi (the royal
sage) there in deep sleep.

 

37\. The wicked Yavana mistaking Muchukunda for S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, gave
him a good kick. The powerful king Muchukunda got up and was very angry;
his eyes became red and reduced that vicious Yavana instantly into
ashes.

 

38\. When Muchukunda burnt the Yavana, he saw the lotus-eyed
Kri<u>sn</u>a; he bowed down to that Supreme Deva, Vâsudeva, and went to
forest.

 

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

 

39\. S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a then went back to the city Dwârkâ with Râma and
made Ugrasena there the king and began to enjoy at his will.

 

40\. At the marriage ceremony of S’is’upâla, at the palace of the king
of Vidarbha, Janârdan Vi<u>sn</u>u carried away by force Rukminî, the
bride elect from the Svayambara assembly (where the husband is self
elected by the bride herself) and afterwards married her according to
the rule called Râkh<u>s</u>asa Vidhi (one of the eight forms of
marriage in Hindu Law in which a girl is forcibly seized and carried
away after the defeat or destruction of her relatives in battle).

 

41-42. Afterwards He brought also Jâmbavatî, Satyabhâmâ, Mitravindâ,
Kâlindî, Lak<u>s</u>manâ, Bhadrâ, and auspicious Nâgnajitî (the daughter
of the king Nagnajit) on various occasions and married them. O Lord of
the earth! These eight women were the best and most beautiful of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a’s wives.

 

43\. Rukminî first gave birth to the beautiful child Pradyûmna and S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a performed the religious ceremony at the birth of his
child.

 

44\. Then the powerful Dânava named S’amvara stole away the little baby
from the lying-in-chamber and carried him to his own city and made him
over under the charge of Mâyâvatî.

 

45\. Coming to know that His son had been stolen away, S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a became very much overpowered with sorrow and took the
shelter of the Supreme Goddess, the Devî, with a heart full of devotion.

 

46-47. S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a then began, to chant, in sweet auspicious
tone, hymns in alphabets, conveying the highest meanings, in adoration
of the Yoga Mâyâ, Who slew Vritrâsura and other Daityas with ease and
alacrity.

 

48\. O Mother! I, in my former birth as the son of Dharma, appeased You
by my ascetic practices in the hermitage of Badari and worshipped You
with various offerings; O Mother! Have you now forgotten all my devotion
to You?

 

49\. O Mother! Has any evil minded enemy stolen away my son from the
lying-in chamber? Or have You Yourself done this to make a fun and see
the amusement? It seems that some one of my enemies has done so to
insult me; however, You, O Mother! ought not to put your devotee under
this shameful condition.

 

50\. O Mother! This Dwârakâ city is well guarded; a very strong fort is
built in its middle and my place is in the midst of that again; and the
lying in-chamber is again in the middle; I therefore must say that it is
due to my bad luck that the child is stolen away!

 

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

 

51\. O Mother! I did not go to the house of my enemy; the Yâdavas also
did not go there; this city is guarded by valiant soldiers; then how is
it, under what charm, the baby has been stolen? O Mother! Now I come to
know that it is due to Your Mâyâ; such things are common due to Your
Mâyâ in the three worlds.

 

52\. O Mother! When I am ignorant of your deepest mysteries, how can
there exist anyone among the little minded Jîvas that can know your
doings? My watchmen could not see anything, where my child was taken
away and who has stolen it. O Mother! I come to the conclusion that it
is hidden behind the screen of Your Mâyâ.

 

53\. O Mother! It is not strange with You; to the chaste woman,
Rohi<u>n</u>î Devî, though situated at a great distance and not
connected with any male persons, You, in the fifth month, moved away the
son to my knowledge from the womb of my mother; and thus Baladeva was
born to Rohinî. This is now known to all.

 

54\. Mother! You are incessantly creating, preserving, and destroying
this whole universe by the mixture of the three qualities. Who can know
Your sin-destroying doings? Mother! There is no need of dwelling at
length. Suffice it to say that You, no doubt, are doing all that are
being done in this whole universe.

 

55\. You first create the joy at the birth of a child; again You load us
with heavy burdens of sorrows due to the separation from that child;
thus you are always sporting; otherwise how my joy at the birth of my
child would thus be rendered quite useless?

 

56\. The mother of that child is always weeping like an ewe, straying
from a flock; she is giving vent to her sorrows always to me; O
Kind-hearted! Being thus endowed with illimitable prowess and
understanding, do You not know my troubles! O Mother! You are the only
source of consolation to one, suffering from the sorrows of this world.
There is no doubt in this.

 

57\. O Goddess! The wise seers say that the birth of a child in any
house is the highest bliss there, and the death of a child is the
greatest sorrow that can befall to any house. Therefore, O Mother! What
shall I do in this? What shall I say more than that my heart is going to
burst, due to the disappearance of my child.

 

58\. O Mother! I will perform all the necessary sacrifices, take up
vows, perform all sorts of worship to the entire satisfaction of the
Great Fate (Ordainer of things); You be pleased to remove my sorrow. O
Mother! If my son be alive, kindly shew him once to me. Mother! There is
no other than You Who is fully capable to destroy this my pain and
sorrow, raging in my heart.

 

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

 

59\. Vyâsa said :-- He who brings into practice, things that are
considered impracticable for the Devas and removes the load of the
Goddess Earth with ease and alacrity, the same Saviour of world, S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a thus chanted hymns in adoration of the Great Goddess. The
Devî then became visible to him and said.

 

60\. O Lord of the Devas! Do not any longer be sorrowful and miserable;
there had been a curse on you before; and, for that reason, the Daitya
S’ambara has stolen away your son by his demonic magic.

 

61\. Therefore, when your son will grow sixteen years old, then he will,
by My Grace, kill the Daitya perforce and will return to you. There is
no doubt in this.

 

62\. O king! Thus saying these words full of hope and confidence, the
Great Goddess Chandikâ, of formidable prowess, disappeared.
Kri<u>sn</u>a too, quitted his sorrows, due to the bereavement of his
child, and began to spend his time in happiness and peace.

 

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Fourth Book of S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa on the stealing away of Pradyûmna.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](bk04ch25)
