[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch16)  [Next](bk04ch18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVII**

 

**On the questions asked by Janamejaya**

 

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

 

1\. Janamejaya said :-- O Muni! You told before that the heavenly
prostitutes sent by Indra in the hermitage of Nara Nârâya<u>n</u>a
became lustful and desired to live with Nârâya<u>n</u>a only, whose
heart was calm and quiet.

 

2\. At that moment when Nârâya<u>n</u>a was about to curse them, his
brother Nara desisted him from taking that step.

 

3-4. Now I ask you what did that triumphant Nârâya<u>n</u>a Muni do, in
the critical juncture, when he was repeatedly asked by those
prostitutes, sent by lndra, to satisfy their lust?

 

5\. O Grand Sire! I am very eager to know the deeds of Nârâya<u>n</u>a,
leading to one’s freedom. Kindly describe in detail and fulfill my
wishes.

 

6\. Vyâsa said :-- Hear, O king! I am describing to you in detail, what
that high souled son of Dharma did.

 

7\. When Nârâya<u>n</u>a Hari was ready to curse them, the Ri<u>s</u>i
Nara, seeing this, consoled him and desisted him.

 

8\. Then the great sage, the ascetic son of Dharma, Nârâya<u>n</u>a,
leaving aside his anger, began to address them in sweet words with
countenance smiling.

 

9-10. O Fair women! We have determined to practise asceticism in this
life; it does not therefore behove us to accept any wife; therefore shew
your kindness unto us and go back to your Heaven. You would better think
that those who know what is religion, they never desire to break the vow
of another.

 

11\. O beautiful eyed ones! In the sexual pleasure, it is the delightful
feeling of passionate joy that is requisite; and we are wanting in those
feelings; then how can we effect that union?

 

12\. No action can come out of no cause; this is all clear. The poets
say that the sexual power and pleasure, is the feeling, the mental
attitude that corresponds; and that is the only thing, that lasts. And
we have no desire for that.

 

13\. However my limbs are all very graceful, I am very fortunate and
blessed in this world, otherwise how can I be the object of your sincere
love towards me.

 

14\. You all are very fortunate; therefore do now show this mercy unto
me “do not break my vow.” I pray now that, in a subsequent birth, I may
become your husband.

 

15-16. O large eyed fair women! In the twenty-eighth Dvâpara Yuga, I
will certainly incarnate on earth to effect the purpose of the Devas;
then you all also would respectively incarnate as the daughters of kings
and would also become my wives.

 

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

 

17\. Nârâya<u>n</u>a thus consented to marry them in some other next
birth; and consoling them, made them go back to their Heavens. They also
abandoned their mental disquietude and, on reaching back to Heavens,
they explained everything to Indra.

 

18-19. Indra heard (from these heavenly women) what the two two
Ri<u>s</u>is did and saw before him Urvas’î and other women created by
Nârâya<u>n</u>a from his thighs, etc., and began to extol the merits of
the high souled Nârâya<u>n</u>a.

 

20\. Indra said :-- O! How wonderful is the patience of the Muni? What
is the wonderful influence of his Tapas! Oh! He has created, by the
sheer force of his Tapas, Urvas’î and these fair women, unrivalled for
their beauties, from his thighs.

 

21\. The Lord of the Devas thus extolled his merits and became freed
from his anxieties. The virtuous Nârâya<u>n</u>a, too, devoted himself
to the practice of his Tapasyâ.

 

23\. O king! Thus I have described to you, in detail, all the wonderful
accounts regarding Nara Nârâya<u>n</u>a.

 

O Superior in the descendants of Bharata! These two Nara and
Nârâya<u>n</u>a afterwards incarnated themselves, due to Bhrigu’s curse
as the two great heroes Arju<u>n</u>a and Kri<u>sn</u>a, to relieve the
burden of the earth.

 

24\. The king said :-- O respect giving Muni! Now describe in detail the
life of the Avatar Kri<u>sn</u>a and dispel my mental doubt.

 

25-26. O best of the Munis! Why were Vâsudeva and Devakî, who were
chosen by the very powerful Hari and Ananta as their parents, doomed to
so many miseries and afflictions. Why had these parents to remain for
good many years in the prison of Kamsa, who pleased directly by their
Tapasyâ that Bhagavân Janârdana.

 

27\. Why did Kri<u>sn</u>a taking his birth at Mathurâ, go to Gokula?
Also what was his object to go to Dvârkâ, situated in the ocean, when he
killed the enemy Kamsa?

 

28\. Also why did his father, mother and relatives, leave their old holy
places of residences and go abroad to live in a wretched old country?

 

29-31. Why was the Yadu race destroyed by the curse from a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a! How did S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a Vâsudeva leave finally His
body after He had relieved the burden of the earth and was about to
enter into His Heaven? The evildoers of the earth were slain by
Kri<u>sn</u>a and Arju<u>n</u>a, of unequalled prowess;  but how was it,
that those who plundered the wives of S’rî Hari, were not at all
punished by Him?

 

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

 

32-33. The great personages Bhî<u>s</u>ma, Dro<u>n</u>a, Kar<u>n</u>a,
the king Vâlhîka, Virâ<u>t</u>a, Vikar<u>n</u>a, Dhri<u>st</u>adyumna,
the king Somadatta were destroyed for relieving the burden of the earth;
and the plunderers were acquitted! Kindly explain the cause of this.

 

34\. How was it that those chaste and virtuous wives of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a go into troubles at the latter end of their lives? There
has arisen a doubt in my mind on this point.

 

35\. Why did the virtuous Vâsudeva leave his mortal coil owing to the
death of his sons and why did he die an unusual death?

 

36\. O best of Munis! The Pâ<u>nd</u>avas were devoted to Kri<u>sn</u>a
and they were religious; they had to suffer so many troubles!

 

37\. Why was Draupadî so very unfortunate and she had to suffer so much
miseries, and pains, who was born of Lak<u>s</u>mî from amidst the
sacrificial place and from the altar.

 

38-39. Why did Duhs’âsan drag Her by Her hairs while She was in Her
menstruation period, in the hall of audience and why was it that Sindhu
Râj Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, gave Her exceedingly mental
troubles?

 

40\. Why was it that Her five sons residing in Her house were killed by
As’vaththâmâ? What was the cause that the son of Subhadrâ had to die in
the battlefield?

 

41\. Why did the king Kamsa kill the six sons of Devakî; and why was it
that S’rî Hari who was capable of averting the Fate did not at all
prevent that?

 

42\. What a wonder is this that in the matters of Brâhma<u>n</u>a’s
curse toward the Jâdavas, their being killed in the Prabhâsa, the total
extermination the Jadu race and the plundering of His wives, why did He
allow Fate to do these great momentous things?

 

43\. If He was the all-powerful God and He Himself Nârâya<u>n</u>a, that
why did He incessantly act like a slave towards Ugrasena.

 

N.B. -- Ugrasena was the king of Mathurâ and father of Kamsa. He was
deposed by his son; but Kri<u>sn</u>a after having slain Kamsa restored
him to the throne.

 

44-45. All these bring doubt in our minds regarding Nârâya<u>n</u>a Muni
that His deeds are always like those of ordinary persons; why did his
pleasures and pains resemble those of ordinary human beings? Were he
God, why his actions were not Godly? (i.e., superhuman)

 

46\. Therefore dost Thou describe in detail all the Divine Leelas
(playful sports) done by Hari of superhuman powers in this world.

 

47\. O Best of Munis! When one’s longevity expires, one dies; then I
cannot understand what glory was manifested by Hari in killing the
Daityas? For Fate Killed them; not Hari.

 

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

 

48\. Was not the doing of Hari like a thief when he stole away the Lady
Rukmi<u>n</u>î and fled quickly to his own place.

 

49\. What did it mean when he fled to Dvârkâ city, and quitted his own
highly prosperous town Mathurâ simply out of the fear of Jarâsandha?

 

50\. Did not anybody at that time recognise that he was S’rî Bhagavân
Hari? O Respected One! Were he Bhagavân, why did He hide himself in
Vraja? Please explain the cause to me.

 

51\. O Muni! These and many other doubts always exist in my mind; you
are the best of the Dvijas and blessed; I pray, dost thou remove these
doubts.

 

52-53. O best of Munis! Another doubt exists and is not dispelled and
that is secret. Was not the taking of the five husbands by Pânchâlî for
herself shameful and despised by the society? The good manners and
doings are always considered by the learned as the proofs of virtue. Why
did those Pâ<u>nd</u>avas, then, capable in every respect, do this thing
like brutes?

 

54\. And what did Bhîsma do living like a Deva in this world? May I ask,
was his act of producing two sons by a widow and thus preserving his
line of ancestors worthy of his name?

 

55\. The religious sanction advocated by the Munis “Procreate sons in
any way whatsoever” is simply shameful. Fie to this religious sanction.

 

Here ends the 17th Chapter in the 4th Book of S’rî mad Devî Bhagavatam
of 18000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa on the questions asked by
Janamejaya.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](bk04ch18)
