[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch11)  [Next](bk04ch13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XII**

 

**On Bhrigu’s curse and the dialogue between S’ukrâchârya and the
Daityas**

 

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! On seeing Vi<u>sn</u>u killing his wife, and
thus committing a dreadful atrocious act, the Bhagavân Bhrigu was very
sorry and began to tremble with anger and addressed Madhusûdana thus.

 

2\. Bhrigu said :-- O Vi<u>sn</u>u! You have done an extremely sinful
act. O intelligent one! Knowing it, you have done so; what a great
wonder! Nobody dreams of the murder of this Brâhma<u>n</u>’s daughter;
and you have committed it in deed, black and white.

 

3\. O Deva! The Mahâr<u>s</u>is declare you to be Sâttvic, engaged in
preservation; Brahmâ to be Râjasic (creator) and S’ambhu S’iva to be
Tâmasic (destroyer). Why then is the contrary thing visible in this
case?

 

4\. Why have you become Tâmasic? Why have you done this heinous crime? O
Vi<u>sn</u>u! The females are never to be killed; this is a known fact;
then why have you killed this woman without any fault.

 

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

 

5-6. You have done a very execrable act. What shall I do to you? It is
mete that I would curse you. O Great Sinner! You have pained me very
much and made me very weary. I will not curse Indra. You always assume a
deceitful appearance and behave like a black cruel serpent; your mind is
all full of wickedness; I will curse you.

 

7\. O Janârdana. Those Munis who call you Sâttvic are fools; I have seen
today that your ways are exceptionally vicious and Tâmasic.

 

8\. O Vi<u>sn</u>u! I curse you now to take frequent births, suffer very
frequently in different wombs, in the earth and thus suffer the pains of
remaining in the wombs.

 

9\. O king! Therefore whenever religion subsides in the world, Bhagavân
Vi<u>sn</u>u incarnates frequently in this human world, due to the curse
of Bhrigu.

 

10\. The king said :-- O best of the Munis! Did that Mahâtmâ Bhrigu
again marry and lead a householder’s life when his wife was thus killed
by the lustrous disc Sudars’ana.

 

11\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! The sacrificer Bhrigu angrily cursed Hari
and next took that severed head and quickly placed it over the body as
before and said :--

 

12-14. O Devî! Vi<u>sn</u>u has slain you today; I will make you regain
your life just now. If I am acquainted with all the Dharmas and if I
have practised these in my life and if I have spoken truth always, then
dost thou regain your life by my religious merit. Let all the Devas
witness my power and strength. If I know the True, if I have studied all
the Vedas and if I have realised the Knowledge of the Vedas, then I,
sprinkling your body with this cold water, charged with my mantras, will
revive you.

 

15\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Sprinkled by the water by Bhrigu, his wife
regained her life and rose up at once and felt herself glad and smiled.

 

16\. All the persons and living creatures seeing her stand, as if awoken
from her sleep, at once exclaimed from all sides “well done, well done!”
thanked Bhrigu and his wife very much and highly praised them.

 

17\. Thus seeing the fair complexioned wife regain her life through
Bhrigu, Indra and all the Devas were very much struck with wonder.

 

NOTE :-- Thought power and inhalation of some medicines might have
revived her.

 

18\. Indra then adressed the Devas :-- Now the mother of S’ukra has
regained her life through Bhrigu; but when S’ukrâchârya will receive the
mantra after his severe tapasyâ, we do not know what terrible harm; he
would do to us!

 

19\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Though the deep sleep that overtook Indra
had now left him, yet he became very unhappy, remembering the severe
asceticism of S’ukra’s tapasyâ and his receiving mantras.

 

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

 

20\. Thinking over deeply in his mind, Indra called his daughter Jayantî
and spoke to her with affection.

 

21-22. Go! Daughter! I have given thee over to the ascetic Kâvya. Do
this service for me, go to Kâvya and help him in his asceticism and
bring him under your control. By whatever acts the Muni be pleased, dost
thou do at once and please him in every way and thus remove my fear.

 

23\. The large-eyed beautiful Jayantî, hearing her father’s words, went
to the hermitage and there saw the Ri<u>s</u>i inhaling or drinking the
smoke.

 

24\. On seeing the body of the ascetic, and remembering her father’s
words she brought the leaves of the plantain trees and began to fan him.

 

25\. The intelligent Jayantî with no excitement used to bring the pure,
clear, cool, and well scented water and place it, with great devotion,
before the sage for his drinking.

 

NOTE: Here Indra bribed by giving away his daughter.

 

26\. When the sun was over his head, she used to prepare some
protection, with her clothes, from the sun and thus made the shade for
him. Thus, in various ways, did she begin to serve the Muni, herself
remaining steady in her religion.

 

27\. She brought sweet and ripe fruits proper according to the S’âstras
and used to place them before him for his repast.

 

28\. In the performance of his daily duties, she used to collect the
Kus’a grass of the span of thumb and fore finger, and flowers, white and
yellow and placed them before him.

 

29\. For the Muni’s bedding to lie down and sleep, she used to gather
soft, green leaves and with them she used to keep his bed ready; and
when the Muni laid himself down, she used to fan him gently.

 

30\. Never did she exhibit for fear of curse, any gesture or posture
calculated to disturb his mind.

 

31\. The sweet-tongued, thin lady used to praise S’ukrâchârya in
pleasing and favourable terms.

 

32\. When the Muni awoke, she placed water before him to wash his face
and hands. Thus serving the Muni, did she stay in the hermitage.

 

33\. The fear stricken Indra used to send messengers to fathom the mind
of that self controlled Muni.

 

34\. Thus did Jayantî serve for good many years the Muni, being void of
anger and observing duly her celibacy.

 

35\. In this way one thousand years passed duly, the God Mahâdeva was
very pleased and addressed S’ukrâchârya that He had come to give him
boons that he desire.

 

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

 

36-37. The God Mahâdeva said :-- Whatever there exists in this universe,
whatever you see with your eyes and whatever cannot be described in
words, you will be the lord of all these and the conqueror of all. There
is no doubt in this. You cannot be killed by any creature; you will be
the ruler of all beings and will be reckoned as the best of the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as.

 

38-39. Vyâsa said :-- The God Mahâdeva disappeared then and there, after
granting him the boons. Then S’ukrâchârya saw Jayantî and said to her
:-- O lady of beautiful hips! Who and whose daughter art thou? What is
the desire in your mind? What for you have come here? O one of beautiful
thighs! what is your duty?

 

40\. O beautiful eyed! I am very pleased with all that you have done for
me. What do you want? O one of good vows! Ask boons from me; I will
grant them even if they be difficult.

 

41\. On hearing this, Jayantî’s face became bright with joy; she said
:-- whatever I desire, you know that already by force of your Tapasyâ.

 

42\. The Kâvya said :-- Your mental desires I know; still mention them
yourself particularly; I will do good to you in any way you like; I am
pleased with your services.

 

43-44. Jayantî said :-- O Brâhmi<u>n</u>! I am the daughter of Indra and
I am the younger of my brother Jayanta. Father has given me over to you;
I now like to live with you. Kindly fulfil my desires now. O blessed
one! You better take me and enjoy me according to Dharma. This is my
desire.

 

45\. S’ukrâchârya said :-- O thou of large and handsome hips! Better
enjoy with me for ten years, according to your liking, without being
visible to anybody.

 

46-48. Vyâsa said :-- Thus saying, S’ukrâchârya went to his home and,
according to religious observances, married Jayantî and lived with her
for ten years under the shade of Mâyâ and unobserved by anybody. On the
other hand, the Daityas, hearing that S’ukrâchârya returned home
successful getting his desired Mantra, were very glad and went to his
house to pay their respects to him. But S’ukra was then living with
Jayantî; hence the Asuras could not see him.

 

49\. Then they got very much dejected, sorry and were drooped in
spirits; they searched for him again and again.

 

50\. Not being able to see S’ukra under the shade of Mâyâ, the Daityas
were very sorry and got afraid and then returned to their own
residences.

 

51\. On the other hand, the Devas, knowing that S’ukra was holding
intercourses with Jayantî, Indra, the God of Devas, spoke to the Deva
Guru

 

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

 

Brihaspatî. O Guru! Advise us what to do under the present circumstances
and relieve us from the impending difficulties.

 

52\. O Brâhma<u>n</u>a. Better go today to the Dânavas and do that by
which our honour may be maintained. You better put the Dânavas under
some charm by your magical spell and think and do good to us.

 

53\. On hearing Indra’s words and knowing that S’ukra is now enjoying
with Jayantî, Brihaspatî went to the Dânavas, putting on the appearance
of S’ukrâchârya.

 

54\. Going to the Demons, he called on them very politely and sweetly.
The Asuras said that S’ukrâchârya had come in presence of them.

 

55\. The Demons were very glad and bowed down before S’ukrâchârya and
could not make out that he was the false S’ukrâchârya, under the mâyic
charm of Brihaspatî.

 

56\. Then the false S’ukrâchârya asked the welfare of the Daityas and
said :-- I went so long for your good; I performed severe tapasyâ and
satisfied the God S’ambhu and acquired from him the Mantra, the sacred
knowledge, and that I will frankly explain to you.

 

57\. On hearing this, the Demons were very pleased and, knowing that the
Guru had been successful, were filled with joy.

 

58\. They saluted him with joy and began to live quietly and freely and
without pains, having got rid of fear from the Devas.

 

Here ends the twelfth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses by Mahârsi Veda
Vyâsa on Bhrigu’s curse and the dialogue between S’ukrâchârya and the
Daityas.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](bk04ch13)
