[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch18)  [Next](bk05ch20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIX**

 

**On the prayer and hymns to the Devî**

 

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Then Indra and all the Devas became very glad
to see the great Mahi<u>s</u>âsura slain; they all began to praise and
chant hymns to the World-Mother.

 

2-33. The Devas said :-- It is by thy Power that Brahmâ becomes able to
create this world, Vi<u>sn</u>u, to preserve, and Mahes’vara to destroy
during the Pralaya time (the Great Dissolution) of this universe. But
when they are bereft of Thy Power, they are quite unable to do such.
Therefore, O Devî! Thou art undoubtedly the Prime Cause in the
preservation and destruction of this whole Universe. O Devî; Thou art,
in this world, Fame, idea and ideal, memory; Thou art the goal, mercy,
compassion, faith, constancy, earth; Thou art Kamalâ, the Mantra Ajapâ,
respiration and perspiration, nourishment, Jayâ, Vijayâ (the destroyer
of obstacles; a name of Durgâ); Thou art contentment, correct notion,
measure, intellect, Ramâ (Lak<u>s</u>mî), (wealth), knowledge,
forgiveness, beauty, intelligence; Thou art the S’akti (power) of Rudra,
Thou art Girijâ and the Energy of God Umâ and all other forces in this
universe; this is known to everyone in the three worlds. Without any or
all of these forces, no one is able to perform any action. Thou art the
Supreme Cause of all this world. Therefore everything rests on Thee. If
Thou wert not the upholding Power, how could Kurma (in the Tortoise
Incarnation) and Ananta have upheld this world? O Mother! Wert Thou not
this Earth, could all these world-load of things have rested on the sky?
O Mother! Those human beings that worship Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Rudra,
Moon, Fire, Yama, the God of Death, Vâyu, Ga<u>n</u>es’a, and the other
Devas, they are certainly deluded by Thy Mâyâ. Could all those Devas do
any action or any favour without Thy Energy? O Mother! Those that offer
in any Sacrifice, a profuse quantity of ghee (clarified butter) as
oblations to the several Devas, they are certainly conceived to be of
very narrow views; Wert Thou not the Svâhâ, could it have been possible
for those Devas to get the offered oblations at that very instant?
Certainly, therefore, they are fools and ignorant persons. There is no
doubt in this. O Mother! Thou givest the several objects of nourishment
and enjoyment to all the beings in this universe by Thy parts (the
several transformations of these material things); it is Thou that
nourishest the Devas, Thy devotees, as well as the others (the Dânavas,
according to their Karma). O Mother! As the owner of any garden plants,
with pleasure, the beautiful trees in his

 

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

 

garden for his delight and, finding some of them not to bear any fruits
or leaves or of a bitter taste, does not cut them off by their roots,
so, O Devî! Thou hast brought into existence these Daityas out of their
inferior Karmas and Thou art supporting them. Knowing that the Daityas
like to enjoy the celestial nymphs, Thou hast, out of compassion, killed
them by their arrows in the battlefield, to afford them facilities in
their re-birth in Heavens and thus to enjoy the Deva women which they
could not have got in any other possible way. Therefore this Thy
dealings with them are to fulfil their intentions and not to kill them.
O Mother! It is a great wonder that to kill these Asuras Thou hadst to
assume this Divine Body; Thou couldst have done so by Thy mere will. It
seems that this act of Thine is but a mere Pastime. There is no other
cause for this. O Devî! Those human beings that do not worship Thee in
this dreadful age of Kâlî, they are certainly deceived by the cunning
Purâ<u>n</u>a makers who have deluded them to worship Hari and Hara, who
are Thy creations. Oh! What an amount of evil has befallen to those poor
souls! O Devî! Those men know that the Devas, tormented by the Asuras,
are Thy devotees, and yet they worship them; certainly such fellows,
holding the lighted torches in their hands, plunge deep into the darkest
waterless wells. O Mother! Thou art the Vidyâ (Blissful Intelligence)
and Thou grantest pleasure and liberation; Thou art the Avidyâ, (Great
Delusion) and thus Thou causest bondage and pain in this world. O
Mother! Thou only destroyest the affliction of the human beings; those
that want liberation worship Thee, and those that are ignorant and
attached to worldly enjoyments do not worship Thee. What more can be
said than this, that Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahe<u>s</u>a and the other
Devas incessantly worship Thy adorable lotus-feet; but those men that
are of dull intellect and are mistaken, they do not meditate Thy feet
and, therefore, they come again and again into this ocean of world. O
Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ! It is through the grace of the dust of Thy lotus-feet
that Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahes’vara are creating, preserving and
destroying this universe. Therefore, O Goddess! Those men that do not
serve Thee, are certainly very unfortunate. O Mother of the Universe!
Thou art the Goddess of speech of the Suras and the Asuras; thus if Thou
didst not dwell in their mouths, they would not have been able to utter
a single word; therefore, O Goddess! How can men speak, when they are
thus deprived of Thee! O Mother! It is due to the curse of Bhrigu Muni
that Hari takes several incarnations as Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion,
and deceitful Dwarf Incarnations; all these show clearly the dependence
of Hari,

 

\*N.B. - The Devas and the Daityas are the opposite polarities of the
same creation.

 

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

 

How, then, can they avoid the fear of death when they serve these
dependent incarnations! O Mother! It is well known that the male
generative organ of S’ambhu, the Mahâdeva fell unto the ground, owing to
the curse of Bhrigu Muni, when he went to the hermitage of the
Ri<u>s</u>is. How can, then, happiness come in this world or in the
next, to those who worship such a S’ambhu who wears human skulls on His
body! O Devî! Those that worship Ga<u>n</u>es’a, born of the above
qualified Mahâ Deva are awfully mistaken; they are especially quite
ignorant of Thee, the Goddess of the Universe, that can be easily
worshipped and that can give the fourfold aims of human existence. O
Devî! It is out of Thy kindness that Thou hast slain with Thy arrows the
enemies and thus hast translated them into Heavens; otherwise they would
have certainly gone down to Hell owing to their own Karmic effects.
Brahmâ, Hari, Hara and the other Devas cannot realise Thy greatness; how
can, then, ordinary men know Thee, when they are deluded by
immeasureably strong Sâttva, Râjas and Tâmas qualities. O Mother! Those
who do not worship Thy lotus-feet as very hard to be brought within this
mind and therefore worship this visible Sun and Fire, they cannot grasp
the Essence of the Vedas, demonstrated by hundreds of passages of
S’ruti; they are deluded and simply suffer pains. O Mother! I think that
the influences of Thy Sâttva, Râjas and Tâmas qualities are widely known
in this world; those qualities as taught in various deluding schools of
Tantras by various persons, stimulate people to the worship of
Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes’vara, Sun and Ga<u>n</u>es’a and thus detract them
from worshipping Thee. O Mother! Those that detract thus the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as from worshiping Thy lotus-feet and advise them through
the Âgamas, to worship Hari, Hara and others, Thou dost not get angry
with them, rather Thou dost shew Thy kindness to them and make them
widely celebrated as possessing the occult powers of enchanting,
bringing others under their control, or attracting towards them various
other persons. In the Satya Yuga, Sâttva Gu<u>n</u>a was more powerful
and therefore the untrue S’âstras could not rear their heads; but in
this Kâlî Age, owing to the Sâttva Gu<u>n</u>a being not so powerful,
the lower qualities have got preponderance; so these so-called clever
Pundits instead of worshipping Thee, worship Hari, Hara and the other
Devas, the products of their fancy and hide Thee. O Mother! Thou art the
Brahmâ Vidyâ, the knowledge of the Supreme Consciousness, Thou givest
liberation to Thy devotees when they succeed in their Yogas. Therefore
the pure Sâttvik Muni meditate on Thee and Thee alone. Those that get
themselves diluted in Thee, they are very blessed; what more to speak of
them in their praise, they will no longer have to suffer any pains in
their mother’s wombs! O Mother! Thou art inherent

 

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

 

as Chit S’akti (the power of consciousness) in the Supreme Spirit and
therefore He is become manifest specially as this Great Cosmos and
becomes known as the Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer of this world,
fashioned out of five elements. O Devî! What male can by his own power
work out this Jagat Prapancha, enjoy it and move in this, without the
aid of Thy power. O Bhagavatî! This universe has been created by Thee;
Thou art, therefore, its Mother. The twenty-four Essences or Tattvas are
inert; how can they without Thy Chits’akti, create this universe? O
Devî! Never can these senses and organs, endowed with Gu<u>n</u>a and
Karma, do any work or bestow any fruits without Thy energy.

 

O Mother! Wert thou not Svâhâ, the instrumental cause in the sacrifice,
how could the Devas have got their shares of the ghee offered in the
Yajñâs by the Munis! Therefore, O Devî! Thou art, no doubt, preserving
this universe. O Bhagavatî! It is Thou that hast created this world in
the beginning; it is Thou that art preserving the gods Hari, Hara and
others; it is Thou that art destroying this universe. Therefore, O
Brâhma<u>n</u>! The Devas cannot know Thy deeds; how can, then, the men
who are of dull intellect, know Thee. O Mother! Thou hast now saved the
Devas by killing this terrible Mahi<u>s</u>âsura. O Mother! All the
Vedas have not been able to know exactly all Thy movements; how can we,
of dull intellect, praise Thee! O Mother! Thou has served our cause by
killing our enemy, the wicked Dânava, the inconceivable source of pain
to all the world by this act of Thine, Thy fame has spread far and wide
in this universe; therefore, O Thou of renowned prowess! Thou art the
Mother of this world; save us, and maintain us by Thy mercy.

 

34-35. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Devas having praised the Devî thus,
the Devî addressed them gently :-- “O Devas! Say if you have any other
difficult thing for Me to do; remember Me whenever any difficult crisis
occurs to you; I will destroy that evil.”

 

36-42. The Devas said :-- “O Devî! All our purposes have been served
when Thou hast killed lately our enemy Mahi<u>s</u>âsura. Now dost Thou
do for us so that we can always recollect Thy lotus feet, and our Bhakti
be firm and steadfast towards Thee. It is only the Mother the bears the
thousand offences of the son; we, therefore, cannot say why men, knowing
this, do not worship the Mother of the Universe. There are two birds
always dwelling in this body, Jivâtmâ (human soul) and the Paramâtmâ
(the Supreme Soul). They are so very intimate friends toward each other
that they never separate. But there is no other third friend that can
bear the faults of these two. Therefore the embodied soul that forsakes
Thee, his friend, can never attain any welfare; what more to say

 

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

 

on this! That vicious soul is very unlucky amidst the Devas and men, no
doubt. He who on attaining this excellent human body, attained with much
difficulty, does not remember Thee frequently by words and deeds, is
certainly the vilest of men. O Devî! Whether in times of distress or
happiness, Thou art our Saviour; therefore dost Thou protect us with Thy
best weapons. O Devî! There is no other means of our security than the
Grace of the dust of Thy Feet.”

 

43\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Devas having prayed to the Devî thus,
the Devî vanished then and there. The Devas, seeing the disappearance of
the Devî, were sufficiently struck with surprise.

 

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the prayer and
hymns to the Devî in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am
of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](bk05ch20)
