[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch34)  [Next](bk06ch01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXV**

 

**On the receiving of the boons by the King Suratha and the Vais’ya
Samâdhi**

 

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

 

1-12. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the Ri<u>s</u>i’s words, the
king Suratha and Vais’ya, who were very distressed in their minds,
became very much comforted and bowed down to the Muni with great
humility and modesty. Their eyes expressed their gladness and their
hearts were filled with loving devotion. Both of them, then, clever in
speaking and of calm and quiet temper, began to address him with their
folded hands. O Bhagavân! We were passing our days in a very humble and
distressed spot; we are today purified by your good words, just as the
country was rendered pure by Bhagîratha when he brought down the river
Ganges here. The saints, adorned with purely good qualities, are
incessantly engaged in doing good to others and how the people can be
made happy. O Intelligent One! Surely we have come to this auspicious
Âs’rama owing to our past good deeds (in previous births) and all our
miseries are therefore brought to their ends today. There are good many
persons that roam in this world for their selfish ends; very few there
exist like you who are always ready to do good to others. O Muni! True
that I am very much distressed

 

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

 

but this Vais’ya is more distressed than me. Both of us, very much
afflicted by the miseries of the world, have come gladly to your Âs’rama
and are relieved of our bodily sufferings by your sight; and now,
hearing your words, we are relieved also of our mental pain and
sufferings. O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! We are very much blessed and our objects
have been gained by your nectar-like words; O Thou, the Ocean of mercy!
You have purified us, out of your unbounded mercy. We are quite tired of
this world; knowing this, do you lead us beyond this world by holding
our hands and by initiating us with Mantrams. O Best of Munis! We will
first of all practise a very hard Tapasyâ (asceticism) and worship
Bhagavatî, the Awarder of happiness; then, seeing Her, we will go to our
respective abodes. Now we expect the nine-lettered Mantram of the Devî
from your mouth and practising the Navarâtra varam we will fast and
meditate on the Mantram.

 

\[Note :-- The nine-lettered Mantram is “Om Mahi<u>s</u>amardinyai
Svâhâ.” Instead of Om, any of the following may be used :-- Hrîm, Klîm,
Aim, Strîm, or Hûm mentioned in Sâradâ Tilaka, Nârâyanî Tantra, or in
Vis’vasâra Tantra (see page 125 of Tantra Sâra ).\]

 

13-30. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When the king and Vais’ya prayed thus to
the Muni Sumedha, the best of the Munis, gave them the auspicious
Mantram with its seed (Vîja) and as well what is to be meditated
(Dhyân). On getting the Mantram (with Ri<u>s</u>i, Chhanda, seed S’akti,
and Devatâ) duly, they welcomed the Muni and with his permission went to
the holy bank of a river. Both of them were of delicate frames and both
of them were fully determined; they went to a very solitary place and
selected their place and took their seats there. There they spent one
month in repeating silently the Mantram and in chanting the three
glorious deeds of Cha<u>nd</u>î. In this short period of one month, they
became very much attached to the lotus-feet of Bhavânî and their minds
were also much pacified. They attended to no other business; only they
used to go to the Muni once a day and bowing down before him they
returned to their own seats of Kus’a grass and gave themselves up to the
meditation of the Devî and always repeated silently their Mantrams. O
King! One year thus passed away; they then abstained from taking fruits
and subsisted on the leaves of trees. Thus engaged in meditation and
asceticism they passed away another year sustaining themselves with dry
leaves only. O King! When the two years thus passed, they got in their
dreams the beautiful vision of the Goddess Bhagavatî. They were very
much delighted to see in their dreams the Ambikâ Devî in red robes and
decorated with various ornaments. They practised tapasyâ in the third
year with water as

 

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

 

their only food. Thus when they found that, after practising the tapas
for three years, they could not see face to face the Devî they became
very anxious to see the Devî and thought thus :-- “When we have not been
so fortunate as to see the Devî, Who art the Bestower of peace and
happiness to the human beings, we will then leave our bodies, in deep
distress and sorrow!” Thus thinking, the King prepared a beautiful
triangular Ku<u>nd</u>a (pit), firm and of one hand measure. Lighting a
fire in that pit, the King began to cut off slices of flesh from his own
body and offered them as oblations to the fire. The Vais’ya, too, then
did the same. O King! Both of them were very much excited and began to
offer their blood as oblation to the Devî. The Devî Bhagavatî, then,
seeing them thus grieved, and that their hearts were over flown with
devotion towards Her, appeared direct before them and said thus :--

 

31-32. O King! You are my favourite devotees; I am pleased with your
Tapasyâ; now ask whatever you desire; I will grant you that boon. Then
She spoke to the Vais’ya :-- “O Highly Fortunate One! I am pleased; ask
without any delay any boon; I will grant that just now.”

 

33-52. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the words of the Devî, the
king Suratha was very much delighted and said thus :-- “O Devî! Grant me
this boon that I be able today to conquer my enemies with my own power
and that I may regain my kingdom.” The Devî then spoke to him thus :--
“O King! Go to your own abode; your enemies are now enfeebled and will
certainly be defeated.

 

(Note :-- The Devî has now withdrawn Her own power from the enemies with
which they were filled before. This is the result of the real sacrifice
to the Devî.)

 

O Fortunate One! Your ministers will all come and prostrate themselves
before your feet and will be obedient to you; you can now go back to
your city and govern your subjects happily. O King! Thus reign for Ajuta
years (10,000 years) over your widely extended dominion; then, when you
quit your body, you will again be born from Sûrya, and be known widely
as Sâvar<u>n</u>i Manu.” Vyâsa said :-- O King! The pure-natured Vais’ya
said with folded hands :-- “O Devî! I have nothing to do with house,
sons, nor wealth. O Mother! The house, wealth and sons, all these are so
many sources of bondage to this world and are very transitory like
dreams. Therefore give me knowledge so that my ties to this world be cut
asunder. Persons who are devoid of knowledge, those fools are merged in
this ocean of world. The wise never prefer this Samsâra; therefore they
can cross this world.  Vyâsa

 

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

 

said :-- O King! Hearing this, the Mahâmâyâ said to the Vais’ya, that
stood in front of Her thus :-- “O Vais’ya! No doubt you will acquire
knowledge.” Thus granting boons to them, the Devî then and there
disappeared. After the Devî had disappeared, the King bowed down to the
Muni, mounted on his horse and expressed a desire to go back to his
kingdom. Just at that time all his ministers and subjects came humbly
before him, bowed down to him and standing before him with folded hands,
said :-- “O King! Your enemies all had acted very sinfully; hence they
were all slain in battle; you be pleased now to remain in your city,
free from any enemy and govern your subjects.” The King, hearing thus,
bowed down to the Muni and with his permission, started towards his
kingdom, surrounded by his ministers. On regaining his own kingdom,
wife, relatives and kinsmen he began to enjoy the sea-girt earth. On the
other hand, the Vais’ya became illumined with the Spiritual Knowledge
and all his connections and attachments being completely severed, became
free from all bondages. He became liberated in his lifetime and
travelled always from one place of pilgrimage to another and passed away
his time in singing the glorious deeds of the Devî. O King! Thus I have
described to you the most wonderful character of the Devî, what fruits
were obtained by the King and the Vais’ya on their worshipping Her, how
the Daityas were killed by Her and about Her auspicious appearances on
this earth. Oh! Such is the glory of the Devî, leading to fearlessness
amongst Her devotees. The mortal who hears constantly this excellent
pure narrative of the Devî Bhagavatî, gets truly all the best and
wonderful pleasures of this world. No doubt anybody who hears this
wonderful incident, will obtain knowledge, liberation, fame, happiness
and purity. The essence of all religions lies in this narration;
therefore it leads, above all, to Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Mok<u>s</u>a
(religion, wealth, desire and liberation). It grants all desires to
human beings.

 

53-54. Sûta said :-- O Ri<u>s</u>is! The Mahar<u>s</u>i Vyâsa, the son
of Satyavatî, versed in all the departments of knowledge, asked by the
King Janamejaya, narrated to him this divine Samhitâ. The character of
Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ, the killing of the Daitya S’umbha, were thus narrated
by the merciful Muni Veda Vyâsa. O Munis! I, too, have described to you
the main points of this Purâ<u>n</u>a. Here ends the Fifth Book.

 

Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the receiving of
the boons by the King Suratha and the Vais’ya Samâdhi in the Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa.

 

The Fifth Book Completed.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](bk06ch01)
