[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch04)  [Next](bk05ch06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter V**

** **

**On the defeat of the Dânava forces of Mahi<u>s</u>a**

 

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

 

1-6. Vyâsa said :-- The thousand eyed Indra, hearing this, again asked
to Brihaspati that he would make preparations for war against
Mahi<u>s</u>âsura. Without effort kingdoms are not attained; no - nor
happiness, nor fame, nor anything; those who are weak, they extol
effortlessness; but the powerful never praise that. Knowledge is the
ornament of the ascetics and contentment is the ornament of the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as; but those who desire lordship over powers, effort and
prowess to destroy one's enemies are their excellent ornaments. O Muni!
I will kill this Mahi<u>s</u>âsura by my heroism as I had, of old,
destroyed Vritra, Namuchi and Balâsura. You are the Deva Guru; therefore
you and my thunderbolt are my strength. The immortal Hari and Hara also
will help me in this. O Guru! Preserver of my honour and prestige! Now
recite the mantras calculated to remove all the obstacles towards my
victory. I, too, am making preparations and raising up my own forces to
wage up war against that Dânava Mahi<u>s</u>a.

 

7-13. Vyâsa said :-- On hearing Indra's words, Brihaspati smiled and
said “O Lord of the Devas! I see you are bent on fight. I will neither
stimulate you to fight nor shall I make you desist from the purpose. The
issue is doubtful. There may be defeat or there may be victory. O Lord
of S'achî! You are not to blame at all in this matter; what is written
in the Book of Fate will come to pass, be it victory or defeat. I am not
aware of the future in this respect. O Child! You know already what an
amount of suffering I had to endure in times gone by when my wife had

 

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

 

been stolen. O Destroyer of the enemies! My wife had been stolen by Moon
who turned out my enemy; living in my stage of an householder I was put
to all sort of miseries, deprived of all my happiness. O Lord of the
Suras! I am renowned in all the worlds as a man of much wisdom and
intelligence. Where then was my intelligence, when Moon carried away,
perforce, my wife. O Lord of the Suras! To my mind, the success or
failure depends entirely on destiny; yet intelligent ones should always
resort to efforts and be energetic.

 

14-17. Vyâsa said :-- O King! On hearing the words of Brihaspati,
pregnant with truth, Indra went with him to Brahmâ, took his refuge and
saluting him said :-- O Grand Sire! The Dânava is collecting a big army,
and wants to conquer and take possession of the Heavens. All the other
Dânavas have enrolled themselves in the list of his army; they are eager
to fight and they are all very powerful and skilled in arts of warfare.
I am therefore very afraid and have come to you. You know everything;
please help me in this matter.

 

18-20. Brahmâ said :-- We all will go today to the Mount Kailâs’a and
take S'ankara with us and go to Vi<u>sn</u>u. There all the Devas,
assembled, will hold a council and consider the time and place, when it
will be settled whether it is proper or not to fight. For one who dares
to do any act without considering one's strength and without any
judgment, certainly courts his own downfall.

 

21-35. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing this, Indra with the other
Lokâpalas and Devas, headed by Brahmâ, went to Kailâs'â. Then they came
to S'ankara and sang vedic hymns to him. Mahes'vara became very much
pleased and they taking Him went to Vaikun<u>t</u>ha, the abode of
Vi<u>sn</u>u. Indra saluted Vi<u>sn</u>u and sang hymns to him, and told
him about his errand thus :-- “Mahi<u>s</u>a has become very haughty on
account of the favour bestowed on him and therefore we are very afraid
(and therefore ask your help to relieve us from this danger).”
Vi<u>sn</u>u, then, hearing the cause of fear, told them :-- “We all
will fight and kill that Demon.” Vyâsa said :--O king! Thus settling the
question, Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Hari and Indra and the other Devas
riding on their own Vâhanas (means of conveyance) respectively
dispersed. While Brahmâ on his vehicle Swan, Vi<u>sn</u>u on his
Garu<u>d</u>a, S'ankara on his Bull, Indra on his elephant Airâvata,
Kârtika on his peacock, and Yama, the god of death on his Vâhana, the
Buffalo, were on the point of going with the other Deva forces, the army
of the Dânava Mahi<u>s</u>a met them on their way, all fully equipped
with arms and weapons. A dreadful fight then ensued between the Devas
and the Dânavas.

 

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

 

Arrows, axes, Prâsas, Mu<u>s</u>alas (clubs), Paras'us (pick axes),
Gadâs (clubs), Pattis'as, S'ûlas (tridents), chakras (discus) S'akti
(weapons), Tomaras, Mudgaras, Bhindipâlas, Lângalas, and various other
deadly weapons appeared on the scenes with which they fought against one
another. The Commander-in-Chief of Mahi<u>s</u>a, the very powerful
Chik<u>s</u>ura, shot five sharp arrows at Indra. The ever-ready and
light-handed Indra too, with his arrows cut off all of them and struck
at his heart heavily with his Ardhachandra (half moon) arrow. The
Commander-in-Chief, struck by this arrow fell senseless on the back of
his elephant. Indra, then struck the trunk of the elephant with his
Vajra (thunderbolt); the elephant then severely struck with the Vajra
fled away into the Dânava's forces. The Lord of the Dânavas seeing this,
got very angry and addressed the general Vidâla “O Hero! You are very
powerful; go then and kill first that haughty Indra; then kill
Varu<u>n</u>a and other Devas and come back to me.”

 

36-57. Vyâsa said :-- The very powerful Asura Vi<u>d</u>âla, on
receiving the order came up at once to Indra, mounted on a very furious
elephant. Seeing him coming, Vâsava shot at him angrily with very
terrible and most powerful arrows that looked like deadly snakes. But
the Demon, too, out off those arrows at once with his excellent arrows
and quickly shot at Vâsava fifty arrows, sharpened on stones. Indra cut
off all those and, being infuriated, shot again sharp deadly
serpent-like arrows at him, and cutting off again all his enemies'
arrows by arrows discharged from his bow, struck the elephant's trunk
with his Gadâ (club). The elephant, being thus struck on his head, cried
aloud in a distressed tone and being afraid turned back, thus killing
the Dânava forces as he fled away. The general Vi<u>d</u>âla, seeing the
elephant fleeing away from the battle-field, mounted on a beautiful
chariot and instantly appeared before the Devas to fight with them.
Seeing the Dânava coming again on a chariot, Indra shot at him sharp
arrows after arrows like venomous snakes. The powerful Dânava, too,
infuriated hurled at him terrible arrows; then a sharp conflict ensued
between Vâsava and the Dânava. Finding the Dânava powerful, Vâsava's
senses were confounded with anger; he then took his son Jayanta before
him and began to fight. Jayanta stretched his bow tight and shot at the
breast of the Dânava swelled with pride, five sharp arrows with his full
strength. Thus shot at by the network of arrows, the Dânava fell
unconscious on the chariot; the charioteer then fled away with his
chariot from the battle-field. Thus on the Dânava Vi<u>d</u>âla becoming
unconscious and being taken away from the field, the Dunduvis (drums) of
the Devas were resounded and great acclamations

 

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

 

of “Victory to the Devas” were heard. The Devas were very glad and
sounded hymns before Indra; the Gandarbhas began to sing and the Apsarâs
began to dance. O king! Hearing the loud acclamations of victory to the
Devas, Mahi<u>s</u>a became very angry and ordered the Dânava Tâmra, the
destroyer of enemy's pride, to go to the battle-field. Tâmra appeared in
the battle, and, coming face to face with many Deva warriors, hurled on
them showers of arrows. Varu<u>n</u>a appeared with his Pâs'a weapon and
Yama, mounted on his buffalo, appeared with his Da<u>nd</u>a (staff). A
terrible fight then ensued between the Devas and Dânavas and the
weapons, arrows, axes, Musalas, S'aktis and Paras'us glittered in the
fields. Yama raising his Da<u>nd</u>a with his hands struck at Tâmra;
but the powerful Tâmra, though severely struck, was not at all moved and
remained firm in his place in the field. On the other hand Tâmra,
violently drawing his bow, hurled a mass of sharp arrows at Indra and
the other Devas. The Devas got angry and shot at the Dânava multitudes
of divine arrows sharpened on stone, and frequently called aloud “Wait,
wait.” The Dânava Tâmra thus shot at by the arrows of the Devas, fell
unconscious in the battle-field; the Dânava forces got afraid and a cry
of universal consternation and distress arose.

 

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the defeat of the
Dânava forces of Mahi<u>s</u>a in the Mâhâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](bk05ch06)
