[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch15)  [Next](bk05ch17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVI**

 

**On the conversation between the Devî and Mahi<u>s</u>âsura**

 

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

 

1-7. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing those words, the King Mahi<u>s</u>a
in anger addressed the charioteer Darûka :-- “Bring over my chariot
quickly. That chariot is drawn by one thousand excellent horses, is
bedecked with banners, flags, and ensigns, is furnished with various
arms and weapons, and is endowed with good wheels of a white colour, and
beautiful poles in which the yoke is fixed.” The charioteer brought the
chariot instantly and duly informed the king, “O King! I have got the
chariot ready at your door, your beautiful chariot, bedecked with
beautiful carpets and various arms and weapons.” Hearing that the
chariot had been brought, Mahi<u>s</u>a thought, the Devî might not care
him, seeing him ugly faced with a pair of horns and therefore decided to
assume a human shape and then go to the battle. The beauty and
cleverness are the delights

 

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

 

of women; therefore I will go before Her, with a beautiful body and with
all the cleverness and dexterities. For I will never be delighted with
anything but that woman looking at me with fondness and becoming
passionately attached to me.

 

8-33. Thus thinking, the powerful King of the Demons quitted the buffalo
appearance and assumed a beautiful human shape. He put on beautiful
ornaments, armplates, etc., and wore divine cloths and had garlands on
his neck and thus shone like a second Kandarpa, the god of Love. Taking,
then, all the arrows and weapons, he mounted on the chariot, and
attended by his army, went to the Devî, elated with power and vanity.
The Devî blew Her conchshell when She saw Mahi<u>s</u>âsura, the lord of
the Dânavas, come before Her with a handsome appearance, tending to
captivate the minds of mistresses and surrounded by many powerful and
valiant warriors. The King of the Demons heard the blow of the
conchshell, wondrous to all, came up before the Devî and smilingly spoke
to Her thus :-- O Devî! Whatever person there exists in this world, this
wheel of Samsâra (the eternal round of births and deaths), be he or she
a man or a woman, everyone always hankers after pleasure or happiness.
And that pleasure is derived in this world by the combination of persons
with each other; never is it seen where this combination is absent.
Again this combination is of various kinds; I will mention them; Hear.
Union is of various kinds according as it arises out of affection or out
of natural consequences. Of these, I will now speak of unions coming out
of affection, as far as my understanding goes. The union that comes
between father, mother and their sons arises out of affection; it is
therefore good. The union between brother and brother is middling, for
mutual interests of give and take are there between the two. In fact,
that union is considered as excellent which leads to happiness of the
best sort and that union which leads to lesser happiness is known as
mediocre. The union amongst the sailors, coming from distant lands, is
known as natural. They come on various errands concerning their varied
interests. This combination, because it offers the least amount of
happiness, is considered as worst. The best union leads in this world to
best happiness. O Beloved! The constant union of men and women of the
same age is considered as par excellence; for it gives happiness of the
very best sort. Both the parties, men and women, are elevated when they
want to excel each other in their family connections, qualities, beauty;
cleverness, dress, humility and propriety of conduct. Therefore, O Dear!
If you establish with me that conjugal relation, you will get, no doubt,
all the excellent happiness. Specially I will assume different forms at
my mere will. All the Divine jewels and precious things that I have

 

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

 

acquired after defeating Indra and the other Devas in battle, and others
are lying in my palace; you can enjoy all of them as my queen consort or
you can make a charity of them as you like. O Beautiful One! I am your
servant; consequently, at your word, I will no doubt quit my enmity with
the Devas. In short, I will do anything that leads to your pleasure and
happiness. O Sweet speaking One! O Large-eyed One! My heart is enchanted
very much with your beauty; I will do, therefore, as you order me. O One
having a broad hip! I am very much distressed; I now take refuge unto
You. O One having beautiful thighs! I am very much struck with the
arrows of Cupid, and I am very much discomforted; therefore, save me. To
protect one who has come under one’s refuge is the best of all virtues.
O One of a somewhat whitish body! O One having a slender waist! I will
spend the remaining portion of my life in serving you as your obedient
servant. Never will I act contrary to your orders to the risk even of my
life. Take this as literally true and do accordingly. I now throw aside
all my weapons before Your feet; O Large eyed! I am very much distressed
by the arrows of Cupid; dost Thou therefore show Thy mercy on me. O
Beautiful One! Never I showed my weakness to Brahmâ and the other Devas;
but today I acknowledge that before You. I have defeated Brahmâ and
others; they are fully acquainted with my prowess in the battlefield.
But, O Honoured Woman! Though I am so powerful, I now acknowledge myself
as your servant. Better look at me and grant your mercy.

 

34\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Mahi<u>s</u>a, the lord of the Daityas,
having said so, that beautiful Bhagavatî laughed loudly and spoke
smiling :--

 

35-45. The Devî said :-- I do not desire any other body than the Supreme
One! O Demon! I am His Will-power; I therefore create all these worlds.
I am His S’ivâ (auspicious) Prakriti (Nature); That Universal Soul is
seeing Me. It is owing to His proximity that I am appearing as the
Eternal Consciousness, manifesting Itself as this Cosmos. As irons move
owing to the proximity of magnets, I, too, though inert, owing to His
proximity, work consciously. I do not desire to enjoy the ordinary
pleasures; you are very dull and stupid; there is no doubt in this, when
you desire sexual union. For women are considered as chains to hold men
in bondage. Men bound up by iron chains can obtain freedom at any time,
but when they are fastened by women, they can never obtain freedom. O
Stupid! You now want to serve the source of urine, etc. Take refuge
under Peace; peace will lead you to happiness. Great pain arises from
connection with women; you know this; then why are you deluded? Better
avoid your enmity with the Devas and

 

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

 

roam over the world anywhere you like. Or, if you desire to live, go to
Pâtâla; or fight with Me. Know this for certain that I am stronger than
you. O Dânava! The Devas collected have sent Me here; I tell you this
very truly; I am satisfied with you by your words of friendship;
therefore dost thou fly away while you are living. See! When words are
uttered seven times amongst each other, friendship is established
between saints. That has been done so amongst us; so there is friendship
now between you and me; I won’t take away your life. O hero! If you
desire to die, fight gladly; O powerful one! I will, no doubt, kill you.

 

46-65. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing the Bhagavatî’s words, the Dânava,
deluded by passion, began to speak in beautiful sweet words :-- O
Beautiful One! Your body and the several parts thereof are very delicate
and beautiful. A mere sight of such a lady makes one enchanted.
Therefore, O Beautiful faced one! I fear very much to strike against
your body. O Lotus-eyed One! I have subjugated Hari, Hara, the Lokapâlas
and the several other Devatâs; I therefore ask whether it is proper for
me to fight with you! O Fair one! If you like, you marry and worship me,
or you can return to your desired place whence you have come. You have
declared friendship with me; I therefore do not like to strike any
weapons on you. I have now spoken for your good and welfare. You can
gladly go away. O beautiful one! You are a fair woman with beautiful
eyes; what fame shall I earn by killing you! O One of slender waist!
Murdering a woman, a child, and a Brâhmi<u>n</u> certainly makes the
murderer liable to suffer the consequences thereof. I will certainly
carry you today to my place without killing you. If I use force to you,
I will not get happiness; for, in such cases, the application of force
leads to no happiness. O One having good hairs! I salute before you and
speak that a man cannot be happy without the lotus face of a woman;
similarly a woman cannot be happy without a man’s lotus face. Where
comes off the good combination between these two, then the highest pitch
of happiness is conceived and pain arises on the disjunction thereof.
True that you are well decked with ornaments all over your body but you
seem wanting in cleverness; for you are not worshipping me. Who has
advised you to renounce enjoyments? O Sweet speaking One! If this be
true; then surely he is your enemy; he has deceived you. O Dear! Leave
your this stubbornness and marry me; both of us shall then be happy.
Vi<u>sn</u>u shines well with Kamalâ, Brahmâ looks splendid with
Savitrî, Rudra is well associated with Parvatî and Indra with S’achî, so
I will shine well with you; there is no doubt in this. No woman can ever
be happy without any good husband. And why are you not then, ack-

 

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

 

nowledging me your husband even when you have got him. O Beloved! Where
is now that Cupid of dull intellect? Why is he not troubling you with
his maddening delicate five arrows? O Fair one! I think that Madana (the
god of Love) out of his pity to you, seeing that you are very weak is
not striking his arrows on you as he has done to me. O One looking
askance! Or it may be that I have got some enmity with that Cupid; else
why is he not shooting arrows at you? Or my enemies the Devas have
advised the God of Love not to dart his arrows on you. O One of slender
body! As Mandodarî had to marry afterwards, when she became passionate,
a hypocrite, and so she had to repent thinking that she had not married
before a beautiful auspicious king, so I think, O One, having eyes like
the young of a deer! You, too, will have to repent like her if you
decline to marry me now.

 

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the conversation
between the Devî and Mahi<u>s</u>âsura in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the
Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](bk05ch17)
