[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch19)  [Next](bk05ch21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XX**

 

**On the peace of the world**

 

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

 

1-11. Janamejaya said :-- O best of Ri<u>s</u>is! I have now seen the
wonderful excellent deeds of the Devî for the enhancement of peace in
this world. Though I have heard from thy lotus face these nectar-like
words, still I am not satisfied. O best of Munis! What did the chief
Devas do when the Goddess disappeared, kindly say to me. O Bhagavân! I
think those Jîvas cannot fully comprehend these excellent sacred deeds
of the Devî, that are less fortunate and have done not many meritorious
deeds in this world. O Muni! What to speak of the less fortunate souls,
even the Mahâtmas who are well versed in hearing such things, can hardly
be satiated on hearing the Devî’s deeds. O! Fie to those, that do not
hear of these things, the essence of essences, on hearing which men
become Immortals. The Mother’s Lîlâ is to preserve the Devas as well as
the great Munis and to serve as a boat for the human beings to cross
this ocean of world. How can, then, the grateful souls forsake Her? The
Pundits versed in the Vedas declare, that the Devî’s life is able to
fulfil all the desires. Therefore the liberated souls that want
liberation, the worldly souls, the diseased all ought to drink
incessantly the nectar-like nectar of Devî’s doings. Especially the
kings that are engaged in Dharma, in earning wealth and in enjoyments,
ought to hear Her life. O Muni! When the liberated souls drink the
nectar-like doings of the Devî, what doubt can there be with the
ordinary human beings, to listen with rapt devotion those wondrous
things! O Best of Munis! It is those that worshipped the Goddess Bhavânî
in their previous births with

 

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

 

beautiful Ku<u>nd</u>a flowers, Champaka flowers and Bel leaves, they
have, it is inferred, in their present births become possessed of rich
enjoyments. And those devoid of any devotion, that obtained this human
body in the land of Bhârata and did not worship the Mother Goddess, they
are, in the present births, without grains and riches, diseased, and
void of any issues. Wander they always as servants, carrying out orders,
and bearing on the burden loads; day and night, they seek for their own
selfish ends, yet they cannot get their belly full meals. The blind,
deaf and dumb; lame and lepers suffer pain and misery in this earth;
seeing them, it should be inferred that they never worshipped the
Goddess Bhavânî. And those that are wealthy, prosperous, attended by
numerous attendants and are always enjoying, like kings, it is to be
inferred that they certainly worshipped the lotus feet of the Mother
Goddess in their past lives.

 

12-15. Therefore O Son of Satyavatî! As you are kind-hearted, kindly
narrate before me the excellent deeds of the Devî. O best of Munis!
Where did the Goddess, Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî, created out of the energies
of all the gods, depart after She had slain the Mahi<u>s</u>âsura and
had been worshipped and praised by the Devas? O highly Fortunate one!
You told me that She vanished from the sight of the Devas; now I like to
know where is She staying now, whether in the Heavens or in the Land of
Mortals? Did She melt away then and there or did She descend to
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha or did She go to the mountain Sumeru? O Muni! Narrate
all these duly before me.

 

16-50. Vyâsa said :-- O King! I told you before about the beautiful
Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa; that island is the place of sport to the Devî and
very dear to Her. In that place Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahâdeva were
transformed into females; they afterwards became males and were engaged
in their respective duties. That place is grand and splendid and is in
the centre of the ocean of Nectar; the Devî Ambikâ assumes various forms
there as She likes; and She sports there. To that Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa the
auspicious Devî departed after She had been praised by the Gods, to that
place where sports always the eternal Bhagavatî Bhuvanes’varî, the
incarnate of Para Brahmâ. When the Highest Goddess vanished, the Devas
installed, on the throne of Mahi<u>s</u>âsura, the powerful King
S’atrughna, endowed with all auspicious qualities, the Lord of Ajodhyâ
and descended from the Solar line. After making him thus the King, Indra
and the other Devas went to their respective abodes on their own
conveyances. O King! The Devas having gone to their places, the subjects
were governed on this earth according to Dharma; and they passed their
times in ease and comfort. It used to rain, then, timely and the earth
was covered with plenty of grains and wealth; the

 

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

 

trees were all filled with fruits and leaves and gave enjoyment to
people. The cows with their udders full like earthen pots gave such a
profuse quantity of milk that men began to milk them whenever they
liked. The rivers’ waters were all clear and cooling; and they flowed
full in regular channels; the birds grouped round them. The
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, versed in the Vedas, were engaged in performing
sacrifices; the K<u>s</u>attriyas observed their virtues and were
engaged in doing charities and in their education; the kings held their
rods of justice and were engaged in governing their subjects; though the
several kings were busy with various arms and weapons, they all became
fond of peace. Thus no wars nor quarrels were seen amongst the subjects;
and the mines yielded plenty of wealth to the people.  O best of Kings!
There were the Brâhma<u>n</u>s, K<u>s</u>attriyas, Vais’yas and S’ûdras
who became the devotees of the Goddess. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as and
K<u>s</u>attriyas used, then, to perform so many sacrifices that, at
every nook and corner in this globe, the sacrificial altars and the
sacrificial posts became visible. The female sex became gentle and of
good behaviour, truthful and chaste towards their husbands respectively.
Atheism and unrighteous acts vanished entirely from the face of the
earth; the people left all dry discussions; they argued only about the
S’âstras that did not go in contra-distinction to the Vedas. Nobody
liked to quarrel with each other; poverty, and evil inclinations were
checked; the people everywhere lived in happiness. Untimely death was
not there; so the people had no bereavements with their friends; no
distress was seen. Famine, want of rains, and deadly plagues were out of
sight. The people had no illness even; and jealousies and quarrels
vanished. O King! all men and women began to sport merrily everywhere
like the Gods in Heaven. Theft, atheism, deceit, vanity, hypocrisy,
lustfulness, stupidity, and the anti-Vedic feelings were not to be seen.
O Lord of the Earth! All the men were then extremely devoted to their
Dharma and engaged in serving the Brâhma<u>n</u>as. The Brâhmi<u>n</u>s
were also, according to the three-fold plan of the creation, Sâttvik,
Râjasik and Tâmasik. The Sâttvik Brâhmi<u>n</u>s were all versed in the
Vedas, clever and truthful; they were kind, they controlled their
passions and they did not accept any presents from others. Filled with
their ideas of Dharma, they used to perform their Puro<u>d</u>â<u>s</u>a
and other such sacrifices with Sâttvik rice, etc., but never, never did
they immolate any animals.\* O King! The Sâttvik Brâhma<u>n</u>as gave
charities, studied the Vedas and offered sacrifices for themselves.
These were their three ordained actions. They were busy in these. O
King! The Râjasik Brâhma<u>n</u>as were versed in the Vedas and acted as
priests to the K<u>s</u>attriyas

 

\*N.B. - Where the victim is fastened during the time of immolation.

 

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

 

and ate flesh as sanctioned by recognised rules. They were busy with
their six duties. They offered sacrifices on their own behalf, assisted
others in sacrifices, took gifts, made charities, studied and taught
others the Vedas. The Tâmasik Brâhma<u>n</u>as were angry, attached to
worldly objects, and jealous. They studied very little of the Vedas and
spent most of their time in serving the kings. O King! Mahi<u>s</u>âsura
was killed, all the Brâhma<u>n</u>as were glad and began to practise
Dharma according to the Vedas, observed vows and made charities. The
K<u>s</u>attriyas began to govern the subjects, the Vaisya carried on
their trading business and the other tribes went on with their
agriculture, preservation of the cows, and lending money on interest.
Thus all men became vary glad on the death of Mahi<u>s</u>a. Devoid of
cares and anxieties, the subjects got much wealth! The cows were endowed
with suspicious signs and gave plenty of milk and the rivers flowed full
of waters. The trees looked splendid with abundance of fruits; men were
without diseases: in short, people had no mental agony and too much or
too little of rains were not there; S’alavas, mice, birds, and seditions
we not extant. O King! The beings died not prematurely; rather enjoyed
incessantly, their full health and possessed lots of riches; especially
beings, engaged in the Vedic Dharma, served the lotus feet of Chandikâ
and thus spent their lives.

 

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the peace of the
world in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](bk05ch21)
