[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch16)  [Next](bk05ch18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVII**

 

**On Mandodarî’s accounts**

 

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

 

1-2. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus, the Devî asked the Dânava,
“Who is that Mandodarî? Who is that king who was not first taken by her?
And who is that king whom she married afterwards? And how did she repent
afterwards? Describe all these in detail to me.”

 

3-26. Thus asked by the Devî, Mahi<u>s</u>a began to say :-- “O Devî!
There is a place, named Simhala, noted in this earth and decorated with
various trees and prosperous with wealth and grains. A virtuous king,
named Chandrasena, used to reign there; he was calm, peaceful, truthful,
heroic, charitable, steady, forbearing, well versed in polities, ethics
and morals vast as a wide ocean, learned in S’âstras, knowing all forms
of religions and much skilled in archery. He was mindful in governing
his subjects and he used to punish according to the laws of Justice. The
king had a beautiful well-qualified wife, very handsome and
broad-hipped. She was very much devoted to her husband and always
engaged in religious acts and of good conduct. This wife, endowed with
all auspicious signs, gave birth to a beautiful daughter in her first
delivery. The King Chandrasena, the father, was very pleased to have
this beautiful daughter and gladly called her by the name of Mandodarî.
This daughter began to grow daily like the phases of the Moon. When she
grew ten years old, she became very handsome. The King now became
anxious to have

 

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

 

a suitable bridegroom and used to think of it everyday. The
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s then told the king that there was a prince named
Kambugrîva, the intelligent son of the powerful king Sudhanvâ of Madra;
this prince was endowed, with all kingly qualifications and versed in
all knowledge and was therefore a fit match for your daughter. The king
then asked his dear qualified wife that he would like to marry his
daughter to Kambugrîva. The queen, hearing this, asked her daughter
Mandodarî that her father was desiring to marry her to Kambugrîva, the
son of the king of Madra. Hearing her mother’s words, Mandodarî spoke
thus :-- “O Mother! I have got no desire to marry; I will not accept any
husband; I will take the vow of leading a chaste virgin life and thus
pass the rest of my life. O Mother! There is nothing more miserable in
this ocean of world than dependence; I therefore prefer to lead
incessantly a life of severe asceticism. The Pundits versed in the
S’âstras say that taking up the vow of separateness and independence
leads to salvation; I will thus be liberated; I have no need for a
husband. At the time of marriage ceremony, one has to say before the
consecrated Fire that one will remain always a dependent to one’s
husband in every way; besides in a father-in-law’s house, one has to
pass one’s time as a slave, as it were, to one’s mother-in-law and to
husband’s (younger) brothers; again one will have to think oneself as
happy when one’s husband is happy and as unhappy when one’s husband is
unhappy; this is the worst of all miseries. Again if the husband marries
again another woman, then this misery of having a co-wife is extreme. O
Mother! Jealousy arises then towards even one’s own husband and
therefore suffering is endless. Therefore what happiness can there be in
this dream-like worlds; especially with women who are made dependent by
Nature? O Mother! I heard that in days of yore the religious son of
Uttânapâda, Uttama was younger than Dhruva; and yet he became King. And
the King Uttânapâda banished his dear wife, solely devoted to her
husband, without any cause, to the forest. Therefore women have to
suffer such diverse pains while their husbands are living; and if by
chance the husband dies, then women get interminable pains; the
widowhood becomes the only source of grief and sorrow. Again if the
husband be in foreign lands, women become subjected to the fire of
Cupid, and then the house becomes an object of more agony. Thus whether
the husband lives or dies, there is no happiness at any time. Thus,
according to my opinion, I ought never to accept any husband.”

 

27-31. The Mother then told her husband all about what the daughter had
said. Mandodarî would accept the vow of a life-long virgin; she had no
desire to marry. She had brought forward many faults in a worldly life
and thus would perform vows and Japams and pass her time alone.

 

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

 

She did not yearn after a husband. The King, hearing thus, came to know,
that his daughter had no intention to marry and so began to pass his
time without giving away his daughter in marriage. Thus the daughter
lived in family protected by her father and mother; by that time signs
of puberty were seen in the body of the daughter. Her comrades requested
her repeatedly to select a bridegroom; but she spoke many words of
wisdom and did not show any inclination for marriage.

 

32-44. Once, on an occasion, that beautiful faced woman went out with
her female attendants on a pleasure trip to a garden, beautified with
various trees. There the slender bodied one began to play and enjoy with
her comrades in picking up various flowers and beautiful flowering
creepers. Just at that time, the famous King of Kosala, the powerful
Vîrasena came there accidentally. Alone he was on his chariot, attended
by a few soldiers; his large army and retinue were coming slowly behind
him at some distance. Her comrades, then, looking at that King from a
distance, told Mandodarî, “O friend! See! Somebody, strong and
beautiful, like a second God of Love is coming towards us, mounted on a
chariot. I think some King he will be and we are very lucky that he has
come here.” While thus talking, the King arrived there. The King,
looking on that blue coloured woman with beautiful eyes became surprised
and getting down from the chariot, asked the maidservant, “O Gentle one!
Who is this woman with large eyes! Who is her father? Tell me this
without any delay.” The attendant smiling, told him thus :-- O
Beautiful-eyed One! Pray speak first who are you? What for have you come
here? What do you want to do here? The female attendant thus asking him,
the King replied :-- There is a very beautiful country named Kosala, in
this earth; I am the King of that place; my name is Vîrasena. My
fourfold army is coming at my will at my back. I have lost my way and
have come here. Know me as the King of the country Kosala.

 

45-49. The female attendant said :-- “O King! This lotus-eyed one is the
daughter of the King Chandrasena; her name is Mandodarî. She has come
here in this garden for sporting.” Hearing thus the attendant’s words,
the King replied :-- “O Sairandhri! You appear to be smart; therefore
make the King’s daughter understand my following words clearly! O
Sweet-eyed one! I am the King descended from the Kakutstha line; O fair
woman! Marry me according to the rules of Gandarbha marriage.”

 

Note :-- Gandharva marriage: one of the eight forms of marriage; this
form of marriage proceeds entirely from love or the mutual inclination
of a youth and maiden without ceremonies and without consulting
relatives.

 

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

 

“O broad hipped One! I have no other wife; you are a beautiful woman, of
a good family and of a marriageable age; I therefore like to marry you?
Or your father may marry you to me according to rules and ceremonies; if
so, I will no doubt be your husband as you desire.”

 

50-55. Mahi<u>s</u>a said :-- O Devî! The female attendant, expert in
the science of love, hearing the King’s words, spoke to the daughter
smilingly and in sweet words. “O Mandodarî! A very good-looking
beautiful King of the solar dynasty has come here; he is very pretty,
powerful, and of your age; O Beautiful! The King is entirely devoted to
you and loves you very much. O Large-eyed One! Your time of marriage has
come and yet you have not married; rather you are against it. Your
father is, therefore, always very sorry and remorseful. See! How many a
time your father sighed and told us, ‘O attendants! Always serve my
daughter and awaken her to this.’ But you are engaged in penances and
austerities, in Ha<u>t</u>ha Dharma; therefore we cannot request you on
this matter. The Munis have said :-- To serve the husband is the highest
virtue of a woman. O Large-eyed! Women get Heaven if they serve their
husband; therefore you better marry according to rules and ceremonies.”

 

56\. Mandodarî said :-- I am not going to marry; better that I should
perform an extraordinary tapasyâ (asceticism); O Girls! You go and ask
the King desist in his request; why is he shamelessly looking at me.

 

57-59. The female attendant then said, “O Devî! Passion is very hard to
conquer; time is also surmountable with difficulty; so know my advice as
the medicinal diet and keep my request. And if you do not keep it,
surely danger will befall you.” Hearing this, Mandodarî replied, “O
attendant! I know whatever is ordained by Fate will inevitably come to
pass; for the present, I am not going to marry at all.”

 

60-61. Mahi<u>s</u>a said :-- The female attendant, knowing this her
obstinate view, told the King :-- “O King! This woman likes not a good
husband; you would better go wherever you like.” The King heard and did
not want to marry that woman any more; and, being sad and
broken-hearted, went back with his army to Kosala.

 

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on Mandodarî’s
accounts in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am, S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](bk05ch18)
