[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch20)  [Next](bk06ch22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXI**

 

**On the installation of Ekavîra and the birth of Ekâvalî**

 

<span id="page_556">p. 556</span>

 

1-10. Vyâsa said :-- O King! In the meanwhile the King Turvasu performed
the Jâtakarma (a religious ceremony performed at the birth of a child)
and other ceremonies of the child. The boy was nurtured duly and began
to grow older day by day. The King began to enjoy his worldly life on
getting this son and thought within himself that the boy had freed him
from the three debts due to the Fathers, the Ri<u>s</u>is and the Devas.
Next, in the sixth month, the King performed the Annaprâsana ceremony
(putting the boiled rice in the mouth of the child) and in the third
year performed regularly his Chû<u>d</u>a Kara<u>n</u>a (the ceremony of
the first tonsure) ceremony. He distributed on those occasions various
articles, wealth and cows to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as and other articles to
various other mendicants and made them glad. In the eleventh year, he
performed the boy’s holy

 

<span id="page_557">p. 557</span>

 

thread (Upanayana) ceremony and tying the girdle made of a triple string
of Munja grass and put the boy to learn archery. Next when the boy
passed off proficiently in the study of the Vedas and in learning the
kingly duties, the King desired to install him on the throne. The King
Turvasu then collected with great care all the necessary articles for
installation in an auspicious day, the combination of Pu<u>s</u>yâ
asterism and Arka Yoga. He called then the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, well versed
in the Vedas and in the S’âstras, and became ready, in accordance with
due rites, to perform the installation ceremony of the prince. Waters
were brought from various sacred places of pilgrimage and from the
several oceans and on an auspicious day the King performed himself the
installation of his son. When the ceremony was over the King gave away
hoards of wealth to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s and giving the charge of his
kingdom to his son, he went to the forest with a desire to ascend to the
Heavens.

 

11-22. Thus placing Ekavîra on the throne, the King Turvasu shewed
respects to his ministers, and, controlling his senses went to the
forest accompanied by his wife. On the top of the Mainâka mountain he
took up the vow of Vânaprastha and sustaining his life on leaves and
fruits began to meditate Pârvatî. Thus when his Prârabdha Karma ended,
he left his mortal coil with his wife and went by virtue of his good
deeds to the Indraloka. Hearing that the King had ascended to Heavens,
his son Ekavîra Haihaya performed his funeral ceremonies according to
the rules laid down by the Vedas. The King’s son, the intelligent
Haihaya, performed, one after another, all the ceremonies due and began
to govern the kingdom which was free from enemies. The virtuous King
Ekavîra remained duly obedient to his ministers after he got possession
of his kingdom and began to enjoy all the best things. The powerful King
one day went on horseback to the banks of the Ganges with the minister’s
son. Roaming about, he found there the boughs of trees had assumed a
very graceful appearance, with loads of fruits, echoed with the sweet
voice of the cuckoos and with the humming of the bees. Close by were the
hermitages of the Munis, where the bucks were skipping about and at
other places the Vedas were being chanted. The smoke was seen rising
from the altars, where oblations were being offered and appeared to form
like a black canopy in the Heavens. Full ripe grains were enhancing the
beauty of the fields and the cowherdesses were merrily watching the
fields. Places of recreations adorned with full blown lotuses and
beautiful groves were attracting the attention of the visitors. The
various trees, Piyâla, Champaka, Panasa, Bakula, Tilaka, Kadamba and
Mandâra, and others were adorned with fruits, stealing away the minds of
the people. At other places, other trees Sal, Tamâla, Jack,

 

<span id="page_558">p. 558</span>

 

Mango, Kali Kadamba, etc., stood gracefully. Next when the King went to
the Ganges water, he saw the gay beautiful full blown lotuses were
spreading their fragrant scents all around.

 

23-31. On the right side of these lotuses, he saw a lotus-eyed girl. She
was shining like the gold, her beautiful hairs were long and curling;
her throat was like a Kambu, belly thin, lips like the Bimba fruits,
several other limbs well built and graceful, breasts risen a little,
nose beautiful and all her body was exquisitely lovely; that lady just
blooming into youth was suffering bereavements from her comrades and was
very distressed and seemed bewildered. She was crying like an ewe in a
dense lonely forest. Seeing her, the King asked her what was the reason
of her sorrows? O Cuckoo-voiced One! You are as yet a girl; who has left
you alone in this state? O Sweet One! Tell me where is your husband now
or where is your father? O One looking askance! What is your trouble;
explain it to me. O thin-bellied One! I will, no doubt, remove all your
sorrows and troubles. O fair-limbed One! In my dominion nobody ever
gives trouble to any other body. O lovely One! There is no fear in my
kingdom from thieves or Râk<u>s</u>asas; or any fear from any serious
dangerous calamities on this earth, fear from lions, tigers or any other
dangers while my sway is predominant.

 

32-41. O One of beautiful thighs! Why are you crying on this lonely bank
of the Ganges? Tell me what is your pain? O Pure One! I can remove the
pains and miseries, even of a serious nature, of men, whether they come
from the Deva or human sources; and this is my principal vow. O
Large-eyed One! Speak what is your inmost desire; I will carry it out
instantaneously. When the king thus spoke, that beautiful woman spoke in
gentle words :-- O King! Hear the cause of my sorrows. O King! Why will
the people cry, to no purpose, unless calamities come before them? O
Mighty-armed One! I now tell you why I am weeping. O King! There was a
very religious King named Rabhya in another province that is not yours.
At first he had no issue. He had a very beautiful wife named Rukmarekhâ.
She was clever, chaste and endowed with all auspicious qualities. But
issueless as she was, she remained very sorry and, in a remorseful tone,
she spoke to her husband Raibbya :-- O Lord! I am barren; I have no
sons; I am therefore a very unhappy creature. My life is in vain; what
use is there in my living? When the queen thus spoke very distressedly,
the king called the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, versed in the Vedas, and began to
perform an excellent sacrificial ceremony, in due accordance with the
Vedic rules. With a desire to get a son, he made many presents in
profuse quantities. When copious quantities

 

<span id="page_559">p. 559</span>

 

of ghee were offered as oblations, there arose, from the fire, a girl
beautiful in all respects and endowed with all auspicious signs.

 

42-53. Her teeth were very nice, eyebrows very lovely, face enchanting
like a Full Moon, the lustre of the body lovely and of a golden colour;
her hairs were fine and curling; her lips like the Bimba flowers; her
hands and face were of a red colour; her eyes were red like lotus and
her limbs were soft and gentle. When the girl arose from the fire, the
priest (Hotâ) took that lean and thin lady of a nice waist by her arms
and presented her to the King and said :-- O King! Accept this daughter,
endowed with all auspicious signs. When Homa was being performed, the
daughter came up like the garland Ekâvalî; therefore this girl became
famous in this world by the name Ekâvalî. O Ruler of the earth! Take
this girl, resembling a son and be happy.

 

O King! Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Deva of the Devas, has given you this Jewel,
this daughter; so be contented. Hearing thus the words of the priest,
the King saw this good-looking girl and with gladdened heart took the
beautiful daughter from his hands. Thus with that lovely daughter he
went to his wife Rukmarekhâ and said :-- O Beautiful One! Take this
daughter. The queen Rukmarekhâ felt the pleasure of having a son when
she got in her arms that lotus eyed beautiful daughter. The King next
performed the natal and other ceremonies of the daughter and did all
other acts as if she had been a son to him duly in accordance with the
rules. The King performed his own sacrificial ceremonies and gave away
lots of Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âs to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s and dismissed them
and became very glad. That beautiful girl was nursed and cared after
like a son and she grew older day by day. The Queen Rukmarekhâ was very
gladdened to get her. On that very day the birthday festival was
performed as on the occasion of the birth of a son. And that daughter
grew older, very affectionate and dear to all.

 

54-61. O Lovely One! You are a king and intelligent too; I will describe
to you all the details; Hear. I am the daughter of the minister to that
King. My name is Yas’ovatî. That daughter and I look alike and of the
same age. Therefore the king has made me her comrade. I spend my time
day and night always with her as her constant dear companion. Ekâvalî
likes very much to remain and sport wherever she finds sweet-scented
lotuses; at other places she does not find happiness. At the distant
banks of the Ganges many lotuses grow; therefore Ekâvalî goes there with
great pleasure to that place with me and her other fellow mates. One day
I told the King that Ekâvalî used to

 

<span id="page_560">p. 560</span>

 

go daily to a distant solitary forest to see the lotus-lake. Then the
King addressed her not to go and he got a lake built within the
compounds of his palace and planted many lotus seeds therein. Gradually
the lotuses began to blossom and the bees came there to drink honey.
Still she used to go outside in search of lotuses. Then the King sent
armed guards to accompany her. Thus that thin-bodied daughter of the
King used to go daily to the banks of the Ganges for play, guarded by
armed soldiers, accompanied by myself and other companions. Again when
the sporting was over, she used to return to the palace.

 

Here ends the Twenty-First Chapter on the Sixth Book on the installation
of Ekavîra and the birth of Ekâvalî in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad
Devi Bhâgavatam by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](bk06ch22)
