[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch21)  [Next](bk06ch23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXII**

 

**On the narration to Haihaya the stealing away of Ekâvalî**

 

<span id="page_560">p. 560</span>

 

1-10. Yas’ovatî spoke :-- O King! One day Ekâvalî got up early in the
morning and went to the banks of the Ganges, accompanied by her
companions; they began to fan her with a chowrie. The armed guards
accompanied her. Slowly she went where there were the lotuses in order
to sport with them. I, too, went with her playing with the lotuses to
the banks of the Ganges and both of us began to play with lotuses with
the Apsarâs. When both of us were deeply engaged in the play, then one
powerful Dânava, named Kâlaketu, came up there suddenly with many
Râk<u>s</u>asas armed with parighas, swords, clubs, bows, arrows and
tomaras and many other weapons. Ekâvalî was playing with the best
lotuses when Kâlaketu saw her in that state, blooming with beauty and
youth as if like Ratî, the Goddess of Love. O King! I then spoke to
Ekâvalî :-- “Look! Who is this Daitya that has come here unexpectedly; O
Lotus-eyed One! Let us go into the central part of our armed guards.” O
King! My companion and myself consulting thus, went out of fear
immediately into the centre of the armed guards. Kâlaketu was seized
with the arrows of Cupid, and no sooner he looked at that beautiful
young lady than he, with a very big club in his hand, hurriedly came to
us, drove away the guards, and took away my lotus eyed companion, of
thin waist. Then the young lady, helpless, began to tremble and cried
aloud.

 

11-22. Seeing this, I spoke to the Dânava :-- Leave her and take me. The
passionate Dânava did not take me but he went away, taking my

 

<span id="page_561">p. 561</span>

 

companion. The guards exclaimed :-- “Wait, wait; don’t fly away with the
girl; we are giving you a good lesson.” Thus saying, they made the
powerful Dânavas stop and both the parties engaged in a very terrible
conflict, astounding to all. The followers of the Dânavas, more cruel
and all fully armed began at once to fight with great enthusiasm for
their Master’s cause. Kâlaketu himself began to fight afterwards
terribly and killed the guards. He, then, with his followers, carried
away my companion towards his own city. I, too, followed my companion,
when I saw her thus carried away by the Dânava and crying out of fear. I
also walked crying aloud by those tracks as would enable my Sakhî to see
me. She, too, seeing me, became somewhat consoled. Crying out repeatedly
I approached her. She was already very distressed and when she saw me,
she clasped me closely around my neck, perspiring and stunned and,
becoming more distressed, cried aloud. Kâlaketu then showed his liking
for me and told that my quick-eyed companion was very afraid and that I
might comfort her. He told me thus :-- “O Dear! My city is like the
Deva’s abodes; you will soon be able to go there. From today I become
your slave, bound by love. Do not cry thus distressedly; be comforted.”
In these words he told me to comfort my dear companion. Thus speaking,
that villain made both of us mount on the beautiful chariot and making
us sit by his sides went gladly and quickly to his own beautiful palace,
followed by his army.

 

23-30. That Demon placed both of us in a beautiful house white washed
and mirror-like and kept hundreds and thousands of Râk<u>s</u>asas to
watch and protect us. On the second day he called me in private :--
“Your companion is very much distressed on the bereavement from her
father and mother and is lamenting; make her understand and console
her.” He told me to speak the following words to my companion :-- “O One
of beautiful hips! Be my wife and enjoy as you like. O One with a face
beautiful like the Moon! This kingdom is yours; ever I am your obedient
slave.” Hearing his unbearable harsh words I said :-- “O Lord! I will
not be able to speak her these words, disagreeable to her. You better
speak this yourself.” When I spoke thus, that wicked Dânava struck by
the arrows of Cupid began to speak gently to my dear companion of thin
belly, thus :-- “O Dear One! Today you have successfully cast on me the
Vasîkara<u>n</u>a Mantra (one of the Tântrik processes by which a lover
is made to come under subjection); O Beloved! Therefore it is that my
heart is stolen and so much brought under your subjection; this has
converted me into a veritable slave of yours; then know this as certain
that I am your slave; O Sweet One!

 

<span id="page_562">p. 562</span>

 

I am very much troubled by the Cupid’s arrows and I am semi-unconscious;
therefore O Lean-bellied One! Worship me. O One of beautiful thighs!
This youth is a very rare and transient thing; O Auspicious One! Now
embrace me as your husband and make your youth a veritable success.”

 

31-36. Ekâvalî said :-- “O Fortunate One! My father wanted to hand me
over to a prince named Haihaya; I also mentally adopted him as my
husband. You are certainly aware of the S’âstras; how can I now abandon
the eternal religion and the virtue of a woman and take up another
husband. The girl must accept him to whom the father betrothes. The girl
is under every circumstances dependent. Never do they get any
independence.” Though Ekâvalî said thus, the vicious Daitya struck by
Cupid’s arrows, did not desist and did not leave me and that larged-eyed
companion. His city lies in Pâtâla and is a very dangerous place; always
it is guarded by Râk<u>s</u>asas and surrounded by a moat; inside is
built a beautiful and strong fort. Now my dear companion, the queen of
my heart, is staying there with a grievous heart and I am here wandering
hither and thither very much troubled on account of her bereavements.

 

37-46. Ekavîra said :-- “O Beautiful-faced One! How have you been able
to get away from the city of that wicked demon and how have you been
able to come here? I am perfectly at my wit’s end. Say quickly all
these. O Proud One! I doubt your words; the father of your dear
companion resolved to give his daughter to Haihaya in marriage; now I am
that Haihaya. I am the King by that name, on this earth; there is no
other King by the name of Haihaya. Is it that your dear companion is
meant for me? O Bhâminî (passionate woman)! Remove my doubts; I will
kill that villain Râk<u>s</u>asa and bring just now your dear companion;
there is no doubt in this. O One of good vows! Shew me that place, if it
be known to you. Has anybody informed her father that She is suffering
from so many troubles? Has her father come to know that her daughter has
been stolen and carried away? And has he made any effort to rescue her
from the hands of that villain Râk<u>s</u>asa? Is it that the King is
calm and quiet, knowing that his daughter has been kept in prison? Or is
it that he is unable to free her from bondage? Say quickly all these
things before me. O Lotus-eyed One! You have captivated my mind by
describing the extraordinary qualities of your dear companion and have
made me passionate too. Alas! When will it be that I will free my
beautiful beloved from the greatest perilous situation and shall see her
face and her eyes, beaming with joy. O Sweet-speaking One! Say, by what
means I can go to that impassable city. How have you been able to come
from there?”

 

<span id="page_563">p. 563</span>

 

47-63. Yas’ovatî said :-- O King! In my early age I got the Mantram of
the Devî Bhagavatî with its seed Mantram (mystic syllable involving in
it the power connoted by the Devî) and how to meditate it. While I was
in the Dânava’s place I thought out that at that juncture I would
worship the powerful Chandikâ who gives instantaneously one’s own
desires. If I worship that S’akti, That fructifies all desires, That is
all mercy to Her Bhaktas, certainly She will free my dear companion from
this her bondage. Though She is really without form, yet She, without
anybody’s help, by Her own force, She is creating, preserving, and at
the end of the Kalpa, destroying this Universe. Oh! She is very
wonderful indeed! Thus thinking I began to meditate that auspicious
red-robed and red-eyed Devî, the Lady of the Universe, and recollected
mentally Her form and repeated silently Her Vîja Mantram. When I
meditated thus for merely one month, Chandikâ Devî became, through my
devotion, manifest to me in my dreams and began to speak in sweet
nectar-like words :-- “You are now asleep; go quickly to the beautiful
banks of the Ganges. The enemy destroyer, the powerful Ekavîra, the
greatest of all the kings, will come there. Dattâtreya, the Great Lord
of the Munis, has given him my Mantra named Mahâvidyâ; the King also
constantly worships me devotedly with that. His mind is constantly
attached to Me and he constantly worships Me. What more to say than this
fact that the king, extremely devoted to Me, meditates on Me as the
internal controller of all beings. That intelligent son of Lak<u>s</u>mî
will come for sport to the banks of the Ganges and will remove all your
sorrows. That king Ekavîra, versed in all the S’âstras will kill the
Râk<u>s</u>asas in a dreadful battle and will rescue Ekâvalî. So now you
pay heed to my word.” Lastly, She told me that my companion should marry
that beautiful King, endowed with all auspicious qualifications. Thus
saying, She disappeared and I instantly woke up. Then I informed my
lotus-eyed dear Sakhî all the details of my dream as well my worshipping
the Devî; hearing this, her lotus-face beamed with joy and gladness.
That sweet-smiling Ekâvalî very gladly told me, “O dear Companion! Go at
once for our success. That truth-speaking Bhagavatî Ambikâ Devî will
release us from our bondage.” O King! When my dear companion ordered me
thus, I thought it proper, as also dictated to me in my dream, to go out
and soon I did it. O King! Due to the grace of the Great Devî, I came to
know the way and I also got the quick motion. Thus I have described to
you the cause of my sorrow. O Hero! Who are you, whose son are you?
Speak truly to me.

 

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter in the Sixth Book on the narration
to Haihaya the stealing away of Ekâvalî in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](bk06ch23)
