[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch07)  [Next](bk06ch09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VIII**

** **

**On S’achî’s praising the Devî**

 

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

 

1-11. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing that the wife of Indra had taken
refuge under Brihaspati, the King Nahu<u>s</u>a became very angry
towards Brihaspati and spoke to the Devas :-- “ O Devas! I hear that the
stupid son of Angirasa has given protection to Indra and has kept her in
his house; I will therefore kill him quickly.” Seeing the terrible
Nahu<u>s</u>a thus angry, the Devas and Ri<u>s</u>is consoled him and
said :-- O King of kings! Do not be angry; quit this vicious motive
yours. See, the Ri<u>s</u>is in all the Dharma S'âstras, have declared
the holding of illicit  connection with other's wives as a very heinous
crime and have blamed it very much. You can consider that the daughter
of Pulomâ is always chaste, devoted to her husband and very
good-natured. How can she, when her husband is alive, take another
husband? O Lord! You are now the Lord of the three worlds and hence the
Defender of Faith and Religion; and if a person like you act
irreligiously, all the subjects will then go to annihilation. One who is
a Lord should always observe the rules of good conduct. Besides there
are many

 

<span id="page_508">p. 508</span>

 

other celestial women in this Heaven as beautiful as S'achî; you can
satisfy your thirst with them. Mutual love is recognised by the wise as
the true originator of amorous dealings; ravishing a woman by force
destroys all amorous sentiments. O King! And if the mutual love be
similar and equal in all respects, then comes the true happiness; you
have now got the post of Indra; therefore quit this idea of holding
illicit connection with other's wives and indulge in other good
thoughts. Demerits destroy prosperity and merits increase it. Therefore,
O King! Leave all these bad thoughts and make your heart take a good
turn and be happy.

 

12-15. Nahu<u>s</u>a said :-- “O Devas! Where were you all when Indra
stole away the wife of Gautama and when the Moon stole away the wife of
Brihaspati? It is easy to give advice to others but to act according to
that is very rare in this world. O Devas! Let the qualified Devî come to
me you will derive much benefit from it and the Devî, too, will get Her
highest happiness; there is no doubt in this. I tell you truly that in
no other way I will be satisfied; bring Indrânî here quickly, whether by
good words or by force.”

 

16-17. The Devas and Munis heard the words of the king Nahu<u>s</u>a,
smitten by the Cupid's arrows, got terrified and said :-- “We will bring
Indrânî to you by gentle words.” Saying thus, they went to the house of
Brihaspati.

 

18-21. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Devas, going to the house of
Brihaspati, spoke thus with folded hands :-- O Guru! We know that
Indrânî has taken shelter in your house; we will have to hand her over
today to the king Nahu<u>s</u>a for we all united have made over the
post of Indra to Nahu<u>s</u>a. Let this beautiful Lady now choose and
worship him. Hearing these awful words of the Devas, Brihaspati said to
them :-- “O Devas! This chaste woman, devoted to her husband, has now
taken my shelter; therefore I can never part with her.” The Devas said
:-- “O Guru! Kindly advise then - if you do not part with S'achî Devî -
how the king Nahu<u>s</u>a be pleased; if he becomes angry, it will then
be very difficult to please him.”

 

22-31. Brihaspati said :-- “O Devas! Let S'achî now go to Nahu<u>s</u>a,
and tempt him with enticing words and make this condition that when her
husband's death will be known to her, she will then accept Nahu<u>s</u>a
as her husband. How could she accept another husband when her husband
was alive. Therefore let her now go in quest of her high-souled husband.
Let S'achî thus make condition with him and, thus deceiving him, let her
try

 

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

 

her best to bring back her husband. O King! Then, after coming to this
conclusion, Brihaspati and other Devas went with Indrânî to the king
Nahu<u>s</u>a. Seeing them come, especially looking at Indrânî the
artificial king Nahu<u>s</u>a became very glad and said to Indrânî :--
“O Beloved! Today I am become the real Indra. O beautiful-eyed One!
Worship me as your husband; see the Devas now have made me to be
worshipped by all the gods.” When Nahu<u>s</u>a spoke thus, the Devî
S'achî became filled with great shame; she began to tremble and said to
the king :-- “O Lord of the Devas! I desire to ask a boon from you.
Better wait till I ascertain whether Indra is dead or alive, there is
this doubt in my heart whether he lives or whether he is dead. O King of
kings! Let me, first of all, clear my doubts. Kindly excuse me and wait
till then. I tell this truly that after I ascertain the fact, I will
worship you. I do not know anything whether Indra is dead or whether he
has gone any where else.” When S'achî Devî spoke thus, Nahu<u>s</u>a
became very glad and saying “let it be so” dismissed her.

 

32-47. Thus having received permission from the King to depart, S'achî
hurriedly went to the Devas and spoke to them to try their best to bring
Indra back as soon as possible. O King! Hearing these sweet and holy
words of Indrânî the Devas intently consulted with each other how they
could get back Indra. They then went to Vaikun<u>t</u>ha and began to
praise with hymns the original Deva, the God Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Lord of
the Universe, kind to those that seek His refuge. The Devas, skilled in
speaking, spoke to Vi<u>sn</u>u with a very troubled heart :-- “O Lord!
Indra, the Lord of the Devas, is very much troubled with his sin
Brahmahattyâ. Where is he staying now, invisible to all the beings? O
Lord! He is now overcome with the sin Brahmahattyâ by killing
V<u>r</u>itra, the best of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s. We ask your skilful and
intelligent advice. O Lord! You are the sole refuge of him as well as of
us. We are now involved in a great difficulty. Kindly show us the way
how we, as well as Indra, can get out of this difficult crisis.” Hearing
the pitiful words of the Devas, Vi<u>sn</u>u said :-- Let Indra perform
the As'vamedha sacrifice (Horse sacrifice) for the purification of his
sins. By this Yajña, that can destroy all sins, Indra will be purified
and he will regain his Indraship; there is no doubt in this. The more so
because the Devî, the Universal Mother, will be pleased with his Horse
sacrifice and will destroy all his sins, Brahmahattyâ and others. Lo!
Merely remembering Her destroys heaps of sins; and, if by this Horse
sacrifice, She be pleased, what wonder is there that sins of a more
grave nature would be destroyed! And let Indrânî worship Bhagavatî
daily; happiness will undoubtedly be gained by worshipping that most
Auspicious One! By this the King Nahu<u>s</u>a will be particularly
deluded by the World

 

<span id="page_510">p. 510</span>

 

Mother and will then be quickly destroyed by the sin committed by
himself. And Indra, purified by As'vamedha, will soon regain his
position and all his wealth. O king! Thus hearing the sweet beneficial
words of Vi<u>sn</u>u of indomitable prowess, the Devas went to the
spot, where resided Indra. Brihaspati and the other Devas consoled the
distressed Indra and made him celebrate duly in right order, the Horse
sacrifice the greatest of all sacrifices. Indra then distributed his sin
Brahmahattyâ amongst the trees, rivers, mountains, women, and the earth.

 

48-51. Thus casting aside his sin on all the above things, Indra became
again free from his sin, and, getting rid of his fever and uneasiness,
abided by the time and remained there invisible in the tubular stem of
the lotus. Doing that wonderful act, the Devas started from there and
reached their own abodes. The daughter of Pulomâ, suffering from her
bereavements from Indra, spoke then to Brihaspati with great sorrow :--
“O Lord! Why is my husband still invisible to me, when he has performed
the As'vamedha sacrifice? Kindly show me the way how I can get a sight
of him.”

 

52-62. Brihaspati said :-- “O Devî! Worship the most Auspicious
Bhagavatî; surely She will make your husband sinless and you will see
him. The Devî Ambikâ, the Upholdress of the Universe, will desist the
King Nahu<u>s</u>a from doing the wrongful act and it is She that will
delude him by Her Mâyâ and get his downfall from the Heavens. O King!
When Brihaspati spoke thus, S'achî Devî got initiated by him in the Devî
Mantram, capable to secure success in any undertaking. Thus getting the
Mantram from her Guru, She began to worship the Devî Bhuvane'svarî duly
with flowers, sacrificial victims and other necessary articles for
worship. Thus Indrânî, with a view to see her husband, performed the
worship of the Devî; she quitted all the articles of enjoyment and
luxury and assumed the garb of an ascetic; thus some time passed away,
when the Devî was pleased and appeared before her on the back of a Swan,
in Her peaceful form, ready to grant boons to Indrânî. She looked, then,
fiery like thousands of Moons; Her lovely beauty appeared in rays like
thousands and thousands of fixed lightnings. The four Vedas personified
began to praise Her in hymns from the four sides. Her two hands were
adorned with a noose and a goad, and Her two other hands made signs to
grant boons and to discard all fear. The Vaijayantî garland of clear
crystal-like gems suspended from Her neck up to Her feet. Her face was
adorned with smiles and signs as if she would grant favours. She had
three eyes and was the ocean of mercy and the Mother of all the Jîvas
from a worm up to Brahmâ. Her two heavy breasts were filled with

 

<span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

 

unbounded ocean of nectar-like juice of Peace and Mukti. She was the
Goddess of innumerable worlds, the Goddess of all and the Highest,
endowed with all the knowledges and the Incarnate of the Undecaying and
Immoveable Brahmâ. The Devî, then, began to address S'achî, the wife of
Indra, in pleasant words and in voice deep like a rolling thunder.

 

63-69. The Devî said :-- O Darling to Indra! Better now ask your desired
boon. I am much pleased with your worship. O Beautiful One! I have come
here to grant you boon. To see Me is not an easy task; by the collected
merits, acquired in thousands and thousands of births one is able to See
Me. Hearing the words of the Devî, S'achî Devî, the wife of Indra, fell
prostrate before Her feet and began to speak to the Highest Goddess, the
Bhagavatî, Who seemed graciously pleased :-- “O Mother! I now desire
from Thee, that I may see my husband whom I attained after great
difficulty, that I be freed from the fear arising out of King
Nahu<u>s</u>a and I want that Indra be reinstated as Indra as he was
before.” The Devî said :-- “O Lady of the Devas! Better go with this My
messenger (Dûtî) to Mânasarovara; there is installed My fixed form,
named Vis'vakâmâ. You will see your Indra staying there very sorrowful
and overwhelmed with terror. I will delude the King Nahu<u>s</u>a within
a very short period. O large-eyed One! Be calm and quiet; I will fulfil
your desires; soon I will delude that king and deprive him of the seat
of Indra.”

 

70-71. Vyâsa said :-- The wife of Indra accompanied the messenger of the
Devî and quickly reached the presence of her husband Indra. She was very
pleased to see her long-wished for husband, in the state disguise.

 

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the praising of the
Bhagavatî by the wife of Indra and on getting the sight of Indra in the
Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am, S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](bk06ch09)
