[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch10)  [Next](bk06ch12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XI**

 

**On the ascertainment of Dharma**

 

<span id="page_518">p. 518</span>

 

1-10. Janamejaya said :-- “O King of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as! You said that
Râma and Kri<u>sn</u>a took their incarnations to relieve the burden of
earth. One great doubt arises in my mind on this point. At the end of
the Dvâpara Yuga, the Earth, burdened and oppressed very much, assumed,
in anguish, the form of a cow and took refuge under Brahmâ. Brahmâ,
then, went with the Earth to Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Lord of Lak<u>s</u>mî,
and thus prayed, “O Bibhu! Let You, with all the other gods, incarnate
soon on earth at the house of Vâsudeva to relieve the Earth of Her load,
as well as to protect the righteous.” When Brahmâ thus prayed, the
Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u incarnated as the son of Devakî, along with
Balarâma to lessen the burden of the Earth. And, in fact, he relieved,
to a certain extent, the Earth by killing many vicious persons and many
wicked and irreligious Kings. But, along with that, Bhî<u>s</u>ma,
Dro<u>n</u>a, Virâ<u>t</u>a, Drupada, Somâdatta, and Kar<u>n</u>a, the
son of the Sun were killed. But, See! that those who plundered
afterwards His riches, and stole away the wives of Hari, those crores of
Âbhîras, S’akas, Mlechchas, and Ni<u>s</u>âdas and other vicious people
remained alive; and how could it, then, be said that the Earth was
relieved when Kri<u>sn</u>a did not kill those people! O Fortunate One!
When I see all the people in this Kâlî Yuga addicted to sinful acts,
this great doubt is not going out of my mind (how the Earth had been
relieved of Her load).

 

11-14. Vyâsa said :-- O King! As the Yuga changes, so the people changes
in course of time. Nothing can alter its course, for this is caused by
the Yuga Dharma (the Dharma peculiar to each Yuga). Therefore if all the
subjects that are considered wicked and vicious according to the law of
the Yuga Dharma, then this creation would be destroyed; hence
Kri<u>sn</u>a killed only those Dânavas and vicious K<u>s</u>attriyas
that were really the burden of Earth. O King! The persons that are
devoted to religion take their births in the Satya Yuga; those that are
fond of religion and wealth they become manifest in the Tretâ Yuga;
those that like Dharma (religion), Artha (wealth) and

 

<span id="page_519">p. 519</span>

 

Kama (desires), they are born in the Dvâpara Yuga, and those that dote
on wealth and lust, they are seen in the Kâlî Yuga. O King! Know this as
certain that these characteristics, peculiar to each Yuga, never vary;
and know this too, that Time, the Lord of Dharma and Adharma, is always
present.

 

15-18. The King said :-- “O Intelligent One! Where are those pious
persons now that were born as high-souled religious persons in the Satya
Yuga; where are those Munis now who were devoted to charity in the Tretâ
or Dvâpara Yuga? Again where will go these shameless and merciless
persons, that are being seen now in this Kâlî Yuga, these vicious
creatures that revile their own Gurus? O Highly Intelligent One! I am
very eager to know how these religious matters are brought to a decision
and settlement; kindly describe to me in detail all these secret
truths.”

 

19-30. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Persons, born in the Satya Yuga, that
perform acts of merit, go to the Deva Loka. O King! The Brâhmi<u>n</u>s,
K<u>s</u>attriyas, Vais’yas and S’ûdras, if they remain in their own
spheres and if they be devoted to religious acts, go to their respective
spheres, earned by their meritorious deeds. By virtue of truth, mercy,
charity, going to one’s own wives, not injuring animals, and having no
jealousy and showing mercy equally towards all, by practising these
universal forms of religion, even the lowest castes, e.g., washermen and
others all go to the Paradise. So in the Tretâ and Dvâpara Yugas men go
to Heaven by virtue of their merits, earned in practising their own
Dharma; but in this Kâlî Yuga persons addicted to vicious acts go to
terrible hells and remain there till the end of the Kâlî Yuga when they
will be again born in this earth. O King! When the Satya Yuga begins and
the Kâlî Yuga ends, at this junction time, the virtuous highsouled
persons descend from Heaven and are born on this earth; and when the
Kâlî begins and the Dvâpara ends, the vicious souls come on the earth
again from their hells. O King! Know this as the course of Time; it
never becomes otherwise. See, then, that the Kâlî Yuga tends to do
vicious things and the people, therefore, become vicious. At times, the
birth of beings takes place otherwise than the laws of Yugas, out of the
strange combinations of Fate (i.e., good persons are seen in the Kâlî
and vicious persons are seen in the Satya). For this reason those that
do meritorious acts in the Kâlî Yuga are born as men in the Dvâpara; so
the Dvâpara good persons take their births as men in the Tretâ; and the
Tretâ good persons are born as men in the Satya Yuga. Again those who
are vicious in the Satya Yuga become persons of the Kâlî Yuga. The Jîvas
suffer miseries on account of their own bad Karmas; they again suffer
more miseries

 

<span id="page_520">p. 520</span>

 

by doing over and over again those bad Karmas by virtue of the Yuga
Dharma.

 

31\. Janamejaya said :-- “O Bhagavân! Describe particularly the details
of the Yuga Dharma. I am now very desirous to hear which Dharma is for
which Yuga?”

 

32-54. Vyâsa said :-- O King! I will now show to you by example the
influence of the religion peculiar to each Yuga; hear it attentively. O
King! The hearts even of saints are quite disturbed by the Yuga Dharma.
See! Your father was a religious and high-souled monarch; still the
wicked Kâlî defiled his mind and prompted him to do an act very
insulting to a Brâhma<u>n</u>a. Otherwise why would he, being a renowned
prince amongst the K<u>s</u>attriyas and a descendant of Yayâti, thus go
and encircle a snake round the throat of an ascetic Brâhmi<u>n</u>?
Therefore, O King! All actions are being influenced by the Yuga Dharma.
The Pundits, also recognise this. If you try your best to perform any
religious act, even then the Yuga Dharma would prevail, yet you would be
able to perform to a certain extent, a part of your intention. O King!
In the Satya Yuga, the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s were versed in the Vedas, always
devoted to worship the Highest Force, with an ardent desire to see the
Devî; they were devoted to Gâyatrî with Pra<u>n</u>ava, devoted to the
meditation of Gâyatrî, always reciting silently Gâyatrî, and the
Mâyâvîja Mantram, the chief mantram. In every village, the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s were very eager to erect temples of the Devî Mahâ Mâyâ
Ambikâ and were truthful, merciful and pure and devoted to their own
respective works. The K<u>s</u>attriyas, skilled in the science of the
highest knowledge, were ever engaged in doing things ordained by the
Vedas and were always intent in protecting well their subjects. The
Vais’yas did their cultivation and trade and the S’ûdras always served
the other three castes. Thus, in the Satya Yuga, all the Var<u>n</u>as
(castes) were devoted to the worship of the Devî Ambikâ, the Highest
S’akti; but in the Tretâ Yuga, the observance of the religion declined a
little and in the Dvâpara, it declined very much. O Ornament of Indra!
Those who were Râk<u>s</u>asas before, they become the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s
of the Kâlî Yuga; they are the flowers of atheists, deceptors of men,
untruthful, without any Vedas, devoid of the Vedic practices, arrogant,
cunning, egoistic, and capable only to serve the S’ûdras. Some of them
try to find fault with the Sanâtan Dharma and are the promulgators of
various other creeds, wicked, fallen from their religion and given to
much talking. O King! As Kâlî gets stronger, so the true religion
declines and ultimately dies; and, in that proportion, the
K<u>s</u>attriyas, Vais’yas and S’ûdras are also devoid of their
religion. When Kâlî will be in full swing, the K<u>s</u>attriyas,
Vais’yas and S’ûdras will all be untruthful, vicious; the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s will act like S’ûdras and will accept other’s gifts. O
King! The women in the

 

<span id="page_521">p. 521</span>

 

Kâlî Yuga would be very passionate, avaricious and ignorant. They would
be very powerful and insolent, wilful, vicious and untruthful and so
would be a source of pain to the society. They would think themselves
vainly religious and learned and would be always ready to impart
religious instructions and deceive their own husbands and be exceedingly
vicious. O King! Our minds are purified by the food that we take; when
our minds are pure, the Light of Dharma shines clearly. The customs and
practices of Var<u>n</u>a and Âs’rama Dharmas get intermixed with each
other and so arises the fault of Dharma S’amkara (i.e., mixture of the
several parts of religion with each other). When the Dharma S’amkara
creeps in, the Var<u>n</u>a S’ankara is seen (i.e., purity in blood and
other matters of birth are lost). Thus, in the Kâlî Yuga, all the
Dharmas will gradually die out and ultimately nothing will be heard
about one’s own religion. O King! In this Yuga even the religious
high-souled persons will be found to do irreligious acts! The nature of
Kâlî is so; nobody will be able to quit it. O King! Thus, in this age,
men naturally commit vicious things; with ordinary means, therefore, no
one becomes able to extricate from the worst vicious habits.

 

55-56. Janamejaya said :-- “O Bhagavân! You know all and you are versed
in all the S’âstras; what will be the fate of so many persons in this
Kâlî Yuga? If there be any path, kindly describe it to me.”

 

57-65. Vyâsa said :-- O King! There is only one path and none other
which can save a man from the sin of this Kâlî; and that is this :-- The
Jîvas must meditate on the lotus-feet of the Highest Devî for the
purification of all their faults and sins. O King! There is so much
strength in Her sin-destroying Name, that the amount of sin in this
world falls much less in proportion to that. Where, then, is the cause
of fear? Her Name, uttered at random, even in an unconscious state,
bestows so much unspeakable results that even Hari, Hara and others have
not the capacity to know that. O King! The mere remembrance of the name
of S’rî Devî is an atonement for a multitude of sins; then it behoves
that every man, afraid of the Kâlî Yuga, residing in a place of
pilgrimage, ought to remember incessantly the Name of the Highest Deity.
Even if anybody cuts, pierces, and kills all the beings in this whole
world, he won’t be touched with the sins, if he bows down, with
devotion, before the Devî. O King! I have narrated to you all the secret
truths of all the S’âstras. Consider all these fully and always worship
the lotus-feet of the Devî. All men are reciting silently the Japam
called the Ajapâ Gâyatrî; still they do not know the glory of it; such
is the powerful influence of Mâyâ. All the Brâhma<u>n</u>as are reciting
in the depth of their hearts the Gâyatrî Mantram, yet they do not know
the glory of it (otherwise they would have

 

<span id="page_522">p. 522</span>

 

been liberated); such is the great influence of Mâyâ. O King! I have
described to you all that you asked me about the Yuga Dharmas; what more
do you want to hear?

 

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Sixth Book on the ascertainment of
Dharma in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](bk06ch12)
