[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch04)  [Next](bk06ch06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter V**

** **

**On praising the Devî**

 

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

 

1-5. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Nârâyana, the Lord of Lak<u>s</u>mî, and
Knower of the essences of all subjects, seeing the Devas extremely
attached to him and anxious, spoke to them thus :-- O Suras! Why have
you kept silent? Tell me why you have all come, let it be good or bad,
tell me; I will try to remove your miseries. The Devas said :-- O Lord!
Is there anything unknown to you in this Triloki; You know everything;
why then art Thou asking us again and again? In ancient times You in
your Dwarf incarnation overspread the three worlds by Your three feet
and thus bound the King Vali in his own premises and gave over the
sovereignty over the Devas to Indra. O All Pervading One! It is You who
deluded the Daityas and procured nectar for the Devas, and it is You who
sent them to the house of Death. Therefore, O Lord! You are the one and
only one that is capable in warding off all the evils that befall on the
Devas.

 

6-31. Thus hearing the Devas' words, Vi<u>sn</u>u said :-- “O Suras! You
need not fear; I know one remedy, approved by all, by which that Daitya
might be killed so that you would be happy. I am now giving out to you.
Your welfare, your benefit must be looked at by me whether by the
exercise of my intelligence or by using my prowess, by wealth pretext or
by any other means whatsoever. Four means, viz., conciliation, gifts,
sowing discord, or punishment are mentioned by the wise statesmen to be
applied to friends and specially to the enemies. Brahmâ was worshipped
by V<u>r</u>itra with severe austerities and He granted boons and it is
due to the influence of that favour that this Asura has become
indomitable. The more so that Vis'vakarmâ created him from the
sacrificial fire; it is through all these causes that the Demon
Vritrâsura, conqueror of the enemies' stronghold, has grown up so very
powerful that he can hardly be conquered by any being. O Suras! First
peace must be negotiated with him; then deceive him, otherwise the enemy
will be very difficult to conquer. First entice him and bring him under
control; then kill him. Now take the Ri<u>s</u>is and Gandharbas with
you and go where the powerful enemy V<u>r</u>itrâsura is residing and
make a treaty with him; thus he will be conquered. Swear on oath and
accede to the terms he proposes and thus create faith in him; then
cultivate friendship with him; lastly, when time will come, kill that
powerful enemy. O Suras! I will also enter, unseen by anybody, into the
excellent weapon of Indra, his thunderbolt and will help him in due
time. Wait till the period of

 

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

 

his longevity expires; otherwise his death will never take place. Now go
to that Asura, with Gandharbas and Ri<u>s</u>is and cunningly cultivate
friendship between him and Indra, by conciliatory words; when he begins
thus to put his confidence, then deceive him. I will enter hiddenly into
the strong well covered thunderbolt. When Indra will come to know that
the Demon has put complete faith in him, he will hurl his thunderbolt
against him and thus the enemy will be killed and not otherwise. O Lord
of the Devas! Do not consider for the present the act of treachery that
you will commit: take my help and kill that wicked Demon with
thunderbolt. To practise hypocrisy with an hypocrite is not considered a
sin; specially no powerful enemy can be killed only by the well known
rules applicable to warriors, without any deceit. I also deceived,
before, Vali, with my dwarf body and again I deceived all the Demons by
showing myself as a beautiful woman; therefore to practise deceit with a
strong deceitful enemy is never considered a sin. Know this. O Devas!
Now you all conjointly worship the Devî Bhagavatî with Mantras and
prayers and take Her shelter; the Yoga Mâyâ, then, will help you. We,
too, worship that Devî, the Highest Prakriti, the Incarnate of pure
Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a, Who grants success, bestows us all our desires, Who
is Herself the object of desires, and Who is never realised by any
except by those Yogis, self-controlled pure men. Indra, too, will
certainly be able to kill his enemy in battle if he worships Her; for
the Mahâ Mâyâ, the Creatrix of Delusion, will, when worshipped, delude
that Demon. Thus deluded by Her Mâyâ, V<u>r</u>itrâsura will easily be
killed by him; there is no doubt in this, what more do you want than
this that everything will be successfully accomplished when the Devî
Ambikâ is propitiated and gets well pleased. She regulates the hearts of
all and is the Cause of all causes. Without Her worship no one's desires
can be expected to be accomplished. Therefore, O Best of Suras! Worship
the Universal Mother, the Prakriti Devî with greatest devotion and with
greatest purity for the destruction of your enemy. See! In days of yore,
I fought for five thousand years, dreadfully with the two Demons Madhu
and Kai<u>t</u>abha and then killed them. I worshipped, then, the Mahâ
Mâyâ, the Highest Prakriti; She was thus pleased and deluded the two
Asuras; thus the two powerful Asuras puffed up with vanity were deluded
and thus I could kill those terrible Daityas under a pretext. Therefore,
O Suras! You, too, worship that Highest Prakriti with the greatest
devotion; She will then surely fulfill your desires.

 

32-49. O King! When the intelligent Vi<u>sn</u>u enlightened thus the
Devas, they went to the top of the Mount Sumeru, adorned with the
Mandâra

 

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

 

trees, and, remaining at a secluded place, recited slowly Her Mantrams
and thus engaged in asceticism and meditation, began to chant hymns and
praise that Universal Mother, the Holder of the world, the Remover of
all world ailings, and the Creatrix, Preservatrix and Destructrix of the
world and the Bestower of all desires to Her devotees. The Devas said
:-- “O Devî! Be graciously pleased unto us! O Thou, the Destructrix of
the afflictions of the distressed! We have taken refuge unto Thy
lotus-feet. We have been defeated by V<u>r</u>itrâsura in the battle, we
are very much oppressed and afflicted. O Thou, the Highest Reality! O
Thou, the Mother of the whole Universe! Protect us as a Mother protects
her child; we are fallen into this difficulty arising from our enemies.
O Mother! Nothing is hidden from Thy knowledge in the three worlds. Why
art Thou taking no notice of us, that are being tormented by the Asuras!
O Mother! Thou createst, preservest, and destroyest the three worlds;
Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a are created by Thy mere will and are
doing all Thy works. Mother! They are not independent; by the
contraction of Thy eye-brows, they are directed and enjoy all the
pleasures. The Mother protects her sons afflicted with various
difficulties and dangers, even when they are found guilty of various
offences. It is Thou that hast made this rule; then why, O Merciful! Art
Thou not protecting us who are quite innocent and whom Thou dost know as
having taken refuge unto Thy lotus-feet. O Devî! If Thou thinkest that
we forget Thee, being too much attracted by the enjoyments that Thou
hast been pleased to confer unto us and therefore we are proper not to
be looked upon with Thy merciful eyes, we would say that this is quite
true; but, O Mother ! Nowhere is seen a feeling of a Mother to Her
child; we are no doubt, objects of Thy mercy and favour always. Besides
there is no fault of us in this matter, O Mother! that we do not worship
Thee and become immersed in sensual enjoyments; for Thy creation, the
Moha (delusion) is very powerful and deludes us. O Mother! Thou art
naturally Merciful! Knowing these, why art Thou not showing mercy unto
us. O Devî! Thou hadst killed before in battle, for our sake, the
powerful Daitya Chief Mahis'âsura, very terrible to all the beings. Then
why art not Thou, O Mother ! killing this dreadful V<u>r</u>itrâsura? O
Mother! Thou hadst killed the two brother Daityas, S'umbha and
Nis'umbha, extraordinarily powerful, and the other Daityas that followed
them; O Thou, the embodiment of mercy! Similarly destroy now this
deceitful strong V<u>r</u>itrâsura. O Mother! Delude this proud Asura so
that he could not  manifest, in the least, his power. We are very much
troubled by the Asuras and overwhelmed with terror from them; Thou
savest us; for there is no other in the three worlds that can by his own
force remove the sorrows and sufferings of the Devas. O

 

 

Mother! Though Thou hast shown favour towards V<u>r</u>itra, now dost
kill him soon, whose nature is cruel and tormenting to others. O
Bhavânî! Better dost Thou save him from sin by Thy holy arrows.
Otherwise that vicious Asura will surely enter into the hideous Hell. It
is for his welfare that Thou oughtest to kill him. Those that had been
before enemies of the Gods, Thou didst purify them by weapons in the
battle-field and hadst sent them to the Nandana Garden in the Heavens. O
Thou, the Mercy personified! Was it not that Thou didst not save them
from hell? Then why art not Thou killing this V<u>r</u>itrâsura! We know
this for certain that the Asura is Thy enemy, not Thy servant; for that
mischievous soul is giving us trouble. O Mother! How can he be Thy
servant and devotee who torments the Devas that are always engaged in
worshipping Thy lotus feet. O Mother! How can we perform Thy worship?
The flowers and other articles used in worship all are created by Thee;
especially we and the Mantras, in fact, everything is the manifestation
of Thy power. Therefore, O Bhavânî! We worship Thee by laying ourselves
prostrate on Thy feet. Be'st Thou pleased. Those men are blessed that
worship with devotion Thy lotus feet for crossing this ocean of world. O
Devî! Those Yogins that want final liberation and forsake therefore all
attachments, vikâras and delusions, even they attain success then only
when they meditate Thy lotus feet. Those that are great Sacrificers and
know best the essence of the Vedas, even they when they offer oblations
to the sacrifice, utter “Svâhâ” that is cheering to the Devas and
“Svadhâ” very consoling to the Pitris; thus they always think of Thee
(for Svâhâ and Svadhâ are Thy names only). O Mother! Thou art the
retentive power and memory. Thou art the beauty, Thou art the peace,
Thou art the Buddhi (intellect) well known to clarify men's minds; and
Thou art the prosperity and wealth of all these three worlds. O Devî!
Those that worship Thee, Thou givest them, out of mercy, those wealth in
some way or other.

 

50-57. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus worshipped by the Devas, the Devî
Bhagavatî appeared before them in a very beautiful form, thin, adorned
with all ornaments. Her two hands holding a noose, and goad, and the
other two hands making signs to discard all fear and ready to grant
boons; Her loins very beautiful, girdled with a gold band with small
bells pending and making sweet tinkling sounds; Her feet with anklets
(ornaments) making sweet sonorous sounds with tiny tinkling bells. Her
voice was exceedingly sweet and lovely, Her forehead was adorned with
the crescent of the Moon and on Her head was glittering a diadem of
jewels, Her lotus-face adorned with sweet soft smiles and with Her three
beauteous lotus-eyes looking like Indîbaras. Her

 

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

 

body was of a red colour like the Pârijâta flowers and Her limbs were
marked with red sandal-paste. She was dressed in a red attire. The Devî
looked well pleased, like an ocean of infinite mercy, wearing complete
dress suited to happy interviews, the Creatrix of all this Cosmos, the
Highest, the Knower of all, the Directrix of all, and the Great Upholder
of all. She looked like an embodiment of the Truth of all Vedântas and
the Incarnate of ever Existence, Intelligence, Bliss, the Mahâ Devî
Bhagavatî Bhuvanes'varî. The Devas all bowed down before Her standing in
front of them. The Mother then spoke :-- “What business have you got
here? Speak to Me.”

 

58-59. The Devas said :-- “O Bhagavatî! V<u>r</u>itrâsura is tormenting
much the Devas; Bewitch him. O Devî! Do such as he can trust the Devas;
and impart then strength on our weapons such as he can be killed.” Vyâsa
said :-- “O King! That will be done.” Saying thus, the Devî departed
then and there. The Devas became very glad and returned respectively to
their abodes.

 

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the praising of the
Devî by the Devas in S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](bk06ch06)
