[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch35)  [Next](bk06ch02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter I**

** **

**On Tris’irâ’s austerities**

 

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

 

1-12. The Ri<u>s</u>is (of the Naimi<u>s</u>a forest) addressed Sûta
(fondly) :-- O highly Fortunate One! Your nectar-like words are very
sweet. We are not satiated with what you have described to us as the
auspicious sayings of Dvaipâyana Vyâsa. O Sûta! We desire to ask you
again to narrate to us the auspicious sayings of this Purâ<u>n</u>a,
beautiful, famous, and sin-destroying and authorised by the holy Vedas.
Vis'vakarmâ had a son, named Vritrâsura, who was very well known, and
very powerful. How was it that he had been slain by the high-souled
Indra? Vis'vakarmâ was a powerful Brâhmi<u>n</u> and belonged to the
gods' party; his son was stronger. How was it that he had been killed by
Indra! The Devas are born of the Sattva qualities; men are born from the
Râjasic qualities; and all the birds, etc., are born of the Tâmasic
qualities. This is the opinion of the Pundits, versed in the
Purâ<u>n</u>as and Âgamas. But in this act of slaying Vritrâsura, a
great contradiction arises; for the powerful Vritra was killed merely
under a pretext by Indra, the performer of the hundred sacrifices, and
endowed with Sattva qualities. And Indra was prompted to do so by
Vi<u>sn</u>u, the head of those who possess Sattva qualities; while
Vi<u>sn</u>u himself entered in disguise into the thunderbolt so that he
could kill Vritra. The powerful Vritra entered into a treaty and kept
himself peaceful when Indra and Vi<u>sn</u>u violated truth and
treacherously killed him by Jalaphena (the watery foams). O Sûta! The
great wonder is this :-- That Indra and Vi<u>sn</u>u turned out so bold
as to forsake the truth. This, then, is therefore very clear that the
high souled persons become deluded and act sinfully. The Heads of the
Devas act very wrongly; they are reckoned as polite simply because they
observe the mere outward forms of good conduct as approved by the
S'âstras. How can the mere observance of outward forms constitute
politeness? Had Indra, who killed in disguise Vritra relying on his
words, to suffer any punishment for the sin that he incurred in killing
a Brâhma<u>n</u>a? It was told by you before that Vritra had been slain
by the Devî Bhagavatî; but the general belief is that Indra killed him.
Our minds are puzzled on this point. (So clear our doubts on this
point.)

 

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

 

13-14. Sûta said :-- O Munis! Hear the incident of the killing of
Vritrâsura and the punishment that Indra had to suffer due to his sin of
Brahmahatyâ (killing a Brâhmi<u>n</u>). This question was asked by the
King Pârik<u>s</u>it and replied by Vyâsa, the son of Satyavatî. I will
tell you what Vyâsa had told before.

 

15-18. Janamejaya asked :-- O Best of Munis! How was it that in former
days Indra, endowed with the Sattva qualities, killed Vritrâsura, with
the aid of Vi<u>sn</u>u? And how and why was it that he was killed again
by the Goddess Bhagavatî? O Lord of Munis! How could one body be killed
by the two; our curiosity has been excited to hear the truth. What man
is there that does not like to hear any more of the glorious deeds of
the high-souled persons! Kindly narrate to us the slaying of Vritra by
the Devî Bhagavatî.

 

19-26. Vyâsa said :-- O King! You are blessed, since your taste to hear
the events of Purâ<u>n</u>a has grown so much; the Devas even get their
thirst for drinking nectar; but when quenched, they do not like to drink
any more. O King! Your name and fame are widely spread. Your Bhakti
(devotion) to the Purâ<u>n</u>as is growing more and more daily. A
speaker gets very much delighted when his audience hears him with
undivided attention. O Lord of the earth! The fight between Vritra and
Vâsava that occurred in days of yore is famous in the passages of the
Vedas and the Purâ<u>n</u>as; as well as the suffering that Indra had to
encounter as his punishment when he had killed the innocent son of
Visvakarma. O King! The Munis, who fear sin very much, commit yet
blameable acts under Mâyâ; then what wonder is there that Vi<u>sn</u>u,
and Indra would kill Tris'irâ and Vritra merely under a plea. When
Vi<u>sn</u>u, the incarnate of Sattva qualities, gets deluded by Mâyâ
and kills deceitfully the Daityas always, then how can you expect any
other man to conquer mentally even the Maha Mâyâ Bhavâni, Who deludes
all the beings! O King! It is under the compulsion of this Mâyâ that the
Bhagavân, the Infinite, the friend of Nara, Nârâyana, takes incarnations
in thousands and thousands of Yugas in this Samsâra as Fish, etc., and
does deeds sometimes lawful and sometimes unlawful. The Devas and men,
being confounded by his Mâyâ, become upset and disordered and say “that
this body, wealth, house, sons, wife and relatives are all mine” and
being thus deluded sometimes do virtuous and sometimes sinful deeds. O
King! There is not even one, on the surface of this earth, though he may
be well versed in finding out cause and effect, the knowledge of the
high and low, that can be free from this Great Delusion; he is from the
very beginning tied up by the three Gu<u>n</u>as of this Mâyâ and that
remains under Her control.

 

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

 

27-35. This explains that Vi<u>sn</u>u and Indra both were deluded by
Mâyâ and engaged in fulfilling their own selfish ends. They killed
Vritrâs'ûra under a pretext. O King! Hear! I am now describing to you
the cause of enmity between lndra and Vritra. Vis'vakarmâ, the
Prajâpati, was great architect of the Gods, he was skilled, he was
superior amongst the gods, a great ascetic and endeared by the
Brahmi<u>n</u>s. He had enmity with Indra; and out of this enmity he
created a son, very beautiful named him Tris'iraska Visvarûpa. That son
had three faces very beautiful and lovely. Visvarûpa performed three
different functions with his three different faces; with one, he used to
study the Vedas, with the second he used to drink nectar (wine), and
with the third he used to see simultaneously all the directions.
Tris'irâ renounced the pleasures of the world and began to practise a
hard tapasyâ; he became a great ascetic, gentle, restrained in his
passions and entirely devoted to his religion. He practised
Panchâgni-Sâdhan in the summer season, tying his feet upwards on the
branch of a tree with his head downwards; he remained in dew in the cold
season, under water in the winter season. Thus he abstained from food
and conquered his self and, forsaking all the worldly connections,
practised a very hard tapasyâ; very difficult, indeed, for those who are
of dull intellects.

 

36-49. Indra became very sad and dispirited to see him practise such a
Tapasyâ and thought of the means so that he might not acquire his
Indraship. The Pâkasâs'ana Indra remained always very anxious see the
energetic penance practised by that ascetic of unbounded glory and his
steady attachment towards it. He thought thus :-- “This Tris'irâ is
becoming stronger day by day by his penance, so he will kill me. The
wise never look an enemy with indifference whose strength daily becomes
greater and greater.” It is now my urgent duty to invent means how to
baffle his Tapasyâ and he at last settled that lust is the great enemy
of asceticism; the practice of devout austerities is destroyed complete
by lust; so I must try this very day how the Muni becomes attached to
worldly lust and enjoyments. The intelligent Indra, thinking thus,
called the Apsarâs Urvas'î, Menakâ, Rambhâ, Ghritâchî, and Tilottamâ and
others proud of their beauties so that they might seduce Tri'sirâ, the
son of Vi'svakarmâ. O Apsarâs! I have now got a very grave task to
fulfil; all of you help me in this respect. A great enemy of mine,
difficult to conquer, is practising penance with his self-controlled.
Start at once and with your dress suited to various amorous gestures and
try hard to seduce him. Be all well with you; seduce him and remove the
fever of my heart. O Apsarâs! What more shall I say, I am restless since
I have heard of his strength performing such hard austerities. O Weak
Ones ! That powerful

 

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

 

ascetic may acquire my place and thus dispossess me; this fear has
possessed me. Therefore destroy my fear as quickly as possible. This is
the task now given to you; get united and do this good to me. The
Apsarâs, hearing him, bowed down and said :-- “O Lord of the Devas! Do
not be afraid! We will try our best to seduce him. O highly Lustrous
One! For the enticing away of the Muni, we will do all the things,
dancing, music and other amorous gestures and practices, that will
discard your fear. O King of the Gods! We will unsettle the mind of the
Muni by our side glances and passionate gestures and postures, delude
and tie him and then bring him under our control.”

 

50-60. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus saying, the Apsarâs went to Tris'irâ
and began to exhibit various amorous gestures and postures as stated in
the Kâma Sâstra. They began to sing sometimes, sometimes to dance in
tune with musical measures before the Muni. In short, they practised
various amorous gestures to entice him away. But that ascetic, blazing
with the fire of Tapas, did not notice even the Apsaras' various
attempts; rather he kept all his senses under the control and remained
like a deaf, dumb, and blind man. In that lovely hermitage of the Muni,
the Apsarâs sang and danced ravishingly and remained a few days there.
But when they saw that the Muni Tris'irâ did not swerve a bit from his
meditative posture they returned tired, distressed to Indra and all,
very fearful, began to address Indra with folded hands :-- “O King! We
tried our best and we could not in any way make the Muni unsteady, very
hard to surmount. O Pâkas'asana! Please invent other means; we could not
make the self-controlled Muni move away an inch from his position; it is
our good luck that that high-souled Muni, an incarnate of blazing fire
have not cursed us!” Then dismissing the Apsarâs, the evil-minded and
dull Indra began to devîse means, though totally unlawful, how to kill
that good Muni. O King! That Indra abandoned all shame, and fear of sin
and ultimately came to a highly blameable and sinful conclusion how to
kill him.

 

Here ends the First Chapter of the Sixth Book on Tris'irâ's austerities
in S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](bk06ch02)
