[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch22)  [Next](bk07ch24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXIII**

 

**On the King Haris’chandra’s acknowledging of the slavery of the
Châ<u>nd</u>âla**

 

<span id="page_669">p. 669</span>

 

1-5. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Speaking these harsh and cruel words to the
King, the Muni took that money and went away. When Vis’vâmitra went
away, the King Haris’chandra became very much perplexed with sorrows and
sighed frequently. He then began to say with his face bent downwards.
“Suffering from constant pain and troubles, I am now turned into a
Preta; if anybody finds me serviceable, he may purchase me with value in
gold as proper; but he should do this quickly before the sun sets.”
Dharma, then, assuming the form of a heartless

 

<span id="page_670">p. 670</span>

 

Châ<u>nd</u>âla, came there quickly to test Haris’chandra. The body of
that low mean person was of a black colour, his air looking ferocious,
his belly elongated, body emitting stench odours, teeth very long, and
his face, covered with beards. He had one bamboo in his hand; in his
neck, the bones of the dead were hanging and his chest was very
distorted.

 

6\. The Châ<u>nd</u>âla said :-- “I am in urgent need of a servant; I
will keep you as my slave; say, then, quickly what is your price?”

 

7\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When the cruel, extremely ferocious and
heartless Châ<u>nd</u>âla said thus, the King Haris’chandra was
surprised to see his appearance and said :-- “Who are you?”

 

8-12. The Châ<u>nd</u>âla said :-- “O King! I am the famous
Châ<u>nd</u>âla, Pravîra; you will have to remain always subject to me
and to collect the clothes of the dead persons.” Hearing his word, the
King said, “I want to be purchased by a Brâhmi<u>n</u> or a
K<u>s</u>attriya. See! The sages say, that the Dharma of good people is
excellent; the Dharma of the persons intermediate is middling; and the
Dharma of the mean is depressing. You belong to the low and mean class.
So my Dharma cannot be observed if I remain in your house.” The
Châ<u>nd</u>âla said :-- “O King! This is the Dharma of yours now
mentioned by you; then why did you mention that anybody can purchase
you; without any previous consideration, you spoke before me. He who
speaks with preconsideration attains his desired object; but, O Sinless
One! You did not consider and you spoke that ordinarily. However, if I
take your words that you spoke first to be true, then you are no doubt,
purchased by me.”

 

13\. Haris’chandra said :-- The villain that speaks untruth, goes
downright to a terrible hell; so to become a Châ<u>nd</u>âla is far
better for me than to use an untrue word.

 

14-15. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When the King was speaking thus, the
ascetic Vis’vâmitra arrived there out of anger and impatience; he rolled
his eyes and said :-- This Châ<u>nd</u>âla is come to give you your
desired money; why, then, are you not giving me the remnant of my
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â!

 

16\. Haris’chandra said :-- “O Kaus'ika! Nothing is unknown to you. My
this body is born for the Solar Line; how then can I accept this slavery
of a Châ<u>nd</u>âla!”

 

17-20. Vis’vâmitra said :-- If you do not sell yourself to a
Châ<u>nd</u>âla, be certain that I will just now put you under my curse.
Give me immediately

 

<span id="page_671">p. 671</span>

 

my Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â, be it whether from a Châ<u>nd</u>âla or from a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a. There is no other purchaser at present than this
Châ<u>nd</u>âla. But know this as certain that I won’t go back until I
get my money. O King! If you do not give me money just now, then when
half the Ghatikâ of the day is remaining, I will burn you up by my fire
of anger.

 

2l. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing these words of Vis’vâmitra, the King
became almost dead; bewildered with fear, then he clasped the feet of
the Ri<u>s</u>i and said, “Be friendly, please.”

 

22-23. Haris’chandra said :-- “O Viprar<u>s</u>i! I am now very
humiliated and have become very afflicted and distressed. Especially I
am your Bhakta, I am your servant; so be graciously pleased and free me
from this painful companion of a Châ<u>nd</u>âla. O Muni! In lieu of my
remnant Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â, I will be your obedient slave; I will do
your work and follow your commands.”

 

24\. Visvamitra said :-- “O King! You are then my slave, you will obey
always my commands.”

 

25-26. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When Vis’vâmitra said so, the King, out of
joy, thought that he regained his life and said to Kaus’ika. Always I
will obey your words; now order me what work I will have to do.

 

27-28. Vis’vâmitra, then addressed the Châ<u>nd</u>âla and said :-- “O
Châ<u>nd</u>âla! Come to me and give me the price for this slave. I am
now handing this slave over to you; give me the price and take him. I
want money; I have no need for a servant.”

 

29\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When Vis’vâmitra spoke thus, the
Châ<u>nd</u>âla, overflowed with joy, came immediately to the
Ri<u>s</u>i Vis’vâmitra and said :--

 

30\. O Dvîja! The relief that you have given me by selling this servant,
for that I will give you the ten Yoyanas wide land of Prayâga
Ma<u>nd</u>alam, covered over with jewels.

 

31-36. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Châ<u>nd</u>âla then gave one thousand
gems, one thousand jewels, one thousand pearls and one thousand gold
Mohurs and Vis’vâmitra took them. No signs of distraction nor
unpleasantness were visible on the face of the King Haris’chandra.
Rather he laid hold of his patience and thought within himself,
“Vis’vâmitra is now my master; I will do any work that he puts

 

<span id="page_672">p. 672</span>

 

me in.” At this time, the incorporeal voice, the voice of the fourth
dimensional space, sounded from the Heavens :-- “O Fortunate One! You
are freed from the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â, the debt before that you
promised to give me.” A shower of flowers fell on the head of the King
from the Heavens. At this time the powerful Indra and the other hosts of
the Devas praised the King, saying :-- “Sâdhu! Sâdhu! Well-done,
Well-done.” The heart of the King was then filled with intense joy and
the King then said to Kaus’ika :--

 

37-38. O Intelligent One! You are a greater benefactor to me than my
father, mother and friend as you have freed me in a moment from my
debts. So, O mighty armed one! Your words are beneficial to me. Now
order what am I to do.

 

39\. When the King said so, Vis’vâmitra then said :-- Go and observe
from today the words of the Châ<u>nd</u>âla. Let good befall on you!
Thus saying, the Mahar<u>s</u>i Vis’vâmitra took the money given by the
Châ<u>nd</u>âla and went away to his own place.

 

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the King
Haris’chandra’s acknowledging of the slavery of the Châ<u>nd</u>âla in
the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](bk07ch24)
