[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch06)  [Next](bk07ch08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VII**

** **

**On the twin As’vins drinking the Soma Cup**

 

<span id="page_616">p. 616</span>

 

1-2. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When the vessel filled with the Soma juice
was given to the two As'vins, Indra became very angry and showing his
strength, spoke thus to the Muni Chyavana. O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! Never will
you be able to endow him with such a high honour. When you have shewn
towards me your enmity, I will kill you, no doubt, exactly like
Vis'varûpa.

 

3-4. Chyavana said :-- “O Indra! Do not insult the two highsouled
As'vins. They have given me beauty, youth and lustre and made me look
like a second Deva. O Lord of the Devas! Just as the other Devas can
take the vessel of Soma excluding you, so the two powerful As'vins can
do the same towards you.”

 

5\. Indra said :-- “They are the physicians; so they cannot in any way
have the right to accept the Soma cup. I will just now sever your head.”

 

6-29. Vyâsa said :-- O Ornament to the race of Bharata! At these words
of Indra, the Muni made the As'vins accept the Soma cup, thus highly
insulting, as it were, Indra and not taking any notice of his words.
When the two As'vins accepted the cup with a desire to drink the Soma
thereof, the powerful Indra saw it  and said :-- “If you make them drink
Soma out of your own necessity, I will hurl thunderbolt on your head
exactly in the same way as I did towards Vis'varûpa.”

 

<span id="page_617">p. 617</span>

 

The Muni became violently angry at this and made the As'vins drink the
Soma according to due rites and ceremonies. Indra, too, angrily hurled
thunderbolt on him in the presence of all the Devas. The weapon shed
lustre like million Suns. Seeing the thunderbolt hurled on him, the
powerful Muni made the Indra's thunderbolt stand stock still by virtue
of his Tapas. The powerful Muni then adopted black magic to kill Indra
and offered oblations of clarified butter and grains, purified by
Mantrams, in the Fire. By the Tapas of Chyavana, of unbounded lustre,
there sprang from the sacrificial hearth Krityâ (A female deity to whom
sacrifices are offered for destructive and magical purposes). And out of
Krityâ originated a very strong person, very cruel and of huge body, a
great Demon. The horrible Demon, named Mada, was terrifying to all the
beings. His body was huge like a mountain, teeth very sharp and
terrible. Four teeth were hundred Yojanas long each, and his other teeth
were ten Yojanas long. His arms were like mountains, very long and
fierce; tongue, horrible, rough and so very long that it reached up to
the heavens. His throat was like a mountain peak hard and of a furious
appearance; nails resembled tiger's, hairs horrible. His body was jet
black like lamp black; face very terrible, eyes bright like the
conflagration fire and awful. One of his jaws touched the ground and the
other touched the heaven. Thus was born the Demon, named Mada, of huge
form. Looking at him, the Devas became suddenly frightened; Indra, too,
got very much terrified at the sight of him and did not want to have any
more fight. The Demon swallowed Indra's thunderbolt, looked at the sky,
and stood up as if to swallow at once the whole Universe. He became
infuriated with rage and pursued Indra to devour him. Seeing this, the
Devas cried aloud :-- “Alas! We are slain.” Indra had his arms disabled
by Mantrams and so he could not hurl his thunderbolt though he wanted to
do so. The Lord of the Devas, then, with thunderbolt in his hand, looked
on the Demon as Death personified and remembered his Guru, skilled in
the knowledge which is the proper time to perform a certain thing. The
liberal-minded Brihaspati knowing the time of imminent danger, and that
he is remembered by Indra, at once came to the spot. He then judged what
to do in the present crisis and told Indra :-- “O Indra! This cannot be
averted even by Mantrams; what to speak of thunderbolt! This powerful
Asura Mada has arisen from the sacrificial hearth by virtue of the Tapas
of the Chyavana Muni. The Muni's power is especially felt here. O Lord
of the Devas! Nobody, You, I, nor any other Deva will be able to resist
him. Know this. Even Brahmâ cannot thwart the anger of one who is
devoted to the S'akti, the Highest Force; Chyavana is the Bhakta of the
Highest S'akti. So no

 

<span id="page_618">p. 618</span>

 

other body is able to defeat him. He is the man himself to take back the
Krityâ that he has originated. There is no doubt in this. So it is
better for you now to take the shelter of the Muni.”

 

30-52. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus from his Guru, Indra went to
the Muni and bowed down shuddering, before him. “O Muni! Forgive me and
stop the Asura from his intention to slay the Devas. O All knowing One!
Be pleased, I will keep your words. O Bhârgava! The two As'vins will,
from this day, have the right to drink the Some juice. This I speak out
to you in truth. O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! Be graciously pleased unto me. O
Ascetic! Your intention will never be baffled. Especially I know you to
be a knower of Dharma; so, you will never be able to make your word
swerve from truth. The two As'vins will, by your grace, be able to drink
always the Soma cup; and the King S'aryâti's fame will also know no
bounds. O Muni! Know that what I have done is simply to test your
prowess in Tapas. O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! Now do this favour to me and take
back your, this Demon Mada, sprung from your sacrificial hearth and thus
do good to all the Devas. There is no doubt in this.” Thus spoken
piteously by Indra, Chyavana, who knew the Highest Reality, drew back
within himself the anger arising from the enmity with Indra. Then the
Mahar<u>s</u>i Chyavana consoled the Devas that were very much perplexed
and anxious out of terror of the Demon named Mada and divided the Asura
into four parts (1) female sex, (2) drinking, (3) gambling and (4)
hunting animals. When Mada was thus divided into four parts, the terror
stricken Devas felt themselves relieved and saved and got consoled.
Chyavana then placed the Devas in their respective stations and
completed the sacrifice. As last, the religious Bhârgava made first
Indra and then the two As'vins drink the Soma Cups. O King! Thus
Chyavana had the As'vins their Soma Cups by virtue of his power of
Tapas. Thence the tank with the sacrificial post Yûpa became famous and
the Muni's Âs'rama also was renowned and honoured in all respects. The
King S'aryâti, too, became very glad at this sacrifice and completing
the sacrifice returned with his ministers to his city. The Manu's son,
the powerful religious King S'aryâti governed his kingdom, free from any
obstacles or other enemies. He had one son named Ânarta; and Ânarta had
a son named Revata born to him.

 

Revata built the city of Kus'asthalî in the midst of the ocean and began
to live there. He enjoyed all the things in the countries named Ânarta
and others. Revata had one hundred sons of whom Kakudmi was the eldest
and of pure character. He had one daughter very beautiful named Revatî,
endowed with all auspicious qualities. When the daughter reached a
marriageable age, the King began to think where he

 

<span id="page_619">p. 619</span>

 

could get a prince of a good noble family. That powerful King began to
govern his people Ânartas, with his headquarters at the Raivata hill.
“Whom to betroth this daughter,” the King thought and settled that he
would go to Brahmâ and ask him, the venerable omniscient Prajâpati,
worshipped by the Devas. Thus the King went with his daughter Revatî to
the Brahmaloka. There the Devas, Yajñas, Vedas, mountains, oceans and
rivers all were shining with luminous bodies. There the eternal
Ri<u>s</u>is, Siddhas, Gandharbas, Pannagas and Châranas were singing
hymns to Brahmâ, standing with folded hands.

 

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the twin As'vins
drinking the Soma Cup in S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](bk07ch08)
