[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch12)  [Next](bk07ch14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIII**

 

**On the coming of** **Vis’vâmitra to Tris’anku**

 

<span id="page_636">p. 636</span>

 

1-3. Janamejaya said :-- “O Muni! I see that at the command of the King,
the ministers installed Haris’chandra on the royal throne; but how
Tris’anku got rid of his Châ<u>nd</u>âla body, kindly say. Was it that
he bathed in the holy waters of the Ganges and lived in the forest and
when he died he was freed of the curse; or was it that the Guru
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha favoured him by his grace and freed him of the curse? O
best of Ri<u>s</u>is! I am extremely eager to hear the life of the King;
therefore kindly describe to me in detail his wonderful career.”

 

4-16. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The King became gladdened in his heart to
install his son on the throne and began to pass his days in that forest
in the meditation of Bhagavatî Bhavânî. Thus some time passed when
Vis’vâmitra, the son of Kaus’ika, completing his course of Tapasyâ with
an intent mind returned to his home to see his wife and sons. On coming
back to his house, the intelligent Muni found his sons and other members
of the family happy and well conditioned, became very glad and when his
wife came to him for his service, asked her :-- O Fair-eyed One! How did
you spend your time in days of famine? There was nothing whatsoever of
the stock of rice, etc., in the house; how then did you nourish these
boys? Please speak to me. O Fair One! I was very busy with my
austerities, I could not therefore come to you and see my boys; how
then, O Beloved, and what measures did you resort to for their
maintenance? O good and auspicious One! When I heard of the dire famine,
I thought then “I have no wealth; so what shall I do if I go there?”
Thus thinking I did not come then. O Beautiful One! At that time, one
day I was very hungry and being very much

 

<span id="page_637">p. 637</span>

 

tired I entered into the house of a Châ<u>nd</u>âla, with the object of
stealing. On entering the house I found the Châ<u>nd</u>âla sleeping;
then being extremely distressed with hunger, I entered into his kitchen
if I could find anything there. When the dishes were sought and turned,
and when I was going to take cooked dog’s flesh I immediately fell into
the sight of that Châ<u>nd</u>âla. He asked me very affectionately “Who
are you? Why have you entered here at this hour of night? Why are your
looking after the dishes? Speak what you want.” O Beautiful One! When
the Châ<u>nd</u>âla asked me these questions, I was very much pressed by
hunger and I spoke out my wants in a tremulous voice :-- O Fortunate
One! I am an ascetic Brâhmi<u>n</u> very much pained by hunger; I have
entered your house stealthily and am looking out for some eatables from
your cooking pots. O Intelligent One! I am now your guest in the form of
a thief; I am now specially very hungry; so I will now eat your cooked
meat; kindly permit me. Hearing these words, the Châ<u>nd</u>âla spoke
to me in words authorised by the S’âstras :-- O One of the Superior
Var<u>n</u>a! Know this to be the house of a Châ<u>nd</u>âla; so never
eat that flesh.

 

17-28. The human birth is very rare in this world; then again to be born
a Dvîja is more difficult; and to get Brâhma<u>n</u>hood again in the
Dvîjas is exceedingly difficult. Are you not aware of this? They ought
never to eat the defiled food who desire to attain to the Heavens; owing
to Karma, the Mahar<u>s</u>i Manu has denominated the seventh caste as
Antyaja and has discarded them altogether. So, O Brâhmi<u>n</u>! I am
now by my actions turned into a Châ<u>nd</u>âla and so forsaken by all;
there is no doubt in this. I am forbidding you so that this fault of
Var<u>n</u>a S’a<u>n</u>kara may not suddenly attack you. Vis’vâmitra
said :-- “O Knower of Dharma! What you are speaking is quite true;
though a Châ<u>nd</u>âla, your intelligence is very clear; hear, I will
now speak to you the subtleties of the Dharma in times of danger. O
Giver of respect! Always and by all means it is advisable to keep up the
body if sin be thereby incurred, one ought to perform Prâyas’chitta
(penance) for its purification when the time of danger is over. But if
one commits sin when the time is not one of danger, one gets degraded;
not so in the time of danger. The man that dies out of hunger, goes to
hell, no doubt. Therefore every man seeking for his welfare must satisfy
his hunger. Therefore I intend to steal for preserving my body. O
Châ<u>nd</u>âla See! The sin, incurred in stealing during famine, which
the Pundits have declared, goes to the God of rains until he does not
pour forth rain.” O Beloved! Just when I spoke these words, the God of
Rains began to pour forth rain. O Beloved! Just when I spoke these
words, the God of Rains began to pour forth rain so desired by all, like
that coming out of the elephant’s trunk. When

 

<span id="page_638">p. 638</span>

 

the clouds thus poured forth rains with the glitterings of the
lightnings, I felt very glad and left the house of the Châ<u>nd</u>âla.
O Beautiful One! Now speak out to me, how did you behave in that famine
time, so terrible to all the beings.

 

29-48. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing the above words of the husband,
the sweet speaking lady spoke :-- Hear, how I passed my time in times of
famine. O Muni! After you had gone to practise Tapasyâ, the dire famine
raged; and my sons, exhausted of hunger, became very anxious for food. I
became very anxious to see the sons hungry; I then went out to the
forest in quest of wild rice; and I got some fruits. Thus I spent some
months by collecting the rice growing wildly in the forest; then in
times these also could not be got and I became again anxious. The Nibâra
rice, too, is now not available and nothing is obtained also by begging;
there are no fruits on the trees and no roots are found under the earth.
The sons are crying in agony of hunger. What to do? And where to go?
What am I to say now to the hungry boys? Oh God! Thus thinking on
various ways, I at last came to this conclusion that I would sell one of
my sons to a rich man and whatever price I can fetch, with that I will
preserve the lives of the other sons. O Dear! Thus thinking, I became
ready and went out. O Fortunate One! Then this boy began to cry aloud
and became very distressed; yet I was so shameless that I took the
crying boy and got out of my Âs’rama. At this time one Râjar<u>s</u>i
Satyavrata seeing me very distressed, asked me “O One of good vows! Why
is this boy weeping?” O Muni! I spoke to him “Today I am going to sell
this boy.” The King’s heart became overfilled with pity, and spoke to me
:-- “Take back to your Âs’rama this boy. Daily I will supply you with
meat for the food of your boys until the Muni returns home.” O Muni! The
King from that time used to bring, with great pity, daily the flesh of
deer and boar killed by him in the forest and he used to tie that on
this tree. O Beloved! Thus I could protect my sons in that fearful ocean
of crisis; but that King was cursed by Vas’i<u>st</u>ha only for my
sake. One day that King did not get any meat in the forest; so he
slaughtered the Kâma Dhenu (the cow giving all desires) of
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha and the Muni became therefore very angry with him. The
high-souled Muni, angry on account of the killing of his cow, called the
King by the name of Tris’anku and made him a Châ<u>nd</u>âla. O
Kaus’ika! The prince turned into a Châ<u>nd</u>âla because he came
forward to do good to me, so I am very sorry for his sake. So it is your
urgent duty to save the King from his terrible position by any means or
by the influence of your powerful Tapasyâ.

 

<span id="page_639">p. 639</span>

 

49\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing these words from his wife the Muni
Kaus’ika consoled her and said :--

 

50-55. O Lotus-eyed One! I will free the King of his curse, who saved
you at that critical moment; what more than this that I promise to you
that I will remove his sufferings whether it be by my learning or it be
by my Tapas. Thus consoling his wife at that moment, Kaus’ika, the
Knower of the Highest Reality, began to think how he could destroy the
pains and miseries of the King. Thus thinking, the Muni went to the King
Tris’anku, who was staying at that time very humbly in a village of the
Châ<u>nd</u>âlas, in the garb of a Châ<u>nd</u>âla. Seeing the Muni
coming, the King was greatly astonished and instantly threw himself
before his feet like a piece of stick. Kaus’ika raised the fallen King
and consoling him said :-- O King! You are cursed, on my account, by the
Muni Vas’i<u>st</u>ha. I will, therefore, fulfil your desires. Now speak
what I am to do.

 

56-62. The King said :-- With a view to perform a sacrifice I prayed to
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha that I would perform a sacrifice, kindly do this for
me. O Muni! Do that sacrifice, by which I can go to the Heavens in this
my present body.” Vas’i<u>st</u>ha became angry and said :-- “O Villain!
How can you go and live in the Heavens in this your human body?” I was
very anxious to go to the Svarga (Heaven)

so I again spoke to him :-- “O Sinless One! I will then have the
excellent sacrifice done by another priest.” Hearing this,
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha Deva cursed me, saying “Be a Châ<u>nd</u>âla.” O Muni!
Thus I have described to you all about my curse. You are the one quite
able to remove now my grievances. Distressed in pain and agony, the King
informed him and became quiet. Vis’vâmitra, too, thought how he could
free him of his curse.

 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the coming of
Vis’vâmitra to Tris’anku in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](bk07ch14)
