[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch25)  [Next](bk07ch27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXVI**

 

**On the narration of the sorrows of Haris’chandra**

 

<span id="page_680">p. 680</span>

 

1-3. Sûta said :-- The King Haris’chandra with his face bent low thus
said to the Queen :-- “O Young One! I am a great sinner, otherwise why
shall I be ready to do this heinous act! However now sit before me. If
my hand be capable to kill you, then it will cut off your head.” Thus
saying, the King took the axe and moved forward to cut her. As the King
did not recognise her as His Queen, so the Queen did not recognise him
as Her husband, the King. So the Queen, being very much strained with
sorrow, began to utter with a view to court her death.

 

4-16. O Châ<u>nd</u>âla! If you like, I say something; hear my son is
dead and is lying close to the outer skirts of the city. Wait till I
bring my child before you and do his burning ceremonies. Next you can
cut me off by your axe. The King said :-- “Very well; let that be,” and
gave her permission to go to her dead son. Then the Queen, emaciated and
pale, her body being covered all over with dust arrived at the burning
ground and taking her dead son, bitten by a serpent, on her lap cried
out loudly “O Son! O my Child! O my young Son!” and referring to her
husband said :-- “O King! See, today, the sad condition of your son,
lying on the ground, as his bed. My son went to play with other boys
and, bitten by a cruel poisonous serpent, left his life.” Hearing the
pitiful cry of that helpless woman, the King Haris’chandra went to the
dead and took off the cover of his face. Due to the long exile and the
difficulties thereof, the Queen was changed altogether in her outer
form, so the King could not recognise her weeping as his wife. On the
other hand the King, too, had not the curled hair on his head as before;
it has turned into matted hair and his skin especially has become like
the bark of a dried tree; so the Queen could not make out the King also.
The King then noticed all the King making auspicious signs on the
several limbs of that dead boy, poisoned all over and lying on the
ground and began to think thus :-- The face of the child is very
beautiful like the Full Moon, nowhere there is any scar nor anything
like this; the nose is high; the two cheeks are clean like a mirror and
spacious; the hairs are blue, curling, similar, long and waving, the two
eyes are widely expanded like a full blown lotus, the two lips are red
like Bimba fruits; the chest is wide and spacious, the eyes are
stretched up to the ears; the arms are extending up to the knees; the
shoulders are

 

<span id="page_681">p. 681</span>

 

elevated; the legs are elongated, yet god-like like a lotus stem; the
appearance is grave, the fingers are fine, yet strong enough to hold the
world; the navel is deep and the region of the shoulders elevated.
Certainly this boy was born in a royal family. Alas! What a pain is
this! The cruel Death has reduced him to this state!

 

17-21. Sûta said :-- Thus looking carefully that boy in the lap of his
mother from his head to foot, the King Haris’chandra got back to his
ancient recollections. He recognised the boy to be his and wept aloud
repeating the words Oh! Oh! The tears flowed from his eyes and he said
:-- “This is my boy that has been reduced to this state! Oh! The cruel
Fate!” Though the boy is dead, yet the King remained bewildered for a
moment. The queen then spoke out of terrible pain :-- “O Child! What sin
is that which has caused this dire calamity, I cannot imagine!

 

22-27. O my Husband! O King! I am extremely worried of pains and
troubles; leaving me thus, how is it and where you are passing away your
time in a calm, quiet state! O Fortune! It is You that has brought about
the loss of the Râjar<u>s</u>i Haris’chandra’s dominion, the separation
from his friends and what more, you have caused his wife and son to be
sold! Has he done so much mischief to you!” Hearing her cries, the
King’s patience gave way and he came to recognise the Devî and the son
and exclaimed, “She is my wife and the dead boy is my son. Oh! What a
series of troubles, one coming after another.” Being overpowered with
extreme trouble and pain, the King fell unconscious on the ground; the
Queen, too, looking at the King’s state, fell motionless, and, void of
senses, no sooner she recognised him as the King Haris’chandra. Some
time after, the King and Queen both got back at the same time their
consciousness and, with great sorrow and agony, began to lament.

 

28-49. The King said :--“O Child! Why my heart does not rend to thousand
pieces, seeing today your gentle face pale and lifeless, that was once
beautiful with curls of hairs! O Rohitâ! When will you come to me saying
in a sweet voice, ‘Father! Father!’ When shall I address you
affectionately, ‘Oh my child! Oh my child!’ embracing you within my
breast! Whose tawny coloured dust on his knees will spoil my clothes,
lap and my body! O Delightful Son! I have sold you as if an ordinary
thing, though I am your father. As yet my pleasure of having a son is
not satisfied. Owing to the mockery of the mean Fate, my unbounded
kingdom, friends, and abundance of riches all have vanished away!
Finally I had one son and that too is now in the jaws of death! Oh! With
what an amount of terrible pain I am being burnt up today when I am
seeing the lotus-face of my son, smitten by a serpent and

 

<span id="page_682">p. 682</span>

 

lying dead on the ground!” Thus speaking in a voice choked with feelings
and with tears in his eyes, as soon as he was going to take his boy in
his lap, he fell senseless on the ground. Seeing the King lying on the
ground, S’aivyâ thus thought :-- “Such is His voice as makes me certain
that He is the King Haris’chandra, the best of men and the delighter of
the learned men’s hearts. His teeth are like those of the famous
Haris’chandra just like to Mukul and his nose is elevated and soft like
the Tila flower. But if he be Haris’chandra, how is it that he has come
to this burning ground!” Thus thinking, while she looked at the King,
leaving for the moment the sorrow for his son, joy, pain and surprise
attacked her heart simultaneously; and she, in that state, fell down
unconscious on the ground. Then gradually regaining consciousness, she
spoke in a pitiful voice :-- “O Fortune! You have caused to the King who
was once like an Immortal, the loss of his kingdom, friends, and even
the sale of his wife and son. And now you have transformed him into a
Châ<u>nd</u>âla! You are merciless, religionless, void of any justice as
to what is just and what is unjust. You are shameless. So fie on you! O
King! Where are gone today that royal umbrella, that throne, that
Châmara, and that pair of fans on your both sides! Oh! What is this
transformation caused by the Vidhâtâ (the Ordainer of Fate)! When the
high-souled King used to travel, all the kings used to remove as His
servants the dust of the roads by their clothings! Oh! Is He the same
King of Kings, Haris’chandra who is roaming in this unholy burning
ground, burdened too much by his load of sufferings! Oh! Innumerable
human skulls are lying here; the small earthen pots (brought for the
purification of the bodies of the dead) are lying scattered close to
each; the garlands of flowers for the dead, being intertwined with the
hairs of the dead, are presenting a grim spectacle! The ashes,
charcoals, half-burnt dead bodies, bones, and marrows all arranged one
over another make the place more hideous. The marrows of the dead bodies
have come out and are dried up by the sun. At places, vultures, and
S’akunîs are crying hideously and the crows and other birds, eager to
eat flesh, are roaming to and fro. All the quarters of the sky are
looking blue with the smoke, arising out of the burning of the dead. The
Râk<u>s</u>asas are constantly roaming hither and thither, gladly
feasting on the human flesh. Is the King passing his days thus in this
place? Alas! Oh! What a painful thing is this!” The daughter of the
King, S’aivyâ, was overpowered with an awful sorrow; and clasping the
neck of the King, began to lament again, in a pitiful voice. O King! You
have spoken that you are a Châ<u>nd</u>âla. Is this a dream? Or a
Reality? O King! If it be true that you are a slave of the
Châ<u>nd</u>âla, then say to me; my mind is being deluded very much!
(i.e., I cannot

 

<span id="page_683">p. 683</span>

 

indulge this idea). O Knower of Dharma! You have shown your great zeal
towards Dharma; and, for that reason, you are displaced from your royal
throne! Now if such help comes out of worshipping the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s
and the Devas, then Dharma cannot stand and, along with it, the truth,
simplicity and harmlessness cannot exist.

 

50-55. Sûta said :-- Hearing these words from the thin S’aivyâ, the King
took a heavy sigh and then described to her in detail with tears flowing
on his neck, how he got the Châ<u>nd</u>âla state. The fearful Queen
became very much pained to hear all this and heaving a deep sigh,
described, as it was, how her son died. On hearing this, the King
fainted and fell unconscious on the ground. Then regaining gradually his
consciousness, he began to kiss, with his tongue, the face of his dead
son. S’aivyâ then said in a choked voice :-- “Now sever off my head and
obey your master’s word. O King! You will be saved then as having kept
your truth; and your master’s order would be carried out.” Hearing this,
the King fainted and fell down senseless. Getting up conscious in a
moment, he began to weep bitterly.

 

56\. The King said :-- “O Beloved! How have you uttered such cruel
words? How can I execute that which is hard even to utter!”

 

57-58. S’aivyâ said :-- “O Lord! I have worshipped the Devî Gaurî and
other Devas and the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s; so, with their mercy, I will get
you as my husband in my future birth.” Hearing this, the King again fell
down instantly on the ground; getting up immediately, he was overpowered
with sorrow and began to kiss the face of the dead son.

 

59-71. The King said :-- “O Dear! I won’t be able to suffer an longer
for a long time. But, O thin-bodied One! See, I am so very unfortunate
that I have no command even over my heart. If I enter into the fire
without the permission of the Châ<u>nd</u>âla, then I will have to
become again the slave of a Châ<u>nd</u>âla in my future birth. Think it
over. After that I will have to go to the hell and be tormented there.
But this too I find beneficial to me. Rather I will go to the hell Mahâ
Raurava and there suffer for a long time the torments of the hell, yet I
do not like to live a little longer when my boy, the continuer of my
family, has left his life out of the queer fancies of the Great Time and
I be merged in the sorrows for my son. My body is now at the command of
the Châ<u>nd</u>âla. How can I in this state quit my life without his
permission. If I leave my body, I will be indebted to him and I will
have to suffer in hell. Let this be so; still I will leave off my body,
the receptacle of all these pains and troubles. Nowhere, in the Triloki,
is any pain like

 

<span id="page_684">p. 684</span>

 

that felt in the demise of a son, not in crossing the Vaitara<u>n</u>î
nor in the Asipatravanam! So I will now throw myself on the burning fire
along with the dead body of my son. So, O Thin-bodied One! You should
now excuse me (i.e., do not prevent me). O Sweet-smiling One! I now
permit you to go back to the house of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>. If ever I have
given in charity riches, offered oblation to the fire, and given
satisfaction to my superiors then, in the other world, I will get you
and my son. But there is no such chance now in this world. O
Sweet-smiling One! If ever I had given you offence while conversing or
making jokes with you, now at the time of my parting, excuse them all. O
Auspicious One! Never despise the Brâhmi<u>n</u> out of your pride as a
Queen. Look on your master as a Deva and try all your best to satisfy
him.”

 

72-73. The Queen said :-- “O Râjar<u>s</u>i! I will also throw myself on
the burning fire. O Deva! I will not be able to carry on this burden, so
I will accompany You. It is better for me to accompany you; so there
will not be otherwise. O Giver of Honour! I will enjoy with You heaven
or suffer with You in the hell.” Hearing this, the King said :-- “O
Chaste One! Do as you please.”

 

Here ends the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the narration
of the sorrows of Haris’chandra in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](bk07ch27)
