[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch09)  [Next](bk07ch11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter X**

** **

**On the story of Satyavrata**

 

<span id="page_626">p. 626</span>

 

1-11. Vyasa said :--  O King! That King Mândhâtâ, true to his promise,
conquered one after another the whole world and became the paramount
sovereign of all the other emperors and got the title “Sârvabhauma”
(Sovereign of all the earth). O King! What more to speak of Mândhâtâ's
influence at that time than this that all the robbers, struck with his
terror, all fled to the mountain caves. For this reason, Indra gave him
the title “Trasadasyu.” He married Bindumatî, the daughter of
S'as'avindu. Her limbs were proportioned and perfect and so she was very
beautiful. Mândhâtâ had by that wife two sons :-- (1) the famous
Purukutstha and (2) Muchukunda. Purukutstha had his son Anara<u>n</u>ya;
this prince was celebrated by the name of Brihadas'va. He was very
religious and deeply devoted to his father. His son was Haryas'va; he
was religious and knew the Highest Reality. His son was Tridhanvâ; his
son was Aru<u>n</u>a. Aru<u>n</u>a's son was Satyavrata; he was very
avaricious, lustful, wicked and wilful. Once on an occasion that vicious
prince, overpowered by lust, stole away the wife of one Brâhmi<u>n</u>
and so created an hindrance in his marriage. O King! The
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, united in a body, came to the King Aru<u>n</u>a,
bewailing and lamenting and uttered repeatedly :-- Alas! We are ruined!
The King addressed to the grieved subjects, the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s :-- “O
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s! What harm has been done to you by my son.”

 

Hearing thus the good words of the King, the Dvijas, versed in the
Vedas, repeatedly blessed him and said :--

 

<span id="page_627">p. 627</span>

 

O King! You are the foremost of the powerful. So your son is like you.
Today he has forcibly stolen away during the marriage ceremony a
Brâhmi<u>n</u> daughter already given over in marriage.

 

12-36. Vyasa said :-- O King! The highly religious King hearing the
words of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, took them to be true and said to his son
:-- “O One of evil understanding! You have rendered to-day your name
useless by perpetrating this evil act. O Vicious One! Get away from my
house! O Sinner! You will never be able to live in my territory!” Seeing
his father angry, Satyavrata repeatedly said :-- Father! Where shall I
go?  He said :-- “Live with the Cha<u>nd</u>alas. You have stolen a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>'s wife and so has acted like a Châ<u>nd</u>ala. Go and
live with them happily. O Disgrace to your family! I don't like to get
issues through you: you have obliterated this family's name. So, O
Sinner! go wherever you like.” Hearing the the words from his angry
father, Satyavrata instantly quitted the house and went to the
Châ<u>nd</u>âlas. The prince, wearing his coat of armour and holding
bows and arrows, began to spend away his time with the Châ<u>nd</u>âlas;
but he could not get out of his breast his feeling of sympathy and
mercy. When he was banished by his liberal minded angry father the Guru
Vas'i<u>st</u>ha instigated the King to the above purpose. Satyavrata
was therefore angry with Vas'i<u>st</u>ha, inasmuch as he, versed the
Dharma S'âstras, did not dissuade the father from banishing his son. His
father, then, owing to some inexplicable cause, quitted the city and,
for the sake of his son, went to the forest to practise austerities. O
King! Owing to that sinful act, Indra did not rain at all in his kingdom
for twelve years. O King! Just then Vis'vâmitra, too, keeping his wife
and children in that kingdom, began to practise severe austerities on
the banks of the river Kaus'ikî. The beautiful wife of Kus'ika then fell
into great trouble how she could maintain the family. All the children,
pained with hunger, began to cry, begging for Nibâr rice food. The
chaste wife of Kaus'ika became very much troubled seeing all this. She
thought, seeing the children hungry, “Where am I to go now and from whom
to beg, and what to do, inasmuch as the King was not then staying in the
Kingdom. The husband is not also near; so who would protect my children?
The boys are incessantly crying. Fie therefore to my life!” She thought
also thus :-- “My husband left me in this penniless state; we are
suffering for want of money. He does not know these, though he is quite
able. Save my husband, who else will support my sons? They will all die
now of starvation. I  might sell one of my sons, whatever I get out of
that, I can support the others; this is now my highest duty. I ought not
to do otherwise

 

<span id="page_628">p. 628</span>

 

and kill all my children; so I will now sell one of my sons to support
the others.” Thus hardening her mind, she went out, tying the child by a
rope round his neck. The Muni's wife, for the sake of the other
children, fastened the middle son by a cord and got out of her house.
The prince Satyavrata saw her distressed with pain and sorrow and asked
:-- “O Beautiful One! What are you now going to do? Who are you? This
boy is crying; Why have you tied him by a rope round his neck? O Fair
One! Speak out truly to me the cause of all this.”

 

37-38. The wife said :-- “O Prince! I am the wife of Vis'vâmitra. These
are my sons. I am now going, for want of food, to sell one of these out
of my own accord. O King! My husband has gone away to practise tapasyâ;
I do not know where he has gone. There is no food in the house; so I
will sell one to support the other sons.”

 

39-56. Satyavrata said :-- “O Chaste One! Save your children. I will
bring to you your articles of food from the forest till your husband
does not come here. Daily I will fasten some food on a tree close by
your Âs'rama. This I speak truly.” The wife of Vis'vâmitra, hearing
these words of the prince, freed the child of the fastening and took him
to her Âs'rama. The child was named afterwards as Gâlaba, due to his
being fastened by the neck. He became a great Ri<u>s</u>i afterwards.
The Vis'vâmitra's wife then felt great pleasure in her home, surrounded
by her children. Filled with regard, and mercy, Satyavrata duly
performed his task and provided daily the family of Vis'vâmitra with
their food. He used to hunt wild boars, deer, buffaloes, etc., and used
to take their flesh to the place where used to dwell the wife of
Vis'vâmitra and the children and tie that up to an adjoining tree. The
Ri<u>s</u>i's wife used to give those to her children. Thus getting
excellent food, she felt very happy. Now when the King Aru<u>n</u>a went
for tapasyâ to the forest, the Muni Vas'i<u>st</u>ha carefully guarded
the Ayodhyâ city, and the palace and the household. Satyavrata, too,
used to sustain his livelihood daily by hunting, accordig to his
father's order; and abiding by Dharma, lived in the forest outside the
city. Satyavrata cherished always in his heart, for some cause, a
feeling of anger towards Vas'i<u>st</u>ha. When his father banished his
religious son, Vas'i<u>st</u>ha did not prevent his father. This is the
cause of Satyavrata's anger. Marriage does not become valid until seven
footsteps are trodden (a ceremony); so the stealing away of a girl
within that period is not equivalent to stealing away a Brâhmi<u>n</u>'s
wife. The virtuous Vas'i<u>st</u>ha knew that; yet he did not prevent
the King. One day the prince did not find anything for hunting; he saw
in the

 

<span id="page_629">p. 629</span>

 

forest the cow of Vas'i<u>st</u>ha giving milk. Very much distressed by
hunger, the King killed the cow like a dacoit, partly out of anger and
partly out of delusion. He fastened part of the flesh to that tree for
the wife of Vis'vâmitra and the remainder he ate himself. O One of good
vows! The Vis'vâmitra's wife did not know that to be beef and thought it
to be deer's and so fed her sons with that. Now when Vas'i<u>st</u>ha
came to know that his cow had been killed, he was inflamed with anger
and spoke to Satyavrata “O Vicious One! What a heinous crime have you
committed, like a Pis'âcha, by killing the cow? For the killing of the
cow, the stealing of a Brâhmi<u>n</u>'s wife and the fiery anger of your
father, for these three crimes, let there come out on your head three
S'ankus or three marks of leprosy as the signs for your crimes. From
this day you will be widely known by the name of Tris'anku and you will
show your Pis'âcha form to all the beings.”

 

57\. Vyâsa said : -- O King! The prince Satyavrata thus cursed by
Vais'i<u>st</u>ha remained in that retreat and practised severe tapasyâ.

 

58\. But he got from a Muni's son the excellent Mantram of the Highest
auspicious Devî Bhagavatî and became merged in the contemplation of
that.

 

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of
Satyavrata in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](bk07ch11)
