[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch01)  [Next](bk07ch03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter II**

** **

**On the piercing of the eyes of Chyavana Muni**

 

<span id="page_598">p. 598</span>

 

1\. Janamejaya said :-- “O Highly Fortunate One! Kindly narrate in
detail the spread of the families of those kings in the Solar line who
were born and who were especially endowed with the knowledge of Dharma.”

 

2-8. Vyâsa said :-- O Bharata! I now speak to you exactly what I heard
of yore, from Nârada, the best of the Ri<u>s</u>is, how the Solar race
spread. Once, on an occasion, the Muni S'rîmân Nârada, on his tour, came
at his will to my holy hermitage on the beautiful banks of the Sarasvatî
river. On seeing him I bowed down at his feet and then remained standing
before him. I then gave him a seat and worshipped him with great esteem.
I then said to him :-- “O Best of Munis! You are worshipped by the whole
universe; my retreat is sanctified by your coming. O All-knowing One!
Kindly narrate the histories of the Kings that were famous in the family
of the seventh Manu; they were unequalled as far as their origin was
concerned and their diameters as well were wonderful. Therefore I am
very eager to know, in detail, the history of the Solar race. O Muni!
Describe shortly or in detail as the circumstances may require.” O King!
When I made this question, Nârada, the knower of the Highest Reality,
gladly smiled, and, addressing me, began to describe the history of the
Solar race.

 

9-26. Nârada said :-- O son of Satyavatî! The history of the royal
families is very holy and pleasant to hear; the more so when they are
heard, one acquires Dharma and wisdom; therefore do you hear. In ancient
times, Brahmâ sprang from the navel-lotus of Vi<u>sn</u>u and created
the

 

<span id="page_599">p. 599</span>

 

world. This is well known in every Purâ<u>n</u>a. That self born,
all-powerful, all-knowing, the Doer of all, the Universal Soul practised
Tapas in ancient times for Ajuta (ten thousand) years. By virtue of that
Tapas, He got special powers to create the world. He meditated on the
Auspicious Mother, and getting from Her the excellent powers, He created
first the mind-born sons, all endowed with auspicious signs. Of them,
Marîchi became well known in this act of creation. His son Kas'yapa was
respected by all and he was of great celebrity. He had thirteen wives,
all daughters of Dak<u>s</u>a Prajâpati. The Devas, Daityas,
Yak<u>s</u>as, Pannagas, beasts and birds all sprang from him. Therefore
this creation is called the Kâs'yapî creation. Amongst the Devas, the
Sun is specially famous; his other name is Vivasvân. His son was named
Vaivasvat Manu; he was a famous king. Besides, Manu had nine more sons.
Ik<u>s</u>vâku was the eldest. Their names are: (1) Nâbhâga, (2)
Dhrista, (3) S'aryâti, (4)Nari<u>s</u>yanta, (5) Prâns'u, (6) Nriga, (7)
Di<u>st</u>a, (8) Karû<u>s</u>a, and (9) <u>R</u>i<u>s</u>adhra.
Ik<u>s</u>vâku, the son of Manu was born first. He had one hundred sons,
and Vikuk<u>s</u>i was the wise and the eldest of these. I am now
narrating how the nine sons, born afterwards of Manu, spread their
families. Ambari<u>s</u>a was the son of Nâbhâga; he was very truthful,
powerful, and religious. He always governed his subjects justly.
Dhâr<u>st</u>aka was the son of Dhri<u>st</u>a; though he was a
K<u>s</u>attriya, he attained to Brâhmanhood. He was naturally weak in
fighting; always be was engaged in the works relating to the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as. Ânarta was the well known son and Sukanyâ was the
beautiful daughter of S'aryâti. The King S'aryâti gave his beautiful
daughter in marriage to the blind Chyavana Ri<u>s</u>i; but the
Ri<u>s</u>i, though blind, got his beautiful eyes again by the good
character of the daughter. We heard that the As'vins, the Twins, the
sons of the Sun, gave him back his eyesight.

 

27-29. Janamejaya said :-- “O Brahmâns! How is it that the King S'aryâti
married his lovely-eyed daughter Sukanyâ to the blind Chyavana Muni? I
have got a great doubt on this point. The King gives his daughter in
marriage to a blind person, if she be deformed, ill-qualified or void of
female signs. But the daughter, in this case, was beautiful. How then
S'aryâti, the Chief of Kings, gave over his daughter, knowing that the
Ri<u>s</u>i was blind? O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! I am always an object of
favour to you; so explain to me the cause of it.”

 

30\. Sûta said :-- Glad to hear these words of Janamejaya, the Muni
Dvaipâyana smilingly said :--

 

31-50. S'aryâti, the son of Vaivasvata, had four thousand married wives.
All of them were endowed with auspicious signs and beautiful

 

<span id="page_600">p. 600</span>

 

all of them were daughters of kings. They all were very obliging and
dear to their husbands. But, out of all of these, the King had only one
daughter exceptionally lovely and beautiful. The father and all the
mothers loved exceedingly that sweet-smiling daughter. Not very far off
the city, there was a beautiful lake of clear waters, like the
Mânasarovara lake. A Ghât way (steps) made of stones descended into the
lake. Swans Kârandavas, Chakravâkas, Datyu'has, Sârasas and other birds
used to play on its waters. Five varieties of lotuses were there in full
bloom, bees were humming there all around. Various trees, S'âl, Tamâla,
Sarala, Punnâgas, As'okas, Banyans, Peepuls, Kadambas, rows of banana
trees, Jambîrs, Dates, Panasas, Betelnut trees, cocoanut trees, Ketakas,
Kânchanas, and other various beautiful trees encircled round the lake.
Within these, the white Yûthikâs, Mallikâs, and other creepers and
shrubs were seen beautifying the scenery. Especially there were, amongst
them, Jack trees, Mango trees, tamarind trees, Karanjas, Ku<u>t</u>akas,
Palâs'as, Neem trees, Khadiras, Bel trees, and Âmalaki trees; and
peacocks were sounding their notes, cuckoos were cooing their beautiful
voices. Close to that place, there was, in a sacred grove covered over
by trees, staying Chyavana Muni, the Bhrigu's son, of a tranquilled
mind, and the chief of the ascetics. Thinking the place lovely and free
from any obstacles, the Muni took his firm seat there and, collecting
all his thoughts within himself, took the vow of non-speaking and
controlling his breath became engaged in practising tapasyâ. Restraining
his senses and foregoing eating and drinking, that Muni constantly
meditated on Bhagavatî of the nature of Sat, Chit and Ânanda, O King!
While he was thus meditating, the anthill grew up round and covered his
body and nice creepers covered that also all round. O King! Long
intervals passed away and it was covered over with ants; so much so that
that intelligent Muni was covered entirely and looked like a heap of
earth. O King! Once the King S'aryâti wanted to play in an artificial
wilderness and came there to the lake with his wives. S'aryâti became at
once deeply engaged in playing on the clear waters of the lake,
surrounded by the beautiful females. On the other hand, the quick
beautiful daughter Sukanyâ, picking up flowers here and there with her
companions also began to play. Dressed in ornaments, Sukanyâ, walked to
and fro; her anklets making a beautiful tinkling sound, till she came to
the ant-hill of Chyavana Ri<u>s</u>i. She sportingly sat close to that
anthill and instantly saw a shining substance inside through that, like
fireflies. “What is this?” She thought and wishing to take it, took a
thorn and became very eager to prick it up.

 

51-59. Slowly she went close to it and no sooner she got ready to prick
it, than the Muni saw the beautiful, good-haired daughter as if to one's

 

<span id="page_601">p. 601</span>

 

liking. The ascetic Bhârgava, seeing that auspicious nice lady with nice
teeth, spoke out in a feeble voice :-- “What are you doing? O
thin-bellied One! I am an ascetic; better go away from here. You have
got such big-eyes, yet you do not see me. I therefore forbid you in your
this attempt; do not pierce the anthill with thorn.” Though prevented,
the daughter could not hear his words and asking “What was that?”
pierced his two-eyes with thorns. Thus impelled by Fate, the princess
sportingly pierced his eyes; but she suspected and thought “What have I
done?” Thus becoming afraid she returned from that spot. His two eyes
being pricked, the great Muni exceedingly pained, became very wrathful
he incessantly gave vent to sorrows and remorse, being restless with
pain. At that instant it happened that the king, ministers, soldiers,
elephants, horses, camels, so much so that all the beings that were
there, had all their evacuations (passing their urines and faeces)
stopped. Seeing thus happened all on a sudden, the King S'aryâti was
very much pained and became very anxious. All the soldiers came to the
King and informed him of the stoppage of their evacuations. The King
thought over the cause why this had happened.

 

60-65. Cogitating thus, the King returned home. Becoming very much
troubled with cares and anxieties, He asked his soldiers and kinsmen
“Who amongst you has done such an heinous act? On the west side of the
lake the Mahar<u>s</u>i Chyavana is practising the great tapasyâ in the
midst of the forest; I think someone has done mischief to that king of
ascetics, blazing like a fire; and therefore we are overcome with this
disease. The highsouled aged son of Bhrigu has become specially
proficient in his asceticism and has become supreme; I think someone
must have injured him. Though I do not know who is that mischievous
person that has shown him contempt or like that, this our state at
present clearly shews that this is the fit punishment of that.” Hearing
this, the soldiers said :-- None of us has committed any mischief by
word, mind or body; we know this very well.

 

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Seventh Book on the piercing of the
eyes of Chyavana Muni in S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am, of  18,000 verses, Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](bk07ch03)
