[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch07)  [Next](bk07ch09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VIII**

** **

**On the King Revata and the Solar Dynasty**

 

<span id="page_619">p. 619</span>

 

1-5. Janamejaya said :-- “O Brâhma<u>n</u>â! The King was a
K<u>s</u>attriya; how could he go himself with his daughter Revatî to
the Brahmâloka (the abode of Brahmâ)? I entertain a great doubt on this
point. I heard of yore while conversing about matters connected with the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, that the Brâhmi<u>n</u> only who was self-restrained
and the knower of Brahmâ<u>n</u> could alone go to the Brahmâloka. The
Satyaloka is very hard for the worldly people to go; so I doubt how the
king could have gone with Revatî from the Bhûrloka to the Satyaloka.
Man, when he discards his body, can go to the Heavens. So is recited in
all the S'âstras. How then, people, while, in their human bodies can go
to the Brahmâloka. So cut asunder my doubts how the King Revata could go
to the Brahmâloka to ask the Prajâpati on certain matters.”

 

6-16. Vyâsa said :-- “O King! On the top of the mountain Sumeru, are
located the Indra's heavens called Amarâvati (the abode of the
Immortals) the Samyamanî city of Yama, the Satyaloka, the Vahniloka, the
Kailâsa, Vaikun<u>t</u>ha the abode of Vi<u>sn</u>u, and others. The
great archer Arju<u>n</u>a, the son of Prithâ, went to the Indraloka and
spent five years there. In ancient times, the Kings Kakutstha and others
went to Indraloka, in their human bodies. Even the powerful Daityas used
to conquer the Indraloka and resided there at their will and pleasure.
In ancient times, when the sovereign of the earth, the King
Mahâbhi<u>s</u>a went to the Brahmâloka, the most beautiful Gangâ also
was coming to the Brahmâloka. On the way the King saw Her. O King!
Accidentally at that time her clothings were cast aside by the wind; the
King saw her partly in her naked state, and, overpowered with lust,
smiled; Gangâ also

 

<span id="page_620">p. 620</span>

 

smiled. Seeing the states of them, Brahmâ instantly cursed them; and
they had to come in this world and take their births. All the Devas,
when oppressed by the Dânavas, went to Vaikun<u>t</u>ha and sang hymns
to Hari, the Lord of Kamalâ. O King! Men can go to all the Lokas; in
fact those high-souled men that perform Yajñas or severe asceticism and
thus have acquired great merits, those performers of Sacrifices and
ascetics surely go to the Heavens. O King! It is only the abundance of
good merits that is the only cause of going to Heavens. So you ought not
to entertain any doubts on this.”

 

17-18. Janamejaya said :-- “O Muni! The King Revata went with his
daughter Revatî to the Brahmâloka; but what did he do when he went
there? What did Brahmâ order him? And to whom did the King betroth his
daughter, when ordered by Brahmâ? O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! Speak out all these
in details to me now.”

 

19-21. Vyâsa said :-- “O King! Hear. When the King went to Brahmâloka to
ask about the proper bridegroom of his daughter, there was going on
singing and music; so he waited a while to find an opportunity when the
assembly would have a leisure; but he was so very pleased with music
that he could not desist from hearing it till the end. When the music
was finished, the King bowed down to Brahmâ and shewed him his daughter
and informed Him of his intention.”

 

22-26. The King said :-- “O Deva! This good daughter is mine; now kindly
say who will be her bridegroom. O Brahmâ! To whom shall I betroth this
daughter? I have come to you to ask on this point I have searched for
many princes and seen also a good many of them and none of them is to my
liking and so my mind is not at rest. O Lord of the Devas! Therefore I
have come to you. Kindly select one bridegroom for her. He is to be a
Kulîn (of good family), powerful, religious, liberal, and a prince
endowed with all auspicious qualities. This is my prayer.” Vyâsa said
:-- O King! Brahmâ, the lotus-born, the Creator of the world, hearing
these words, laughed, thinking that a very long interval had passed
away. He then said :--

 

27-43. O King! The princes that you thought would become the bridegroom
of your daughter, all died; their sons and grandsons and their friends
even have all passed away. The twenty-seventh Manvantara of the Dvâpara
Yuga is now going on; so none of the princes of your family are now
existing. The Daityas sacked your city. Now Ugrasena, the King of
Mathurâ, is reigning in that place. He belongs to the illustrious lunar
family of Yayâti. His son, the powerful Ka<u>n</u>sa,

 

<span id="page_621">p. 621</span>

 

born of a Dânava, began to do injuries always to the Devas; he threw his
own father to the prison. Becoming very haughty, he began to govern
himself the countries of other kings and began to tyrranise over the
subjects. O King. The Earth became so much troubled by the armies of the
wicked Demon Kings, that She became quite unable to bear further loads.
So She went to seek refuge to Brahmâ. Brahmâ and the other Devas then
began to say :-- “O Earth! To remove your burden the lotus-eyed
Nârâya<u>n</u>â will incarnate Himself as part incarnation in the form
of S'rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. He who is Nârâya<u>n</u>â practised in ancient
times, as the son of Dharma, a very severe asceticism, in company with
his brother Nara in the sacred hermitage of Badari. Now this very Deva
is born in the great family of Yadu in the womb of Devakî by Vasudeva
and is now celebrated by the name of Vâsudeva. O King! He has slain that
vicious wicked Kan<u>s</u>a and has installed Ugrasena in his place. The
very powerful Jarâsandha, the vicious King of Magadha, is the
father-in-law of Kan<u>s</u>a. On hearing the death of his son-in-law,
he became infuriated with rage, came to Mathurâ, and raged a terrible
war. Vâsudeva defeated in a battle that Jarâsandha, proud of his mighty
valour. Though defeated, Jarâsandha sent Kâlayavana with his host of
army to fight again with Kri<u>sn</u>a. Bhâgavan Vâsudeva, when he heard
that the King of Yavanas arrived, sent away all the members of his
family and the Yâdavas to Dvârkâ and began to wait with his brother
Balarâma for the Yavana King. Then he went alone to the camp of Yavana
and led him away to a mountain cave where was sleeping the King Muchu
Kunda and had then the Yavana King slain by Muchukunda. Kri<u>sn</u>a
then went to Dvârkâ. The city of Dvârkâ was then a dilapidated
condition. Kri<u>sn</u>a brought together the artists and got built
exquisitely the beautiful palaces, forts, and markets and stalls, etc.,
and so added to the beauty of the place. That Vâsudeva, of mighty
prowess, thus improving the city, made Ugrasena the King of that place;
and Kri<u>sn</u>a is now waiting there with his friends. His elder
brother Baladeva, the carrier of the plough, is celebrated. Thus he with
Musala in his hands is a great warrior and the part incarnation of
Ananta Deva. He is the fit bridegroom of your daughter. So give your
daughter in marriage, without any delay, according to the rules of the
marriage ceremony to Sankar<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a Balabhadra. After giving
your daughter marriage, go to the hermitage of Badari and practise
tapasyâ. That sacred retreat is the (park) recreation ground of the
Devas, holy and yielding to human beings the objects of their desires.

 

44-46. Vyâsa said :-- “O King! Thus ordered by the lotus-born Brahmâ,
the King went to Dvârkâ with his daughter. Reaching there he gave over
his all auspicious daughter in marriage to Bala Deva

 

<span id="page_622">p. 622</span>

 

duly according to the rules and regulations. At last, according to
Brahmâ's injunction, he became engaged in severe austerities in the
Badarikâs'ram and, when the time of death arrived, left off his mortal
coil on the banks of the river and went to the world of Gods.”

 

47-48. Janamejaya said :-- “O Bhagavân! You have uttered one wonderful
thing. One hundred and eight Yugas passed away when the King of Revata
with his daughter was deeply absorbed in hearing music in the Brahmâloka
yet neither the good King nor the daughter did get sufficiently old. How
could this be! How could they have lived so long! Were their longevities
ordained to be such a long period!”

 

49-56. Vyâsa said :-- “O King! The Brahmâloka is not touched by any vice
nor sin; old age, hunger, thirst or fear of death nothing exists there;
nor is there any other cause by which weariness comes. So what doubt
there can be that the people there will be long-lived, free from old age
and death! When the King S'aryâti went up to the Heavens, his sons were
all destroyed by the Râksasas; those that remained, they, terrified left
Kus'asthalî and fled on all sides. Vaivasvata Manu sneezed; owing to
that, came out of his nose one powerful son; his name was Iksâku. He
spread the Solar dynasty and became celebrated. Getting excellent
initiation from the Mahar<u>s</u>i Nârada, he began to meditate the Devî
constantly and practised severe tapasyâ for the spread of his race. O
King! Iksâku had one hundred sons; Vikuksi was the eldest; he was
powerful and endowed with great strength. Iksâku became king and lived
in Ayodhyâ. He sent his fifty sons, the powerful S'akuni and others to
Uttarâpatha (Eastern) provinces for governing those countries. That
high-souled monarch sent also other eight sons to govern the countries
in the South. (Western). O King! He kept the remaining two sons by his
side for his own service.”

 

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the story of the
King Revata and the spread of the Solar dynasty in the
Mahâpura<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](bk07ch09)
