[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch27)  [Next](bk07ch29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXVIII**

 

**On the glory of the S'atak<u>s</u>i Devî**

 

<span id="page_687">p. 687</span>

 

1-3. Janamejaya said :-- “O Ri<u>s</u>i! Wonderful is the story of the
religious Râjar<u>s</u>i Haris’chandra that you have described, the
great Bhakta of S’atâk<u>s</u>î Devî! Why is that auspicious S’ivâ, the
wife of S’iva, called S’atâk<u>s</u>î? Explain to me, the cause of it, O
Muni! And thus make my birth full of use and success. Who is there
amongst the clear-minded that gets fully satisfied, when he hears the
good deeds of the Devî? Each sentence, describing the good deeds of the
Devî, gives the undecaying fruits of As’vamedha Sacrifice.”

 

4-45. Vyâsa said :-- O King. Hear; I am describing the story of
S’atâk<u>s</u>î Devî. You are the great devotee of the Devî; so I have
nothing that I cannot say to you. In olden times, there was a great

 

<span id="page_688">p. 688</span>

 

Dânava named Durgama: he was very cruel. He, the the son of Ruru, was
born in the family of Hira<u>n</u>yâk<u>s</u>a. Once be thought within
himself thus :-- “The Munis offer oblations by Mantras as ordained in
the Vedas. And the Devas, eating the clarified butter (ghee) of these
oblations, get

nurtured and strengthened. The Vedas is the strength of the Devas; if
the Vedas be destroyed, the Devas also would be destroyed. Thus it is
advisable to destroy the Vedas. (There is no other easy way.)” Thus
thinking, he went to the Himâlayâs to perform tapasyâ. He began to
meditate Brahmâ  in the space of his heart, and, taking air only, passed
away his time. \[Mark here that all the Devas reside in space, a
magnitude of the Fourth Dimension.\] He practised hard tapasyâ for one
thousand years and the Devas and the Asuras and all the Lokas were
agitated by the power of his Tejas (fiery lustre). Then the Bhagavân,
the four-faced Brahmâ, became pleased with him and mounting on his
carrier, the Swan came up there to grant him the boon. Brahmâ  told
clearly the Demon, sitting in Samâdhi with his eyes closed, “Let all be
well with you; now ask what you desire? Satisfied with your tapasyâ, I
have come to grant you the boon.” Hearing thus, the Demon got up from
his Samâdhi and worshipping Him duly, said :-- “O Lord of the Devas!
Give me all theVedas. O Mahes’vara! Let all the Vedic Mantrams, that are
found in the three worlds, with the Brâhma<u>n</u>as and the Devas, come
to me and give me such strength as would enable me to conquer the
Devas.” Hearing this, the God Brahmâ, the author of the four Vedas,
replied, “Let it be as you wish,” and went away. From that time, the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as forgot all about the Vedas. So bathing, Sandhyâ, daily
Homas, S’râddha, sacrifice, and Japam and other rites and performances,
all became extinct. Then a cry of universal distress arose on the
surface of this wide earth; the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s began to say to each
other :-- “How has this happened! How has this come to pass! Now what
are we to do? Where the Vedas have disappeared.” Thus when great
calamities befell on the earth, the Devas became gradually weaker and
weaker, not getting their share of the sacrificial Havis. At this time,
that Demon invested the city of Amarâvatî. And the Devas, not being able
to fight with the Asura, of a thunder-like body fled to various
directions. They took refuge in the caves of the mountain Sumeru and the
inaccessible passes of the mountain and began to meditate on the Highest
Force, the Great Goddess. O King! When oblations of clarified butter are
offered to the Fire, those get transferred to the Sun (Sûryaloka) and
get transformed as rains. So when the Homa ceremonies disappeared, there
was the scarcity of rain. The earth became quite dry and not a drop of
water was found anywhere. The wells, tanks, pools, rivers all were dried
up. And this state of “no rains” lasted one hundred years. Countless
people, hundreds and thou-

 

<span id="page_689">p. 689</span>

 

sands of cows, buffaloes and other beasts went to the jaws of death. The
dead bodies of persons remained in heaps in every house; persons would
not be found to perform their burning ceremonies. When such calamities
were seen, the calm and quiet body of the Brâhma<u>n</u>s, in their
earnestness to worship the Supreme Goddess, went to the Himâlayâs. They
with their whole heart and without taking any food began to worship the
Devî daily with their Samâdhi, meditation and worship. O Mahes’ânî! Shew
mercy on us. O Mother! It’s not praiseworthy to Thee to manifest Thy
such anger on us, the low persons and guilty of all sins. So, O Deves’î!
Forgive us. If Thou art angry on us for our faults, even then we may be
excused, for Thou art the Internal Ruler within us all and we do
whatever Thou impellest us to do. (The other Devas become pleased and
give fruits when they are worshipped by Japam, and other Homa
ceremonies; but that is not even possible due to the disappearance of
the Vedic Mantrams from amongst us. But You are kind as mothers are
towards their children whenever they remember.) So without Thee, there
is no other rescue for these people. O Mahes’varî! Whatever Thou
willest, Thou canst do that; so what art Thou seeing again and again? O
Mahes’arî! How can we live without Water, what is called the Life. Now
rescue us from this great difficulty. O Mother of the Worlds! O
Mahes’varî! Be pleased. Oh the Ruler of the endless crores of
Brahmâ<u>nd</u>as! Obeisance to Thee! We bow down to Thee, the
Unchangeable, of the nature of Intelligence. We again and again make
obeisance to Thee, the Lady of the Universe and realisable by the
Vedânta words (not this, not this). All the sayings of the Vedânta
declare Thee, by negating (not this, not this) other transient objects
as the Cause of all this Universe. We with all our hearts bow down to
the Devî. When the body of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as thus praised and chanted
the hymns of Mahes’varî, She created innumerable eyes within Her body
and became visible. Her colour was dark-blue (colour of the fourth
dimension, space) like heaps of collyrium (eye-paint); eyes like the
blue lotuses and expanded; breasts hard, regularly elevated round and so
fleshy that they touched each other; four handed; with Her right hand,
holding arrows; on the under hand holding lotus; on the upper-left hand
holding a great bow and on the lower hand, carrying vegetables, fruits,
flower and roots with abundance of juice, destroying hunger, thirst and
fever. She was the Essence of all Beauty, lovely, luminous like the
thousand Suns, and the ocean of mercy. That Upholder of the Universe,
showed Her form and began to shed waters from Her eyes. For nine nights
continuously, the heavy rains poured down out of the waters flowing from
Her eyes. Seeing the misery of all the people, out of

 

<span id="page_690">p. 690</span>

 

pity, She showered incessantly tears from Her eyes; and all the people
and medicines were satisfied. What more than this, out of those tears,
the rivers began to flow. The Devas that remained hidden in the mountain
caves, now came out. Then the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, united with the Devas,
began to praise and sing hymns to the Devî. Thou art known by the
Vedânta Mahâvâkyas. We bow down to Thee. Thou ordained everything to all
the worlds by Thy Mâyâ; so again and again we bow down to Thee. Our
Obeisance to Thee! Who art a Kalpa tree to the Bhaktas yielding all
their desires! Thou assumest the body for the Bhaktas! Thou art always
satisfied; without any equal; the Lord of the Universe! We bow down to
Thee. As Thou, O Devî! hast innumerable eyes only for our welfare and
peace, therefore Thou wilt be called henceforth by the name
“S’atâk<u>s</u>î.” O Mother! We are very much hungry; so we have no
power to chant hymns to Thee; therefore, O Mahes’varî? Shew mercy on us
and deliver to us our Vedas.

 

46-68. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing these words of the Devas and the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, the Auspicious One gave them the vegetables, delicious
fruits and roots to them that were on Her Hand, for their eating. After
She was prayed, She gave to men sufficient quantity of various articles
of juicy food and to the beasts, grass, etc., until new crops came out.
O King, from that day She became famous by the name of S’âkambharî
(because She nourished all by vegetables, etc.) Great tumult arose and
the Demon Durgama heard all from the emissaries and started out to fight
with his weapons and army. He took one thousand Ak<u>s</u>auhi<u>n</u>î
armies with him (one Ak<u>s</u>auhi<u>n</u>î army equals large army
consisting of 21,870 chariots, as many elephants, 65,610 horses, and
109,350 foot) and, shooting arrows, he came quickly before the Devî and
invested Her and the Deva army and the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s. At this, a great
tumultuous uproar arose and the Devas and the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s united
exclaimed :-- “O Devî! Save us; save us.” The Auspicious Devî, then, for
the safety of the Devas and the Dvîjas created round them a luminous
circle and She Herself remained outside. The terrible fight, then,
ensued between the Devî and the Dânavas. The Sun was covered with their
incessant hurling of arrows; and the shooters could not shoot accurately
on account of the darkness that then prevailed. Then by the collision of
the arrows of both the parties, the arrows caught fire and the
battlefield again became filled with light. The quarters on all aides
resounded with harsh bow sounds and nothing could be heard. At this
moment, came, out of the body of the Devî, the principal S’aktis (forces
incarnate) Kâlikâ, Târi<u>n</u>î, <u>S</u>o<u>d</u>as’î, Tripurâ,
Bhairabî, Kamalâ, Bagalâ, Mâtangî, Tripurâ Sundarî, Kâmâksî, Tulajâ
Devî, Jambhinî, Mohinî, Chchinnama<u>s</u>tâ,

 

<span id="page_691">p. 691</span>

 

and ten thousand armed Guhya Kâlîs and others. Thirty-two S’aktis,
sixty-four S’aktis, and then innumerable S’aktis, all armed, came out of
the Devî successively. When the S’aktis destroyed one hundred
Ak<u>s</u>auhi<u>n</u>î forces, Mridangas, conch-shells, lutes and other
musical instruments were sounded in the battle-field. At this time, the
enemy of the Devas, Durgama, came in front and first fought with the
S’aktis. The fight grew to such a terrible extent that, within ten days,
all the Ak<u>s</u>auhi<u>n</u>î troops were destroyed. So much so as the
blood of the dead soldiers began to flow in torrents like rivers. When
the fatal eleventh day arrive the Dânava, wearing red clothes on his
waist, red garlands on his neck and annointing his body all over with
red sandal paste, celebrated a very grand festivity and mounted on his
chariot and went out to fight. With the strenuous effort, he defeated
all the S’aktis and placed his chariot before the Devî. Then a terrible
fight ensued for two Praharas (six hours). The hearts of all shivered
with horror. At this time, the Devî shot fifteen very awful arrows at
the Dânava. His four horses (Vâhanas) were pierced by Her four arrows;
the charioteer was pierced by one arrow; his two eyes were pierced by
two arrows; his arms by two arrows, his flag by one arrow and his heart
was pierced by five arrows. He then left his body before the Devî,
vomitting blood. The vital spirit, the luminous counterpart, emitting
from his body, merged in the space-like body of the Devî. The three
worlds, then, assumed a peaceful appearance when that greatly powerful
Dânava was killed. Then Hari, Hara, Brahmâ  and the other Devas began to
praise and chant hymns to the World Mother with great devotion and in
voices, choked with feelings.

 

69-73. The Devas said :-- “O Auspicious One! Thou art the only Cause of
this Illusion of this world, presenting an unreal appearance (while
Brahmâ  is the Only Reality). So Thou art the Lady of all the beings
(otherwise why it would be that Thou hast nourished all the beings with
vegetables, etc). So, Obeisance to Thee, the S’âkambharî! Hundred-eyed!
O Auspicious One! Thou art sung in all the Upani<u>s</u>adas; The
Destroyer of the Durgama Asura! We bow down to Thee, the Lord of Mâyâ,
the Dweller in the five sheaths Anna, Rasa, etc. We meditate upon Thee,
the Lady of the universe, as demonstrated by Pra<u>n</u>ava Aum, whom
the chief Munis meditate with their Nirvikalpa hearts (hearts free from
any Vikalpa, doubts or ignorance). Thou art the Mother of the endless
crores of universe! Thou assumest the Divine Bodies at times for our
welfare! Thou art the Mother of Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and others; we bow
down to Thee with all our heart.

 

<span id="page_692">p. 692</span>

 

Thou art the Mother of all; so, out of mercy, Thou hast shed tears from
the hundred eyes, to remove the miseries of the low humble persons. Thou
art the Ruler of all!”

 

74-80. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus when Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Hara and
the other Devas praised and chanted various hymns to the Devî and
worshipped Her with various excellent articles, She became instantly
pleased. Then the Devî, graciously pleased, handed over the Vedas to the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as. At last, She, the Cuckoo-voiced, made a special
address to them. “These Vedas are the excellent parts of My body. So
preserve these with your greatest care. The more so, when you all have
seen with your own eyes what a great calamity befell on you when these
Vedas went away out of your hands! You should all worship and serve Me
(the Controller of the Space) always; there is no other thing higher
than this that I can advise you for your welfare. Read always these My
excellent glorious deeds. I will be pleased thereby and will destroy all
your bad calamities and misfortunes. My name is Durgâ, because I have
killed this demon Durgama; so he, who will take My name Durgâ and
S’atâk<u>s</u>î, he will be able to unveil my Mâyâ and walk freely. No
use in telling more than this that I tell you now, O Devas, the Essence
of all essences :-- Both the Suras and the Asuras would always serve Me
and Me, alone.”

 

81-83. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus giving pleasures to the Devas by
these words, the Devî of the nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss
disappeared before them. O King! This Grand Mystery I have described to
you in detail; but this is the source of good to all; so keep it secret
with every care. The person that hears daily with great devotion this
Chapter, gets all that he wants and at last gets the worship in the Devî
Loka.

 

Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the glory of
the S'atak<u>s</u>i Devî in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](bk07ch29)
