[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch05)  [Next](bk07ch07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VI**

** **

**On granting the As’vins the right to drink the Soma juice**

 

<span id="page_612">p. 612</span>

 

1-3. Janamejaya said :-- “O Muni! How did Mahar<u>s</u>i Chyavana make
these twin Devas drink Soma and how his words came out to be true. Human
strength is insignificant compared to Indra's strength. Indra forbade
the physicians, the As'vins, to drink the Soma juice. How then could the
Muni give the right thereof. This is very wonderful. Therefore, O Thou,
devoted to Dharma! O Lord! Describe in detail the doings of this
Mahar<u>s</u>i Chyavana. I am very anxious to hear it.”

 

4-10. Vyâsa said :-- O King! In that famous sacrifice of the King
S’aryâti, Chyavana Ri<u>s</u>i did wonderful feats. O Bharata! I am now

 

<span id="page_613">p. 613</span>

 

narrating to you his entirely wonderful character. Hear it attentively.
Mahar<u>s</u>i Chyavana, illustrious like the Devas, began to enjoy with
a cheerful mind and gladdened heart, with his beautiful wife Sukanyâ who
was like a Deva Kanyâ. Now, once on an occasion, the wife of S'aryati
became very anxious and trembling said to her husband weeping :-- “O
King! You have betrothed your daughter to the blind Muni Chyavana; now
it is your duty to go and enquire whether the daughter is living or is
dead. O Lord! What is my beautiful daughter doing with that husband.
Please go just now to the Muni's Âs'rama and see about it. O
Râjar<u>s</u>i! I always burn in pain and agony when I think of her. She
must have become very lean and thin due to the troubles of Tapasyâ;
please bring her quickly here to my presence. She is suffering an
everlasting pain from having an aged blind husband; and it is quite
likely she has become very lean and thin, I am anxious, therefore, to
see my daughter lean and thin who is wearing barks of trees as her
dress.”

 

11\. S'aryâti said :-- “O broad-eyed One! I am going gladly just now to
see my dear daughter and that Muni of severe vows.”

 

12-25. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus saying to his wife, distressed with
sorrow, the King S'aryâti mounted on his chariot and quickly went
towards the Âs’rama of the Chyavana Muni. On reaching there, he saw the
Mahar<u>s</u>i Chyavana like a Deva's son. Seeing his body like that of
Deva, the King became bewildered and began to think thus :-- “What! Has
my daughter done such an ugly act, blameable in the society! That Muni
was very calm and quiet, penniless and very old; my daughter, perhaps,
being overpowered with passion, killed him and has taken, no doubt,
another husband. It is indeed difficult to control the God of Love,
armed with his flowery bow: the period of youth is moreover very hard to
conquer. So this daughter impelled by lust has thrown a dreadful stigma
on the clear name of the family of the great Manu. Fie on him whose
daughter in this world is of a vicious character! It seems that
daughters are born for the expiation of all the sins committed by their
fathers. But what an unjust act have I committed for my own selfish
ends? It is highly incumbent on every father to betroth his daughter
with every care possible to a bridegroom suitable in every respect; but
I did not do it and now have got  the fruits equivalent to my doing. If
I kill my daughter, vicious and unchaste, I will incur sin due to
killing a woman and moreover my daughter. I am the cause of this stain
on Muni's line of descent. On the one hand, the scandal on one is very
powerful; and the affection for a daughter is strong on

 

<span id="page_614">p. 614</span>

 

the other. What am I to do now?” The King became merged in deep
thoughts. At this time Sukanyâ accidentally saw her father thus drowned
in anxious thoughts. Seeing him, Sukanyâ instantly came to her father's
side and asked the King in sweet affectionate words. O King! How is it
that your face has become so pale with anxious thoughts, seeing the Muni
sitting in front of you, a young man with lotus-eyes. O Father! What are
you thinking? You belong to the famous Manu's family; besides, you are a
high-minded man; you ought not to be sad so suddenly; come quickly and
bow your head down before my husband.

 

26\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the daughter's words, the King
became impatient with anger and began to speak to her :--

 

27-36. O Daughter! Where is that aged blind ascetic Muni Chyavana and
who is this youth intoxicated with lust? A great doubt has arisen in my
mind. O Vicious Soul! Have you slain that Chyavana Muni and engaged
yourself in such a sinful act? O You, a Disgrace to your family! Have
you accepted another husband out of your desire of lust? My mind has
became very much troubled on not seeing that Muni in this Âs'rama. O
vicious One! Now I don't see the Muni; but instead of him, I see this
bright person. And thus it is on account of your sinful behaviour that
my mind is drowned in the ocean of cares. Then hearing her father's
words, Sukanyâ smiled and gladly took him at once to her husband and
said :-- “O Father! He is your son-in-law; He is the same Chyavana Muni;
there is no doubt here. The twin As'vins have given him this beautiful
lustre and lotus-like eyes. The two As'vini Kumâras came accidentally to
my Âsrama and out of mercy no doubt they have made Chyavana such a nice
young man. O King! I am not your that daughter that will do a vicious
act as you think, beguiled by this beautiful form of the Muni. Father!
Bow down before the Chyavana Muni. Ask him and he will tell you
everything.” Hearing thus the daughter's words, the King went instantly
to the Muni and bowed down before him and asked him affectionately thus
:--

 

37-38. The King said :-- “O Son of Bhrigu! How have you got your eyes
back? Where has your old age gone? Kindly narrate all your details as
early as possible. O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! Seeing your exquisitely beautiful
form, a great doubt has arisen in me; so tell me everything in detail; I
will be very glad, no doubt.”

 

39-45. Chyavana said :-- “O King! The two As'vins, the physicians of the
Gods, came here on their own account and have done me

 

<span id="page_615">p. 615</span>

 

this good out of their mercy. Owing to the benefit thus received, I have
granted them the boon that I will make them drink the Soma juice in the
Agni<u>st</u>oma Yajña of the King S'aryâti. Thus I have got these
beautiful eyes and the new youth; therefore, O King! Collect yourself
and sit in the holy sacrificial seat.” When the Brâhmi<u>n</u> Chyavana
Muni spoke thus, the King S'aryâti and his dear wife sat with greatest
pleasure and began to talk on auspicious topics with the high-souled
Muni. Then the Bhârgava consoled the King and said I will perform your
sacrifice; please collect all the necessary materials. I have promised
to the As'vins that certainly I will make them drink the Soma juice.
Therefore, O King! I will have to carry that out in your sacrifice. O
King! If Indra be angry, I will stop him by my Tapas force and in the
Agni<u>st</u>oma Yajña I will make the As'vins drink Soma.

 

46-58. Vyâsa said :-- O King! S'aryâti, the lord of the earth, then
gladly approved the proposals of Chyavana Muni. The King then shewed
respects to the Muni and, with a pleasant attitude of mind, returned to
his city with his wife, all the while talking of the Muni on the way. On
a good auspicious day he, possessed of enormous wealth and prosperity
prepared an excellent place for the performance of the sacrifice. The
Muni Chyavana then invited Vas'i<u>st</u>ha and other respectable Munis
and initiated the King S'aryâti for the performance of the sacrifice. At
the commencement of the sacrifice, Indra and the other Devas and the two
As'vins all came to the sacrifice to drink Soma. Seeing the As'vins,
Indra became afraid and asked the other Devas, “Why have the As'vins
come here?” They are the physicians and, therefore, never fit to drink
Soma. Who has brought them hither at this great Agni<u>st</u>oma
Sacrifice? The Devas remained all silent. Chyavana Muni then became
ready to offer Soma to the As'vins and Indra immediately stopped him
saying :-- They are already prohibited to drink Soma as a sacrificial
share; so do not accept the vessel of Soma for them. Chyavana then said
:-- “O Lord of S'achî! These are the Sûrya's sons; tell, then, truly why
these are rendered unfit to drink Soma. They are not of mixed blood;
they are born of the legal wife of Sûrya Deva. O Lord of the Devas! What
is the fault then, of the As'vins, the physicians, that they be
prohibited to drink Soma juice. Please reply. O Indra! This point must
be settled by all the Devas here. I have promised to make them drink the
Soma juice in this sacrifice. To keep my word I have initiated the King
in this sacrifice. I will have my word fulfilled; there is no doubt in
this. O Indra! They have given me my youth and bestowed my eyes and have
done me great good. I will also do good to them to my best.”

 

<span id="page_616">p. 616</span>

 

59\. Indra said :-- “The Devas have appointed these Devas their
Physicians; therefore they are looked down upon in the society; so they
are unfit to drink Soma. You need not make them drink Soma.”

 

60-61. Chyavana spoke :-- “O Indra! You have adulterated yourself with
Ahalyâ; why are you, then, giving vent to your anger thus in vain. You
have treacherously murdered Vritrâsura; it is quite inappropriate for a
vicious person like you to say that the As'vins cannot have the right to
drink Soma. This is quite impossible.” O King! On the springing of this
dispute, no body spoke to Indra. The illustrious Bhârgava, then, made
them accept the Soma juice.

 

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Seventh Book on granting the As'vins
the right to drink the Soma juice in S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](bk07ch07)
