[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch29)  [Next](bk07ch31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXX**

 

**On the birth of Gaurî, the seats of the Deity, and the distraction of
S’iva**

 

<span id="page_695">p. 695</span>

 

1-12. Vyâsa said :--O King! They went to the forest and fixed their
seats on the slope of the Himâlayân mountain and engaged them-

 

<span id="page_696">p. 696</span>

 

selves in repeating silently the seed Mantra of Mahâ Mâyâ and thus
practised their austerities. O King! One hundred thousand years passed
in the meditation of the Parâ S’akti. The Devî, pleased, became visible
to them. Her form was three-eyed, and of the form of Existence,
Intelligence and Bliss (Sachhidânanda); She was filled with mercy. In
Her one hand there was the noose, in another hand, goad; in another hand
there was the sign bidding her devotees discard all fear, and in the
other hand She was ready to offer boons. The good-natured Munis, seeing
this Form of the World Mother began to praise Her. “O Devî! Thou art
existing separately in every gross body; we bow down to Thee. Thou art
existing wholly (cosmically) in all the gross bodies; we bow down to
Thee. O Parames’varî! Thou art existing separately in every subtle body;
we bow down to Thee; Thou art existing universally in all the subtle
bodies; we bow down to Thee, Thou art existing separately in all the
causal bodies wherein all the Linga Dehas (subtle bodies) are
interwoven; we bow down to Thee. Thou art existing universally in all
the causal bodies; we bow down to Thee. Thou art of the nature of the
unchangeable Brahmâ, the receptacle of all the Jîvas and thus residest
in all the bodies; so we bow down to Thee. Thou art of the nature of
Âtman, the Goal of all the beings; we bow again and spin to Thee.” Thus
the pure-natured Dak<u>s</u>a and the other Munis praised Her with
voice, choked with feelings of intense devotion and bowed down to Her
feet. Then the Devî, pleased, spoke to them in a cuckoo voice. “O Highly
Fortunate Ones! I am ever ready to grant boons; so ask what you desire.”
O King! Hearing thus, they asked that Hari and Hara both regain their
former natural states and be united respectively with their S’aktis,
Lak<u>s</u>mî and Gaurî. Dak<u>s</u>a again asked :-- “O Devî! Let your
birth be in my family. O Mother! I will, no doubt, consider myself as
having then realised the fulfilment of my life. So, O Parames’varî!
Speak by Thy own mouth how Thy worship, Japam, meditation will be
conducted as well the various fit places where they would be performed.”

 

13-16. The Devî said :-- “The insult shown towards my S’aktis has led to
this calamitous state of Hari and Hara. So they should not repeat such
crime. Now, by My favour, they will regain their health and, of the two
S’aktis, one will be born in your family and the other will take Her
birth in the K<u>s</u>iroda Sâgara, the ocean of milk. Hari and Hara
will get back their S’aktis, when I will send them the chief Mantra. The
chief Mantra of Mine is the said Mantra of Mâyâ; this is always sweet to
Me; so worship this Mantra and make Japam of this. The Form that you are
seeing before you, this is My Bhuvanes’varî form (that of the Goddess

 

<span id="page_697">p. 697</span>

 

of the Universe), or worship My Virâ<u>t</u> (cosmic) form; or
Sachchidânanda form. The whole world is my place of worship; so you can
meditate on Me and worship Me always and in all places.”

 

17-23. Vyâsa said :-- When the Bhuvanes’varî Devî living in the
Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa thus giving Her reply, went away, Dak<u>s</u>a and
other Munis all went to Brahmâ and informed him with great earnestness
of everything that happened. O King! Thus Hari and Hara both became
devoid of their haughtiness and got back their previous natures by the
Grace of the Supreme Deity and were thus enabled to perform their
functions as before. Then, on a certain time, the Devî Bhagavatî, the
Fiery Nature of the Parâ S’akti, took Her birth in the house of the
Prajâpati Dak<u>s</u>a. O King! Everywhere in the Trilokas, great
festivities were held. All the Devas became glad and showered flowers.
The Dundubhis of the Devas were sounded by the hands and made very grave
sounds. The pure-minded saints were gladdened; the Sun’s rays looked
purer and cleaner; the rivers were elated with joy and began to flow in
their channels. When the World-auspicious Devî, the Destroyer of the
birth and death of the Jîvas took Her birth, everything looked
propitious. The wise Munis named Her “Satî” as She was of the nature of
Parâ Brahmâ and Truth Herself. The Prajâpati Dak<u>s</u>a handed over
the Devî, who was before the S’akti of Mahâdeva, to that Deva of the
Devas, Mahâdeva. Due to the misfortune of Dak<u>s</u>a, the daughter of
Dak<u>s</u>a burnt Herself in a blazing fire.

 

24-25. Janamejaya said :-- “O Munis! You have made me now hear a very
inauspicious word. How can such a great thing of the nature of the
Highest Intelligence come to be burnt up in a fire! The mere
recollecting of Whose Name dispels the terrible danger of the burning up
by the fire of Samsâra, how can She be burnt up by fire, I am extremely
eager to hear; kindly describe that to me in detail.”

 

26-37. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hear. I am describing to you the ancient
history of the burning of Satî. Once on a time, the famous Ri<u>s</u>i
Durvâsâ went to the bank of the river Jambû and saw the Devî there.
There he remained with his senses controlled and began to repeat
silently the root Mantra of Mâyâ. Then the Goddess of the Immortals, the
Bhagavatî was pleased and gave the Muni a beautiful garland as Her
Prasâda that was on Her neck, that emitted the sweet fragrance of
Makaranda (juice of flowers; Jasamine). Whereon the bees were about to
cluster. The Mahar<u>s</u>i took it quickly and placed it on his head.
He then hurriedly went to see the Mother to the place where Satî’s
Father,

 

<span id="page_698">p. 698</span>

 

the Prajâpati Dak<u>s</u>a was staying and bowed down to the feet of the
Satî. The Prajâpati then asked him :-- “O Lord! Whose extraordinary
garland is this? How have you got this enchanting garland, rare to the
mortals on this earth!” The eloquent Mahar<u>s</u>i Durvâsâ then spoke
to him with tears of love flowing from his eyes :-- “O Prajâpati! I have
got this beautiful garland that has no equal, as the Prasâda (favour) of
the Devî.” The Prajâpati asked that garland then from him. He, too,
thinking that there was nothing in the three worlds that cannot be given
to the devotee of the S’akti, gave that garland to the Prajâpati. He
took that on his head; then placed it on the nice bed that was prepared
in the bed-room of the couple. Being excited by the sweet fragrant smell
of that garland in the night, the Prajâpati engaged in a sexual
intercourse! O King! Due to that animal action, the bitter enmity arose
in his mind towards S’ankara and His Satî. He then began to abuse S’iva.
O King! For that offence, the Satî resolved to quit her body that was
born of Dak<u>s</u>a, to preserve the prestige of the Sanâtan Darma of
devotion to Her Husband and burnt Her body by the fire arising out of
Yoga.

 

38\. Janamejaya said :-- “O Muni! What did Mahâ Deva do, thus pained by
the bereavement from His consort dearer than His life, when the Satî’s
body was thus consumed.”

 

39-50. Vyâsa said :-- O King! I am unable to describe what happened
afterwards. O King! Out of the fire of anger of S’iva, the Pralaya
seemed to threaten the three worlds. Vîrabhadra came into existence with
hosts of Bhadra Kâlîs, ready to destroy the three worlds. Brahmâ and the
other Devas took refuge to S’ankara. Though Mahâdeva lost everything on
Satî’s departure, He, the Ocean of Mercy, destroyed the sacrifice of
Dak<u>s</u>a, cut off his head and instead placed the head of a goat,
brought him back to life and thus made the Gods free from all fears. He,
the Deva of the Devas, then became very much distressed and going to the
place of sacrifice, began to weep in great sorrow. He saw that the body
of the Intelligent Satî was being burnt in the fire of the Chitâ. He
cried aloud :-- Oh my Satî! Oh My Satî! And taking Her body on His neck,
began to roam in different countries, like a mad man. Seeing that,
Brahmâ and the other Devas became very anxious and Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u
cut off the body to pieces by His arrows. Wherever the parts fell,
S’ankara remained there in so many different forms. He then said to the
Devas :-- Whoever will worship, with deep devotion in these places, the
Bhagavatî, will have nothing left unattained. The Highest Mother will
remain close to them there. The persons that will make
Puras’chara<u>n</u>a (the repetition) of the Mantrams, especially the
Mâyâ Vîja (the root Mantra of Mâyâ), their Mantrams will become, no

 

<span id="page_699">p. 699</span>

 

doubt, fructified and become incarnate. O King! Thus saying, the
Mahâdeva, being very much distressed for Satî’s departure, passed His
time in those places, making Japam, Dhyânam and taking to Samâdhi.

 

51-52. Janamejaya said :-- Where, in what places the several parts of
the Satî fell? What are the names of those Siddhapî<u>t</u>has? And what
is their number? Kindly describe these in detail, O Great Muni! No doubt
I will highly consider myself blessed by hearing these words from your
blessed mouth.

 

53-102. Vyâsa said :-- O King! I will now describe those Pîthas (Sacred
places), the mere hearing of which destroys all the sins of men. Hear. I
describe duly those places where the persons desiring to get lordly
powers and to attain success ought to worship and meditate on the Devî.
O Mahârâja! The face of Gaurî fell in Kâs’î; She is well known there by
the name Vis’âlâksî; that which fell in Naimi<u>s</u>âra<u>n</u>ya
became known by the name of Linga Dhâri<u>n</u>î. This Mahâ Mâyâ is
known in Prayâg (Allahabad) by the name of Lalitâ Devî; in Gandha Mâdan,
by the name of Kâmukî; in the southern Mânasa, by Kumudâ; in the
northern Mânasa, by Visvakâmâ, the Yielder of all desires; in Gomanta,
by Gomatî and in the mountain of Mandara, She became known by the name
of Kâmachârinî. The Devî is known in Chaitraratha, by the name of of
Madotka<u>t</u>â; in Hastinâpura, by Jayantî; in Kânyakubja by the name
of Gaurî; in the Malaya Mountain, by Rambhâ; in the Ekâmrapî<u>t</u>ha,
by Kîrtimatî, in Vis’ve, by the name of Vis’ves’varî; in Pu<u>s</u>kara,
by the name of Puruhûtâ. She is known as Sanmârga Dâyinî in the Kedâra
Pî<u>t</u>ha; as Mandâ, in the top of the Himâlayâs; and as
Bhadrakar<u>n</u>ikâ in Gokar<u>n</u>a. She is known as Bhavânî in
Sthanes’vara, as Vilvapatrikâ in Vilvake; as Mâdhavi in S’rîs’aila; as
Bhadrâ in Bhadres’vara. She is known as Jarâ in Varâha S’aila; as Kamalâ
in Kamalâlaya; as Rudra<u>n</u>î in Rudra Ko<u>t</u>î; as Kâlî in
Kâlanjara; She is known as Mahâ Devî in S’âlagrâma, as Jalapriyâ in
S’ivalingam; as Kapilâ in Mahâli<u>n</u>gam, as Muku<u>t</u>es’varî in
Mâko<u>t</u>a. As Kumarî in Mâyâpurî, as Lalitâmbikâ in Santânâ; as
Mangalâ in Gayâ K<u>s</u>etra, as Vimalâ in Puru<u>s</u>ottama. As
Utpalâk<u>s</u>î in Sahasrâk<u>s</u>a; as Mahotpalâ in
Hiranyâk<u>s</u>a; as Amoghâksî in the Vipâsâ river; as Pâ<u>t</u>alâ in
Pundra Vardhana. As Nârâya<u>n</u>î in Supârs’va, as Rudra Sundarî in
Trikû<u>t</u>a; as Vipulâ Devî in Vipulâ; as Kalyânî in Malayâchala. As
Ekavîrâ, in Sahyâdri; as Chandrikâ in Haris’chandra; as Rama<u>n</u>â in
Râma Tîrtha; as Mrigâvatî in the Yamunâ. As Ko<u>t</u>ivî in

 

<span id="page_700">p. 700</span>

 

Ko<u>t</u>atîrtha; as Sugandhâ in Mâdhavavana; as Trisandhyâ in the
Godâvarî; as Ratipriyâ in Gangâdvâra. As S’ubhânandâ in S’iva
Ku<u>n</u>dam, as Nandinî in Devîkâta<u>t</u>a; as Rukmi<u>n</u>î in
Dvâravatî; as Râdhâ in Brindâvana. As Devakî in Mathurâ; as Parames’varî
in Pâtâla; as Sîtâ in Chitraku<u>t</u>a; as Vindhyâdhivâsinî in the
Vindhyâ range. O King! As Mahâlak<u>s</u>mî in the sacred place of
Karavîra, as Umâ Devî in Vinâyaka; as Ârogyâ in Vaidyânâtha; as
Mahes’varî in Mahâkâla. As Abhayâ in all the U<u>sn</u>a tîrthas, as
Nitambâ in the Vindhyâ mountain; as Mâ<u>nd</u>avî in Mâ<u>nd</u>avya;
as Svâhâ in Mâhes’varîpûra. As Pracha<u>nd</u>â in Chhagalan<u>d</u>a,
as Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ in Amarakan<u>t</u>aka; as Varârohâ in Somes’vara; as
Puskarâvatî in Prabhâsa. As Devamâtâ in Sarasvatî; as Parâvârâ in
Samudrta<u>t</u>a; as Mahâbhâgâ in Mahâlayâ, as Pingales’varî in
Payo<u>sn</u>î. As Simhikâ in Kritas’aucha; as Atis’ânkârî in Kârtika;
as Lolâ in Utpalâvartaka; as Subhadrâ in S'o<u>n</u>a Sangam. As the
Mother Lak<u>s</u>mî in Siddhavana; as Anangâ in Bhâratâs’rama; as
Vis’vamukhî in Jâlandhara; as Târâ in the Ki<u>s</u>kindhya mountain. As
Pu<u>st</u>î in Devadâru Vana; as Medhâ in Kâs’mîrama<u>nd</u>alam; as
Bhîmâ in Himâdri; as Tu<u>st</u>îi in Vis’ves’vara K<u>s</u>etra. As
S’uddhî in Kapâlamochana; as Mâtâ in Kâyâvaroha<u>n</u>a; as Dharâ in
S’ankhoddhâra; as Dhritî in Pi<u>nd</u>âraka; as Kalâ in Chandrabhâgâ
river; as S’ivadhâri<u>n</u>î in Achchoda; as Amritâ in Venâ; as Urvas’î
in Vadarî. As medicines in Uttara Kuru; as Kus’odakâ in Kus’advîpa; as
Manmathâ in Hemakû<u>t</u>a; as Satyavâdinî in Kumuda. As Vandanîyâ in
As’vattha; as Nidhi in the Vais’rava<u>n</u>âlaya; as Gâyatrî in the
mouth of the Vedas; as Pârvatî near to S’iva. As Indrâ<u>n</u>i in the
Devalokas; as Sarasvatî in the face of Brahmâ; as Prabhâ (lustre) in the
Solar disc; as Vai<u>sn</u>avî with the Mâtrikâs. She is celebrated as
Aru<u>n</u>dhatî amongst the Satîs, the chaste women and as Tilottamâ in
the midst of the Râmâs. Again this Mahâdevî of the nature of the Great
Intelligence (Samvid) is always existent in the form of S’akti named
Brahmakalâ in the hearts of all the embodied beings. O Janamejaya! Thus
I have mentioned to you the one hundred and eight pîthas (sacred places
or seats of the Deity) and as many Devîs. Thus are mentioned all the
seats of the Devîs and along with that, the chief places in India (the
world). He who hears these excellent one hundred and eight names of the
Devî as well as Her seats, gets himself freed from all sins and goes to
the Loka of the Devî. O Janamejaya! His heart gets purified and is
rendered blessed, no doubt, who duly makes jâtrâ (sojourn) to all these
seats of the Deity, performs S’râddhas, offers peace-offerings to the
Pitris and worships with the highest devotion the Goddess and asks
frequently the pardon of the World Mother. O King! After worship, one
should

 

<span id="page_701">p. 701</span>

 

feed the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, well dressed virgins (Kumârîs) and
Va<u>t</u>ukas with good eatables. All the tribes whether they be
Châ<u>nd</u>âlas, know them all to be of the nature of the Devî and
therefore they should be worshipped. Never one is to accept any donation
or gifts (Pratigrahas) in these seats of the Devî. The saintly persons
should make Pura<u>s</u>chara<u>n</u>as (repeat the names of their own
deities, attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) of their own
Mantrams with all their might in all these places and should never be
miserly in their expenses on this account. He who starts to these sacred
places, with devoted hearts filled with love, finds his Pitris in the
higher and greater Brahmâ Loka for one thousand Kalpas and he gets the
highest knowledge, crosses the ocean of the world and becomes free. Many
a people have attained success by repeating these one hundred and eight
names of the Deity. Any place wherein are kept those names, embodied in
a book, becomes free from such dangers as plague, cholera or any
misapprehensions from planetary Deities and so forth. Nothing remains to
be attained by these persons who repeat these one hundred and eight
names. That man, devoted to the Devî, certainly attains blessedness.
That saintly person becomes of the nature of the Devî. The Devas bow
down and worship him when they behold him! What then need be said that
the saints would worship him! The Pitris become pleased and get their
good ends when these one hundred and eight names are read with devotion.
These places are, as it were, Intelligence personified (Chinmaya) and
places ready to yield freedom from bondage. Therefore, O King!
Intelligent men should take their shelter in these places. O King!
Whatever secrets and other deeper secrets about the Great Goddess you
asked to know from me, I described to you. What more do you want to
hear. Say.

 

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the birth of
Gaurî, the seats of the Deity, and the distraction of S’iva in the
Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

Note :-- The number one hundred and eight is a holy number, got by
taking the half of 216,000, the number of breaths inhaled by a child in
the womb who promises to take the name of God at his every breath or by
taking one-eighth of 864,000, the number of seconds in a day. The two
zeros are then dropped. Thus the number signifies the one who fulfils
one’s promise.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](bk07ch31)
