[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch24)  [Next](bk07ch26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXV**

 

**On the quarrels between Haris’chandra and** **Vis’vâmitra**

 

<span id="page_674">p. 674</span>

 

1-12. Sûta said :-- Here, on the other hand, one day the boy Rohitâs’va
went out with other boys to play at some place close to Kâ<u>s</u>’î. He
first played with the his comrades; he then began to root out and
collect, as far as he could, the Darbha (Kus’a) grass, with its ends and
which had not deep roots. On being questioned why he was taking the
Dharba grass, Rohitâ told his comrades that his master was a
Brâhmi<u>n</u> and that he was collecting them for his satisfaction.
Saying this,

 

<span id="page_675">p. 675</span>

 

he began to collect carefully by his hands the sacrificial fuel
(Samidha) and other fuel for the burning purposes. He collected the
Palâsa wood for Homa purpose and making it into a bundle with other
articles already collected, took it on his head, but at every step he
seemed to be fatigued. Feeling thirsty he went to a pool of water close
by and keeping his load on the ground went down to drink water. Drinking
water he rested a while and then as he had kept his load on the anthill,
be began to take it back on his head, a very poisonous deadly serpent
came out suddenly out of that anthill at the order of Vis’vâmitra. The
snake immediately bit the boy who instantly fell down and died. His
comrades seeing Rohitâs’va dead went to the house of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>.
With much anxiety the boys went soon out of fear, to his mother and said
:-- “O Brâhmi<u>n</u>’s maidservant! Your son went out with us to play
outside; but suddenly a poisonous snake bit him and he is dead.”
Rohitâ’s mother, hearing these cruel words like thunder and lightning at
once fell down on the ground like a plantain tree, cut off from its
roots. The Brâhmi<u>n</u>, then, came and sprinkled water on her face.
When she regained her consciousness, the Brâhmi<u>n</u> then angrily
spoke :--

 

13-19. O wicked One! It is very inauspicious to cry at the evening time;
especially the disfavour of the Goddess Lak<u>s</u>mî; the poverty comes
to the householder, you know this; why are you then weeping? Have you
not a bit of shame in your heart? She made no reply at this. Rather very
much immersed in grief for her son, she wept in a pitiful voice. Her
body was covered with dust, hairs were dishevelled and her face covered
all over with tears from eyes. She constantly wept out of sorrow. The
Brâhmi<u>n</u>, then, became very angry and spoke to the queen :-- “O
Villain! O Wicked! Fie on you. I have bought you for money; yet you are
hindering my luck. If you had this thought that you would not work under
me, why did you take for nothing my money?” Thus repeatedly scolded by
the Brâhmi<u>n</u>, she pitifully cried and spoke to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>
in a voice choked with feelings :-- “O Lord! My son has fallen into the
jaws of death, being smitten by a serpent. O One of good vows! I will
never be able to see him. So kindly permit me to go and see my boy.”
Saying thus, that lady began again to weep in a pitiful voice. The
Brâhmi<u>n</u> became very angry and spoke thus :--

 

20-26. O Cheat! Your conduct is extremely blameable; you do not know how
one commits a sin. The man who taking his pay from his master spoils his
master’s work, he goes to the terrible hell Raurava and is being
scorched there. Living in the Hell for a short while, he is born as a
cock. Or it is useless for me to give you this instruction of the Dharma
S’âstra, for to speak to such to an illiterate, cruel, low, hypocrite

 

<span id="page_676">p. 676</span>

 

and liar and to one addicted to sinful acts is to sow seed on an usar
land and to see it fruitless. Now if you have any fear for the
afterlife, come and do the household affairs. Hearing this, she said to
the Brâhmi<u>n</u>, trembling :-- “O Lord! Be graciously pleased and
shew your mercy on a maidservant. Only for a moment I will go to see the
dead son of mine; so give me order to go there for a moment.” That lady
was deeply absorbed with sorrows for her son; then she put her head on
the feet of the Brâhmi<u>n</u> and with a pitiful voice cried. The angry
Brâhmi<u>n</u> with eyes reddened then began to speak.

 

27-41. What purpose of mine will be served by your son? Don’t you know
about my anger? Have you forgotten about my whipping? So be ready and do
my household work without any delay. Hearing his words, the queen held
her patience and began to do the household work. She spent half the
night time, when she finished champooing his feet. When this was over,
the Brâhmi<u>n</u> spoke to her :-- “You can go now to your son; but
see, finish his burning ceremonies and come back quickly. See that my
morning works do not suffer.” Thus getting the permission, the Queen
went at that dead of night to look for her son, alone and weeping.
Gradually she went out of the precincts of the city of Kâ<u>s</u>î and
there she saw her son like a poor man’s son lying on the ground over
leaves and pieces of woods. Seeing her son dead, the humble Queen was
very troubled with sorrow like an antelope, straying from its herd and
as a cow missing her calf. The Queen Mâdhavî then began to lament, in a
very pitiful tone, thus :-- “O my Son! Come once before me; say why you
are angry. Oh! My child! You used to come frequently to me, uttering Ma!
Ma! Then why are you not coming now?” Saying thus, she tumbling went and
fell over his son. She, regaining her consciousness, embraced her son
and placing her face on the face of the child began to weep pitifully.
“Oh! My son! Oh! My child! Oh my Kumâra! Oh! My Beautiful! and began to
beat her head and her breast with her hands. O King! Where are you now?
You used to look upon your son dearer than even your life. Your that son
is now lying dead on the ground. Come and behold him once. It seems that
the son has got back his life.” Thus thinking she looked upon his face;
but when it looked dead, she fell immediately unconscious. Getting back
soon her consciousness, she held his face by her hands and said :-- “O
Child! Rise up from your sleep; awake; now is the dreadful night time;
hundreds of jackals are yelling into our ears. Even Pretas, Bhutas,
Pis’âchas and Dâkinîs are roaming in packs and making terrible sounds
Hum, Hum. Your comrades returned to their homes just at sunset; Why are
you alone remaining here?

 

<span id="page_677">p. 677</span>

 

42-56. Sûta said :-- The thin-bodied queen, thus saying, began to
lament, “Oh my Child! Oh! My son, Oh! Rohitâs’va, O Kumâra, why are you
not replying to my words! Oh my Child! I am your mother; do you not
recognise me; look at me once. O Child! I am deprived of my kingdom and
exiled from my country; my husband has sold even his body and I am
myself reduced to slavery. What man is there that can live in this
state! I am living simply by seeing your lotus-face. The astrologer who
cast your horoscope at your birth, calculated future events in your
life; but where? none of them is fructified. They said that this child
will be a hero, warrior, long-lived, very charitable man, and always
ready to do the worship of the Devas, Dvîjas and the Gurus. What more
than this that the child will be one paramount sovereign and with his
sons and grandsons will enjoy his kingdom. This boy will be the master
of his senses and will fulfil the desires of his father and mother. Oh
my Son! Now all those predictions have turned out false. O Child! You
have on your palms so many auspicious signs, discus, fishes, umbrella,
S’rî Vatsa, Svastika, flags, Kalas’a (earthen jar), Châmara and other
signs; besides these, various other auspicious omens exist on your
hands. Are all these become in vain today! O Son! You are the Lord of
this whole dominion; but where are your that Kingdom now, those
ministers, that royal throne, that umbrella, that axe, that vast amount
of riches, that Ayodhyâ city, those palatial buildings, those elephants,
horses, and chariots? Where have gone your subjects! O Child! Where have
you gone now, quitting all these and even me! O beloved Husband! See the
condition of your son who in his early childhood used to move on all
fours (the hands and feet) and get up on your broad chest, anointed with
Kumkum, and spoil it with dust; O King! Come once and witness the
condition of your child who used to press, out of ignorance due to his
young age, the Tilak on your forehead, prepared of Mriganâbhi, (musk).
Alas! Flies are now sitting on the lotus face today which I used to kiss
over, covered with dirt; the insects are now stinging that. Oh! This I
have got to witness now! O King! Come and see once your child is now
sleeping on the ground like a poor man’s dead son. O Fate! What bad act
did I commit in my past life, that I have got to suffer so much in this
life and I do not get an end of them! O Child! O Son! Oh, my Kumâra! Oh!
My Beautiful! Shall I not be able to see you once any more elsewhere?”
The Queen Mâdhavî thus lamented very much when the warders of the city,
hearing her lamentations awoke and came to her without any delay,
greatly astonished. They asked her thus :--

 

<span id="page_678">p. 678</span>

 

57-77. Who are you? Whose son is this? Where is your husband? Why are
you weeping here in this dead of night, without any fear? Though thus
questioned, the thin Queen did not reply anything. Being again asked,
she remained silent; and in the next moment she was pained with extreme
agony and began again to cry. Tears flowed incessantly from her two eyes
out of her sorrow. The guards then began to suspect her and were greatly
afraid. So much that hairs stood on their ends out of terror. They at
once raised their arms and began to talk with each other. When this lady
is not giving any sort of reply, she is then certainly not a woman; most
probably she will be a Râk<u>s</u>asî, knowing magic and destroying
young children. So she should be killed with great attention. If she be
not a Râk<u>s</u>asî, then why she should stay in this dead of night
outside the city? No doubt, this Râk<u>s</u>asî has brought someone’s
child to eat here. Thus saying, they, without any delay, tied her hairs
closely and some caught hold of her hand and some caught hold of her
neck, saying O Râk<u>s</u>asî! where will you go now? The armed men,
then dragged her perforce to the house of the Châ<u>nd</u>âla and handed
her over to him. All the people said :-- “O Chief of the
Châ<u>nd</u>âlas! We have caught today outside the city this child
eating Râk<u>s</u>asî; so you better take her quickly on the slaughter
ground and slaughter her.” The Châ<u>nd</u>âla looked at her body and
said, “This Râk<u>s</u>asî is widely celebrated in this world. I know
her from before; but nobody is able to see her. This Mâyâvinî has
devoured many sons of many persons. You all will acquire great merit
when she will be slaughtered and your good name will be known to all and
will last long. You better now go back to your own homes. The man who
kills women, children, cows and Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, who burns another’s
house with fire, who destroys the wayfares of others, who steals his
Guru’s wife, who quarrels with saintly persons, and who drinks wine, if
killed, will certainly yield merits to the man who kills him. If such a
one be a female or a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, no sin will accrue if he or she be
slaughtered.

 

So it is my paramount duty to kill her.” Saying this, the
Châ<u>nd</u>âla tied her closely and drawing her by her hairs, began to
beat her with a rope. Then he told to Haris’chandra in terse language
:-- “O Slave! Kill her; this woman is by her very nature wicked; so do
not judge anything in this matter of killing her.” Hearing these harsh
words, like the falling of a thunderbolt, the King shuddered. When he
came back to his nature, he fearing lest a woman be killed, said to the
Châ<u>nd</u>âla :-- “I am not at all able to carry this order out; so
kindly make over this task to some other servant of yours. He will kill
her. I will certainly carry out any other order that you would task me
to do.” Thus hearing

 

<span id="page_679">p. 679</span>

 

the King, the Châ<u>nd</u>âla said :-- Discard your fear and take the
sword; this Mâyâvinî kills always the children; so to kill her is
meritorious; in no way whatsoever ought she to be saved. The King became
very sorry and said :-- Women should always be protected with care,
never to be killed; the more so as the religious Munis have assigned
greater sin in the killing of women. The man who kills consciously or
unconsciously females, certainly becomes boiled in the Mahâ Raurava
hell.

 

78-79. The Châ<u>nd</u>âla said :-- “Don’t you say this; take this sharp
sword, lustrous like a lightning; where killing one engenders happiness
to many, abundance of merits are acquired in doing that. This wicked
fellow has eaten many children of this place; so kill her as early as
possible and bring peace and happiness to the Kâ<u>s</u>î people.”

 

80\. The King said :-- “O Chief of the Châ<u>nd</u>âlas! I have taken
the difficult vow from my childhood, not to kill any woman. Therefore I
cannot exert myself in this matter of killing the woman as you order.”

 

81-82. The Châ<u>nd</u>âla said :-- “O Wicked Fellow! No work is
superior which is not the master’s work. Why then are you cancelling
today to carry out my order, when you are taking pay from me. The
servant that spoils his master’s work, taking his money, is not freed
from the hell even if he remains for ten thousand years there.”

 

83-86. The King said :-- “O Lord of the Châ<u>nd</u>âlas! Put me to some
other task that is very difficult. I will do that easily. Or if you have
an enemy, specify and I will kill him no doubt within an instant. I will
give you the whole earth by killing him. Even if Indra comes against you
with the other Devas, or Dânavas, or Uragas, or Kinnaras, or Siddhas, or
Gandharbas, I will slay him with my sharpened arrows, but I will never
be able to kill a woman.” The Châ<u>nd</u>âla, then, began to tremble
with anger at these words and said to the King.

 

87-89. You are a servant and what you have spoken is not fit for a
servant. Working as a slave of a Châ<u>nd</u>âla, you are speaking the
words of the gods. Therefore, O slave! hear now what I say; no need of
exchanging any further words. O Shameless One! If you fear sin a bit why
then did you accept the slavery in a Châ<u>nd</u>âla’s house. Take this
sword and cut off her head.” Thus speaking the Châ<u>nd</u>âla gave him
the axe.

 

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the quarrels
between Haris’chandra and Vis’vâmitra in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, S’rî
Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](bk07ch26)
