[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch21)  [Next](bk08ch23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXII**

 

**On the narrative of the sins leading to hells**

 

<span id="page_788">p. 788</span>

 

1\. Nârada said :-- “O Everlasting One! O Muni! Now describe the various
actions that lead to these tormenting hells. I like to hear about them
in detail.”

 

2-52. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Devar<u>s</u>i! He who steals other’s
sons, wives, and riches, the wicked fellow is taken to Yama by His
messengers. Tied down hard and fast by the terrible messengers of Yama,
by the Kâla rope (rope of time), he is taken to the Tâmisra hell, the
place of many torments. There the Yama’s attendants punish him, beat him
and threaten him; and he becomes stupefied, and feels himself very weak,
distressed and ultimately faints. He who deceives another’s husband and
enjoys his wives; the Yama’s servants drag him down to Andha Tâmisra
hell. There he suffers any amount of pain and suffering. He loses
instantly his eyesight and his brain gets upset. His state resembles
that of a tree when its trunk is broken. For this reason the ancient
sages called this Andha Tâmisra. He who being subject to “My” and “Mine”
quarrels with others and being very much attached, maintains his family,
leaves his families here and goes with his bad tendencies to the Raurava
hell, very horrible to all. The animals whom he injured and killed
before in this world, assume the form of Ruru animal and torment him in
the next. For this reason, the intelligent knowers of Purâ<u>n</u>a,
call this Raurava. The ancients say, that Ruru is more cruel and
ferocious than snakes. These animals live in that hell; hence it is
termed Mahâraurava. He who torments others, goes to this hell and these
Rurus, the flesh-eaters, spring on his body and bite and eat his flesh.
He who cooks other animals and birds, that cruel and ferocious, thus
deluded, is cooked in return on the hot oil in the Kumbhîpâka hell by
the Yama Dûtas for thousand years. He who quarrels with his Pitris and
the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, is taken by the Yama Dûtas to the Kâlasûtra hell
and there be burnt by the fire and Sun. There that hellish person, being
troubled very much, inside and outside by hunger and thirst, sometimes
sits, sometimes sleeps, sometimes walks, and sometimes runs hither and
thither. O Devar<u>s</u>i! He who transgresses the path of the Vedas in
times other than those of calamity and danger and follows other paths

 

<span id="page_789">p. 789</span>

 

even to a trifling distance, that sinner is taken by Yamadûtas to
Asipatra Kânana and there whipped severely. Not being able to bear that,
he runs wildly to and fro and is pierced by the sharpedged Asi leaves on
both his sides. His whole body being cut asunder, he cries “Oh! I am
killed!”and faints away. Then feeling himself pained very much, he
tumbles down at every step. Thus the sinner suffers for violating the
path of the Vedas. The King or that royal personage who gives orders of
punishment, not approved by Dharma, and hurts or punishes the body of a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a, the Yama’s servants throw him down into the
S’ûkaramukha Hell and grind down his body with great force as a
sugarcane is ground down. He then cries aloud bitterly, he gets fainted
and becomes stupefied. He is crushed by them and suffers all sorts of
pains and miseries. Again he who knows the feelings of others when they
are tormented, pains those insects who live on other’s blood as bugs,
etc., and who does not realise other’s pains, goes, as a punishment for
that fault to the Andhakûpa Hell. There he is pained by the beasts,
birds, deers, reptiles, mosquitoes, bugs, louses, flies and Dandas’ûkas
and various other cruel animals. There he lives in his ugly body and
roams like a beast. The man who, getting even a trifling wealth and
food-stuff, does not perform the five Mahâ Yajñâs and gives not a share
of that to the Devas and feeds his own belly with that like a crow, is
taken by the ferocious Yamadûtas to the worst Krimibhojana Naraka for
his sinful deeds. This hell is one lakh Yoyanas wide and is the
reservoir of worms. It causes terror to the inhabitants of the hell.
That sinner assumes the form of an insect and is eaten up on return by
the insects and thus passes his time there. When a man does not give any
share to the Atithis or the guests and does not offer oblations to the
Fire and eats his food, he, too, goes to the above hell. When a man in
times other than that of great danger and distress, follows the
livelihood of a thief and robs gold and jewels forcibly of a
Brâhmi<u>n</u> or any other person, he is taken to this hell and the
Yama’s servants pierce and cut off his skin by a fiery hot iron cutter.
When a man goes for an illicit cohabitation to one who is not fit to be
approached and when a woman goes similarly to an unapproachable man,
both of them are taken, being whipped, to this hell by the servants of
Yama! Where the man is obliged to embrace a fiery hot iron figure of
woman and vice versa. When a man goes to all sorts of wombs for
unnatural crimes, he is taken to Vajra Ka<u>nt</u>aka Naraka and placed
on the top of an iron S’almalî wood. When a King or any royal personage,
subject to the Pâ<u>s</u>a<u>nd</u>a Dharma (i.e., the unrighteous path)
breaks the boundary of a law, he for that sin goes to Vaitara<u>n</u>î,
the ditch round that hell. There the aquatic animals eat

 

<span id="page_790">p. 790</span>

 

his body all around. O Nârada! Yet neither his life nor his body parts
with him. He is thrown, for his Karma, into the rivers filled with
faeces, urine, puss, blood, hairs, bones, nails, flesh, marrow, fat,
etc., and he becomes very much troubled. Those who are the husbands of
Vri<u>s</u>alîs (girls under twelve years of age, who have attained
menstruation; or the barren women), void of any S’aucha (cleanliness) or
shame and without any Âchâra Vyavahâra (the following of one’s natural
customs and rites) and those who follow Pas’vâchâra (like beasts), they
meet with a very hard fate and are thrown into this hell filled with
faeces, urine, cough, blood and other impurities and when they feel
hungry, are forced to eat the above things. When those persons that are
twice born, maintain dogs and asses, etc., and when they are addicted to
hunting, and kill daily, for nothing, beasts, birds and deer, those
evildoers are specially watched by the servants of Yama and when they
retire, they tear them asunder by shooting bows at them. He who kills
animals, engaged vainly in a sacrifice and addicted to haughty tempers
and habits, is thrown into this hell by the Yama’s servants and whipped
very severely. The twice-born that copulates blindly with a
savar<u>n</u>â wife, is taken by the Yama’s messengers into the hell
filled with semen and he is made to drink that. Those who are addicted
to robbery, who put fire to other’s houses, who make others drink
poison, those that are treacherous, and who destroy the interest of the
villagers and other persons, those kings or the royal personages are
taken after their death by the Yamadûtas to the Sârameyâdana hell. There
seven hundred and twenty dogs, very wonderful to behold, come furiously
and with great force and energy, over them and feed on them. O Nârada!
This hell is denominated as Sârameyâdana Naraka and it is very horrible.
Now I will describe to you the other hells Avîchi and others.

 

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narrative
of the sins leading to hells in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](bk08ch23)
