[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch11)  [Next](bk08ch13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter XII**

** **

**On the narration of Plak<u>s</u>a, S’âlmala and Kus’a Dvîpas**

 

<span id="page_767">p. 767</span>

 

1-37. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- The Jambudvîpa has been described, how it
is and what is its width. It is surrounded on all sides by the salt
ocean. As Meru is surrounded by Jambudvîpa, so the salt ocean is
surrounded by Plak<u>s</u>advîpa, twice its size. As the ditch is
surrounded by gardens, so the salt ocean is surrounded by gardens. As
the Jambu tree exists in Jambudvîpa, so the Plak<u>s</u>a tree exists in
the Plak<u>s</u>a Dvîpa and of the same size. The name Plak<u>s</u>a
Dvîpa is derived from the name of this Plak<u>s</u>a tree. This tree is
of a golden colour. Fire exists at its bottom with form incarnate. This
is, named Saptajihva. The Ruler of this island is Idhmajihva, the son of
Priyavrata. He divided his island into the seven Var<u>s</u>as and
distributed them, to each of his seven sons and he himself took refuge
of the path of Yoga, so much liked by the Knowers of Self and he got the
Bhagavân Vâsudeva. The names of those seven Dvîpas are :-- S'iva, Yavas,
Subhadra, Sânti, K<u>s</u>ema, Amrita, and Abhaya. Seven rivers and
seven mountains exist respectively in the seven islands. The rivers are
:-- Aru<u>n</u>â, Nrimnâ, Angirasî, Sâvitrî, Suprabhâtikâ,
<u>R</u>itambharâ, and Satyambharâ. The names of the mountains are
Ma<u>n</u>ikûta, Vajrakûta, Indrasena, Jyoti<u>s</u>mâna,
Supar<u>n</u>a, Hira<u>n</u>yasthîva, and Meghamâla. The seeing and
drinking the waters of these rivers take away all sins and all darkness
due to ignorance. The four castes live here, Hamsa, Patanga,
Ûrd<u>h</u>âyana, and Satyânga, corresponding to the four castes
Brâhma<u>n</u>a, etc. The inhabitants of this Plak<u>s</u>a Dvîpa live
for one thousand years and all are of variegated wonderful appearances.
They follow the customs

 

<span id="page_768">p. 768</span>

 

and usages dictated by the Vedas and worship the God Sun for the
attainment of Heaven. The mantra by which the worship is done is this
:-- We take refuge unto that Sun, Who is the Body Manifest of the
Ancient Person Vi<u>sn</u>u and Who is the Ordainer of Satya (Truth),
Ritâ (Straight forwardness), Brahmâ, Amrita (Immortality) and Mrityu
(Death); O Nârada! All the persons here live long, of vigorous senses,
energetic, powerful, intelligent, enthusiasts, and valorous; everyone
gets extraordinary powers of themselves. Next to this Plak<u>s</u>a
Dvîpa is the Ik<u>s</u>hu Ocean. This Ik<u>s</u>u Sâgara surrounds the
Plak<u>s</u>a Dvîpa. Next comes S'almala Dvîpa. It is twice as large as
Plak<u>s</u>a. This Dvîpa is surrounded by Surâsâgara (the ocean of
wine). There is a tree named S'almalî in this island, which is as large
as the Plak<u>s</u>a tree. The high-souled Garu<u>d</u>a resides on that
tree, Yajñavâhu is the Ruler of this place. He was born of Priyavrata;
he divided his Var<u>s</u>a into the seven parts and distributed each of
them to his seven sons respectively. Now hear the names of these
Var<u>s</u>as :-- Surochana, Saumanasya, Rama<u>n</u>a, Deva
Var<u>s</u>a, Pâribhadra, Âpyâyana, and Vijñâta. Seven mountains and
seven rivers exist there respectively. The names of the mountains are
:-- Sarasa, S'atas'ringa, Vâma Deva, Kandaka, Kumuda,
Pu<u>s</u>pavar<u>s</u>a, and Sahasra-S'ruti. Now hear the names of the
rivers. Anumati, Sinîbâlî, Sarasvatî, Kûhu, Rajanî, Nandâ, and Râkâ;
these are the seven rivers. The people are divided into the four castes
:-- S'rutadhara, Vîryadhara, Vasundhara, I<u>s</u>undhara. These
correspond to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, etc. They worship the Bhagavân Moon,
the Controller of all and the Creator of all the Vedas. They offer food
duly in the black and white fortnight to their Pitris. The mantra for
their worship is :-- “Let Soma, the King of all, be pleased.” O Nârada!
Next to Surâsâgara is Kus'advîpa, surrounded by Ghritasâgara (the ocean
of clarified butter). Its dimensions are twice as large. Here are blades
of Kus'a grass, of a very resplendent colour. The name of the Dvîpa is
from this Kus'astamba. This bundle of Kus'a, illumines all the quarters
with their gentle rays. The Ruler of the Dvîpa is Hira<u>n</u>yaretâ,
the son of Priyavrata. He divided the Dvîpa into seven parts and
distributed each of them to each of his seven sons respectively. The
names of the seven sons are :-- Vasu, Vasudâna, Dhri<u>d</u>haruchi,
Nâbhigupta, Stutyavrata, Vivikta, and Bhâmadevaka. There are seven
mountains forming the seven boundaries and so are the seven rivers. Hear
the names of these. The names of the mountains are :-- Chakra,
Chatuhs'ringa, Kapila, Chitre Devânîka, Kûta, Ûrdharomâ and
Dravi<u>n</u>a. The names of the rivers are :-- Rasakulyâ, Madhukulyâ,
Mitravindâ, S'rutavindâ, Devagarbhâ, Ghritâchyut, and Mantramalikâ. The
inhabitants of the Kus'advîpa drink the waters of these

 

<span id="page_769">p. 769</span>

 

rivers. There are the four castes here Kus'ala, Kovida, Abhiyukta, and
Kulaka corresponding to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, etc. They are all powerful
like Indra and the other chief Devas; and all of them are omniscient.
They worship the Fire God and perform various good works in honour of
Him. Their mantra is this :-- O Fire! Thou carriest the oblations direct
to Para Brahmâ. In the sacrifices of the Devas, Thou worshippest that
Personal God and offerest to Him whatever are given in oblations,
mentioning the respective limbs of His Body. Thus the inhabitants of
that Dvîpa worship the Fire God.

 

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of
Plak<u>s</u>a, S'âlmala, and Kus'a Dvîpas in the Mahâpurânam, S'rî Mad
Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](bk08ch13)
