[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch09)  [Next](bk08ch11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter X**

** **

**On the description of Bhuvanako<u>s</u>a**

 

<span id="page_761">p. 761</span>

 

1-7. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- In Hira<u>n</u>maya Var<u>s</u>a, the
Bhagavân is remaining in the form of Kurma, the Tortoise, as the Lord of
Yoga. He is thus praised and worshipped by Aryamâ, the Ruler of the
Pitris. Aryamâ said :-- Om namo Bhagavate Akûpârâya; (King of tortoises,
sustaining the world) Obeisance to Thee,

 

<span id="page_762">p. 762</span>

 

the Lord of all prosperities, in the form of Tortoise (Kurma); Thou art
built of Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a Incarnate; no one can make out where Thou
dost dwell; Thou art not encompassed by Time; (Thou art in the Present,
Past and Future); so obeisance to Thee. Thou dost pervade all things; we
bow down to Thee. All are established in Thee; so obeisance to Thee. By
Thy extraordinary Mâyâ (power) Thou hast made manifest this universe
that is seen. This is Thy Form. It is by no means distinct from Thee.
This Thy Form is seen in so many forms. So the true reality being not
known like the mirage, these cannot be counted really speaking, what is
Thy form, no one can definitely say. The beings generated by heat and
moisture (said of insects and worms), those that are born of eggs, from
wombs and the plants and other moving, non-moving beings, the Devas,
Ri<u>s</u>is, Pitris, Bhûtas, and these senses; the sky, the heavens,
earth, mountains, rivers, oceans, islands, planets, and stars all these
art Thou and Thou alone. Thy name, form, and appearance, are as varied;
and their numbers cannot be counted. Still, Kapila and others have
determined their numbers, by the knowledge of which Thou canst become
visible to the Eye of Knowledge. Thy form and nature are determined by
these Sânkhyas ascertained by Kapila. So we bow down to Thee. Thus
Aryamâ, and the other rulers of the Var<u>s</u>a all united sing,
praise, and worship the Bhagavân Kurma Deva, the Controller of all and
the Generator of all. All Hail to Thee! The Bhagavân Yajña Puru<u>s</u>a
is manifest in Uttara Kuru Ma<u>nd</u>ala in the form of Âdi Varâha. The
Earth Herself worships Him always. The Goddess Earth praises Hari, the
Yajña Varâha, the Destroyer of the Daityas and worships duly that Deva,
with Her heart lotus, naturally devoted, rendered more devoted by Her
attachment to the Lord.

 

8-13. The Goddess Earth spoke :-- “Om Namo Bhagavate Mantratattva
Li<u>n</u>gâya Yajña Kratave” I bow down to the Bhagavân, the Great
Boar; Thou art Om; Thy real form and nature can be known by only the
Mantra and Tattva. Thou art Yajña and Kratu (sacrifice) incarnate;
therefore all the great sacrifices are Thy limbs. Thou art the Three
Yugas (there being no Yajña in the Satya Yuga); Thou art that which is
left as Pure, after doing Karma (so as to be fit for performing Yajñas).
So obeisance to Thee. The sages, versed in Jñâna and Vijñâna say that
Thou art hidden in the body and in the senses as fire is hidden in the
wood. So they, ardent to see Thee, seek for Thee with a discriminative
and dispassionate mind, judging Karmas and their fruits; and then Thy
Nature is revealed, I bow down to Thee, Thy Form can be ascertained by
the cause and effect of the Karmas and other Gu<u>n</u>as of Mâyâ, sense
objects, senses, actions, Devas, body, time, Ahamkâra and others. I bow

 

<span id="page_763">p. 763</span>

 

down to Thee, Those can see thus Thy form, whose mind is firmly
established in Thee, by their discrimination and Yama, Niyama, etc., and
who have abandoned all sorts of fickleness and changeability of their
tempers. So obeisance to Thee. As iron goes attracted towards the
magnet, so Mâyâ dances before Thee with Her Gu<u>n</u>as and Her works
in the way of the creation, preservation and destruction of this
universe; but Thou art totally indifferent to it. For the sake of the
Jîvas (embodied souls), desire comes to Thee, though Thou art not quite
willing! Thou art the Witness of the Jîvas and their Adri<u>st</u>a (the
Fate). I bow down to Thee. The Yajña Varâha, the Cause of this universe,
has lifted me up from the Rasâtala and placing me on His big tusks, has
come out from the Pralaya, the great ocean, after overpowering in battle
His enemy, the powerful Daitya, like an elephant, I bow down to that
Controller of all, to Thee. In the Kimpuru<u>s</u>a Var<u>s</u>a, the
Bhagavân Âdi Puru<u>s</u>a (the Prime Man), the Self-manifest, and the
Lord of all, is residing in the form of Râma, the son of Das'aratha and
the Joy of the heart of Sîtâ Devî.

 

14-18. S'rî Hanumâna thus spoke:-- “Om namo Bhagavate Uttama Slokaya” I
bow down to the Bhagavân, who art sung by the excellent verses,
purifying all. I bow down to Thee, the incarnate of modesty, good
temper, vow and good signs; Thy mind is always under control; Thou dost
imitate, as Thy nature is good, the actions of all persons; obeisance to
Thee. Thou art the Supreme Place to award praise. Obeisance to Thee.
Thou art Brahma<u>n</u>ya Deva (in the creation of the universe), the
high souled Person Mahâpuru<u>s</u>a. Thou gettest the First Share,
above all the persons! Thou art the One Tattva and That Alone, as
established in the Vedânta. The holy realisation is the only guide to
it. This Tattva dominates over all the Gu<u>n</u>as. It can never be an
object. Only by pure intellect, It can be realised. There is no name, no
form of It. It is always beyond the pale of Ahamkâra. I take refuge to
this Tattva, the most Peaceful, with my body and mind. Thy incarnation
in human shape in this world is not simply for killing Râva<u>n</u>a but
for giving instructions to the mortals. The contact with woman and the
suffering thereof are very difficult to avoid; to give this lesson also
He took this incarnation, He Who is merged in enjoying the Supreme Bliss
of His Own Nature and He Who is the Lord of all, how can He suffer
miseries in the bereavement of Sîtâ. He is the best friend and the very
Âtman of those who have conquered their minds and senses. Especially He
is the receptacle of all the qualities and is in enjoyment of other
divine extraordinary powers. So He is not attached to the worldly
objects. How can the delusion due to His wife come and darken Him? and
why will He send Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a

 

<span id="page_764">p. 764</span>

 

in exile? He is the Mahat Tattva and the Parama Puru<u>s</u>a; so good
birth, beauty, intelligence, oratory or good form, nothing can please
Him. Bhakti (devotion) can only attract Him. If that be not the case,
then why will He, the elder of Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a, the Bhagavân, the
son of Das'aratha make friendship with us, the wanderers of the forest
and who are by nature, not the receptacles of any beauty, etc. So
everyone, be he a Sura or Asura, man, or not man, should worship the
Hari manifest in Râma, in the human body with all his heart. He is so
good that if anybody worships Him even to a very small extent, He always
considers it to be much; what more can be said than this that He took
all the inhabitants of Kos'ala to Heaven!

 

19-20. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Thus Hanumân, the best of monkeys, sings
the praises and worships duly in Kimpuru<u>s</u>a Var<u>s</u>a, the
lotus-eyed Râma, truthful, and determined in his vows. He who hears this
wonderful description of Râma, is freed of all his sins and goes with
his body pure to the abode of Râma.

 

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of
Bhuvanako<u>s</u>a in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam,
of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](bk08ch11)
