[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch40)  [Next](bk08ch02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter I**

** **

**On the description of the worlds**

 

<span id="page_741">p. 741</span>

 

1-4. Janamejaya asked :-- “O Lord! I have heard all that you have
described about the sweet nectar-like characters of the Kings of the
Solar and the Lunar dynasties. Now kindly describe the real Tattva of
the Virâ<u>t</u> Form of the Great Devî and how She was worshipped in
every Manvantara by the Regent of that Manvantara and the Kings thereof.
In what part of the year and in which place, under what circumstances
and in what form and with what Mantras was the Devî worshipped? I am
very anxious to hear all this. O Guru! In fact describe the gross forms
of the Âdyâ S'akti, the Devî Bhagavatî by concentrating attention to
Which, I can have the power to understand the subtle forms of the Devî
and I can get the highest good in this world.”

 

5-7. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Now hear. I am describing to you in detail
about the worship of the Devî Bhagavatî that leads to the welfare of the
Whole World; the hearing of which or the practice of which enables one
to get the highest good. In days of yore, the Devar<u>s</u>i Nârada
asked Nârâya<u>n</u>a about this very point; I will now tell you what
the Bhagavân, the Promulgator of the Yoga Tattva, advised Nârada. Once
on a time the all powerful Devar<u>s</u>i Nârada entitled with all the
Yogic powers, and born from the body of Brahmâ was travelling all over
this earth and came to the hermitage of the Ri<u>s</u>i Nârâya<u>n</u>a.
Resting a while, and the troubles of the journey over, he bowed down to
the Yogi Nârâya<u>n</u>a and asked Him what you ask me now. Nârada said
:-- O Deva Deva Mahâdeva! O Thou, the Ancient Puru<u>s</u>a, the
Excellent One!

 

8-9. O Omniscient ! O Thou, the Holder of the Universe! O Thou Who art
the repository of the good qualities and Who art praised by all!

 

10-12. O Deva! Now tell me what is the ultimate cause of this Universe:
whence has this Universe its origin? And how does it rest? To whom does
it take refuge? Where does it dissolve in the time of Pralaya? Where do
all the Karmas of these beings go to? And what Object is that whose
knowledge destroys forever the Mâyâ, the Cause

 

<span id="page_742">p. 742</span>

 

of all this Moha (illusion)? Whose worship, what Japam, and Whose
meditation in the lotus of heart are to he made, by which, O Deva! the
knowledge of Paramâtman rises in the heart, as the darkness of the night
vanishes by the rising of the Sun.

 

13\. O Deva! Kindly reply to these my questions in such a clear manner
as the ignorant people in this Samsâra can understand and get themselves
across this ocean of Samsâra.

 

14-15. Vyâsa said :-- Thus asked by the Devar<u>s</u>i, the ancient
Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the Best of the Munis, the great Yogi gladly spoke :--
O Devar<u>s</u>i! Hear I will now speak to you all the Tattvas of this
world, knowing which the mortal never falls into the illusion of this
world.

 

16\. O Child! The original cause of this Universe is the Devî Mahâ Mâyâ
(the image of the Supreme Chaitanya Para Brahmâ); this is the opinion of
the Ri<u>s</u>is, the Devas, Gandharvas, and other intelligent persons.

 

17-23. It is written in the Vedas and other S'âstras that the Devî
Bhagavatî, worshipped by all in the Universe, creates, preserves and
destroys the Universe by the influence of Her three Gu<u>n</u>as. I now
describe to you the nature of the Devî, worshipped by the Siddhas,
Gandharbas and Ri<u>s</u>is, the mere remembering of Whom destroys all
sins, and gives final liberation Mok<u>s</u>a (and Dharma, Artha, and
Kama also). The powerful Svâyambhuva Manu, the First, the husband of
S'atarûpâ, the prosperous and the Ruler of all the Manvantaras
worshipped the sinless Prajâpati Brahmâ, his Father with due devotion
and satisfied Him when the Grandsire of the Lokas, the
Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha spoke to his son :-- The excellent worship of the
Devî should be done by you. By Her Grace, O Son, your work of creating
worlds will be successful. Thus spoken by Brahmâ, the Bibhu Svâyambhuva
Manu, the Virâ<u>t</u> incarnate, worshipped the World Mother with great
austerities. And with his concentrated devotion, he satisfied the Devî
Deves'î and began to chant hymns to Her, the First-born, the Mâyâ, the
S'akti of all, and the Cause of all causes.

 

24-36. Manu said :-- Thou art Brahmâ, the ocean of the Vedas,
Kri<u>sn</u>a, the abode of Lak<u>s</u>mî, Purandara. I bow down again
and again to Thee, the Deves'î, the Cause of Mâyâ, the Cause of this
Universe. Thou holdest s'ankha (the conchshell), chakra, gadâ, etc., in
Thy hands and Thou residest in the heart of Nârâya<u>n</u>a; Thou art
the Vedas incarnate, the World Mother, the Auspicious One, bowed down by
all the Devas, and the Knower of the Three Vedas. O Thou, endowed with
all

 

<span id="page_743">p. 743</span>

 

powers and glory! O Mahâmâye! Mahâbhâge! Mahodaye! (the
Self-manifested). Thou residest as the better half of Mahâ Deva, and
Thou dost all what are dear to Him. Thou art the most beloved of Nanda,
the Cow-herd (in the form of Mahâ Mâyâ, the daughter who concealed
Kri<u>sn</u>a and slipped from the hands of Kamsa and got up in the air
and remained as Vindhyâvâsinî; also in the form of S'rî Kri<u>sn</u>a).
Thou gavest much pleasure and wert the cause of all the festivities;
Thou takest away the fear due to plague, etc.; Thou art worshipped by
the Devas. O Thou, the auspicious Bhagavatî! Thou art the welfare of all
incarnate; Thou fructifiest the desires of all to success! Thou art the
One to Whom all take refuge and Thou removest their all the dangers; O
Thou the three-eyed! Gaurî! Nârâyanî! Obeisance to Thee. I bow down to
that ocean of all brightness and splendour, without beginning or end,
the One Consciousness, wherein this endless Universe rises and remains
interwoven therein. I bow down to the Devî, whose Gracious Glance
enables Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahes'vara to do their respective
works of creating, preserving, and destroying the Universe. O Devî! Thou
art the Only One, whom all can bow, since the lotus-born Brahmâ,
terrified by the horrible Daityas, was freed by Thy prowess only. O
Bhagavatî! Thou art modesty, fame, memory, lustre; Thou art
Lak<u>s</u>mî, Girijâ, the daughter of Himâlayâ, Thou art Satî, the
Dak<u>s</u>a's daughter; Thou art the Sâvitrî the Mother of the Vedas,
Thou art the intelligence of all and Thou art the cause of fearlessness.
So I now engage myself reciting Thy Japam, Thy hymns and Thy worship. I
meditate on Thee and see Thy form within my heart and hear Thy praises.
Be graciously pleased on me, O Devî! It is by Thy Grace that Brahmâ is
the Revealer of the Four Vedas, Vi<u>sn</u>u is the Lord of
Lak<u>s</u>mî, Indra is the Lord of the Devas and of the three worlds;
Varu<u>n</u>a is the Lord of waters, Kuvera is the Lord of wealth, Yama
is the Lord of the dead, Nairrita is the Lord of the Râk<u>s</u>asas,
and Soma is the Lord of the water element and praised by the three
worlds. Therefore, O Auspicious World Mother! I bow down again and again
to Thee.

 

37-45. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Child! When Svayambhuva Manu, the son
of Brahmâ, chanted thus the hymns to the Âdyâ S'akti Bhagavatî Nârâyanî,
She became pleased and spoke to him thus :-- The Devî said :-- “O King,
the Brahmâ's son! I am pleased with your devoted worship and hymns; so
ask boon from Me that you desire.” Manu said :-- “O Devî! If Thou art
graciously pleased, grant that my creation be finished without any
hitch.” The Devî said :-- “O King of Kings! By My blessing, your work of
creation will be completed without any obstruction. And by your
pu<u>n</u>ya (merits) they will no doubt multiply on and on. He who
reads

 

<span id="page_744">p. 744</span>

 

with devotion this hymn (stotra) composed by you, will get sons, fame
and beauty in the world and, in the end, he will be entitled to get the
Highest Place. The people will have powers unopposed by anybody, will
get wealth and grains, will get victory everywhere and happiness; and
his enemies will be ruined.” Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- “O Child! The Devî
Bhagavatî Âdyâ S'akti granted thus the desired boon to Svâyambhuva Manu
and vanished away at once from his sight.” Then the powerful Manu,
obtaining thus the boon, spoke to his father :-- O Father! Now give me a
solitary place where I can worship the Devî with sacrifices and do my
work of creating a good number of people.

 

46-48. Hearing thus the words of the son, the Prajâpati, the Lord
thought over the matter for a long time :-- “How this work would be
done? Alas! I have spent an endless time in this work of creation; but
as yet nothing has been done. For the Earth, the receptacle of all the
Jivâs is submerged in water and has gone down to the Rasâtala. What is
to be done now? There is only one hope and that is this :-- If the
Bhagavân, the Primeval Person, under Whose Command I am engaged in this
work of creation, helps me in this work of mine, no doubt it will be
accomplished then and then only.”

 

Here ends the First Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of the
worlds in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am, S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000
verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](bk08ch02)
