[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch23)  [Next](bk09ch01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXIV**

 

**On the worship of the Devî**

 

<span id="page_792">p. 792</span>

 

1-2. Nârada said :-- “O Bhagavân! Of what sort is the Dharma, i.e., the
worship of the Devî? In what way shall we worship Her, so that She gives
us the Highest Place? What are the methods and forms of Her Worship?
Where and when shall we worship Her! So that the Durgâ Devî saves us
from the above mentioned hells.”

 

3-20. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Devar<u>s</u>i! You are the foremost of
the Knowers of Truth. I will therefore tell you how the Devî gets
pleased and how Her worship is conducted according to the Dharma. Hear
attentively. O Nârada! I will also describe the nature of Sva Dharma.
Hear that also. When one worships, with due rites and ceremonies, the
Devî in this beginningless world, She Herself removes all the terrible
dangers and difficulties. Hear the rules how the people worship the
Devî. When the Pratîpat Tithi (the first day after the Full or New Moon)
comes, one should worship the Devî with a present of rice, etc., with
ghee (clarified butter) and give that to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s. Then one
becomes completely free from any disease. On the second day (Dvîtiyâ
Tithi), one must serve the Mother of the Universe with sugar and give
that to the Brâhmins; he then becomes long-lived. On the third (tithi)
on commencing with the Poojâ, the worshipper must give milk to the

 

<span id="page_793">p. 793</span>

 

Devî and give that to a best Brâhmi<u>n</u>; he is then freed from all
his troubles and ailings. On the fourth (tithi) the worshipper is to
offer a cake of flour to the Devî and then give that to a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>; no obstacles come to that man. On the fifth tithi, the
worshipper is to offer plantains to the Devî and then to give that to
the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s; he thus becomes intelligent. On the sixth tithi,
the worshipper gives honey to the Devî and then that to a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>; he gets thus the beauty of his body. On the seventh
tithi, the Brâhmi<u>n</u> gives to the Devî the Naivedya (an offering of
rice, etc.) with Gu<u>r</u> (sugarcandy) and then that to the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s; he then becomes freed from his mental sorrows. On the
eighth day, if one gives cocoanut, one is freed of one’s remorse, etc.;
on the ninth, if anybody gives fried rice (Lâj), he will have his
happiness increased both in this world and in the next. O Muni! If on
the tenth tithi, one offers to the Devî black Til (sesamum) and then to
the Brâhmi<u>n</u>, he becomes free from the fear of death. If, on the
eleventh tithi, (ekâdas’î) one gives the curd to the Devî and then to
the Brâhmi<u>n</u>, one becomes a great favourite of the Devî. If on the
twelfth day, one offers to the Devî and to the Brâhmi<u>n</u> the
Chipi<u>t</u>aka rice or grain (well parched and flattened) one becomes
a favourite of the Devî. If, on the thirteenth day one gives to the
Bhagavatî grains and then that to a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, one gets progeny.
If, on the fourteenth day, one gives to the Devî the flour of fried
barley or other grains (S’aktu) and then that to a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, one
becomes a favourite of S’iva. If on the Full Moon day, one offers to the
Devî Pâyasa and then that to a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, then one’s Pitris are
uplifted to the higher regions.

 

21-42. O Muni! On the above tithis, if one forms daily Homas, as stated
in the Pûjâ Chapter, the Devî becomes very pleased. The articles
corresponding to the tithi as mentioned above destroy all the evils and
inauspicious omens.

 

On Sunday, it is a rule to give an offering of Pâyasam (a food prepared
of rice, milk, and sugar). On Monday, the milk; on Tuesday, the nice
plantains; on Wednesday, the fresh butter; on Thursday, the gu<u>d</u>
or sugarcandy, Friday, the white sugar, and on Saturday, it is a rule to
give the clarified butter of cow’s milk. Now hear what should be offered
on the Nak<u>s</u>attras. The following are the Naivedyas given to each
of the Nak<u>s</u>attras, in due order, from As’vinî :-- Clarified
butter (ghee), sesamum (Til), sugar, curd, milk, Kilâ<u>t</u>ak (Mâlâi,
milk), Dadhikûrchi (Mâlâi Curd), Modaka (a kind of sweetmeat, a
confection) Phe<u>n</u>ikâ, Ghrita Ma<u>nd</u>aka, a sort of sweet meat
of wheaten flour and gur, Va<u>t</u>apattra, Ghritapura (Ghior),
Va<u>t</u>aka, Kharjura juice (of the datepalm), a sort of sweet meat of
Gur and gram, honey, S’ûra<u>n</u>a, Gur

 

<span id="page_794">p. 794</span>

 

Prithuka, grapes, datepalms, Chârakâs, Apûpa, Navanîta (fresh butter),
mudga, modaka, and Mâtulinga. Now hear what are given in the
Vi<u>s</u>kambha and the other Yogas. The World Mother becomes very much
pleased when one offers to Her the following things :-- Gur, honey,
ghee, milk, curd, Takra, apûpa, fresh butter, Karka<u>t</u>î,
Ku<u>s</u>mâ<u>nd</u>a, Modaka, Panasa, plantain, Jambu (rose-apple),
mangoe, sesamum, oranges, Dâ<u>d</u>ima, (pomegranate) Vadarî (Jujube)
the Dhâtrî (Âmalaki) fruit, Pâyasa, Prithuka, gram, cocoanut, Jambîra.
Kaseru, and S’ûra<u>n</u>a. The auspicious events occur when these are
offered. The intelligent persons have thus decided to give the above on
Vi<u>s</u>kambha and the other Yogas. Now hear :-- I will describe the
things that are offered on the respective Kara<u>n</u>as :-- Kamsâra,
Ma<u>nd</u>aka, Phenî, Modaka, Va<u>t</u>apattraka, Ladduka, Ghritapûra,
Til (Sesamun), curd, ghee, and honey. These are to be offered devotedly
to the Devî on the respective Kara<u>n</u>as. Now I will describe to you
the other offerings very pleasing to the Devî. Hear. O Nârada! Hear it
with great attention and love. On the third tithi of the bright
fortnight, in the month of Chaitra, one is to worship duly the Madhûka
tree and offer Pañcha Khâdya (the five sorts of food). So hear what
articles are to be offered according to the rules that are laid down on
the third day of the white fortnight of the other months. The Gur, in
the month of Vais’âkh; the honey, in Jyai<u>st</u>ha; the fresh butter,
in Â<u>s</u>âdha; the curd, in S’râva<u>n</u>a; the S’arkarâ, in Bhâdra;
the Pâyas’a, in Âs'vin; the pure milk, in Kârtik; the Phenî, in
Agrahâya<u>n</u>a; the Dadhi Kûrchîkâ in Pau<u>s</u>a; the clarified
butter of cow’s milk, in Mâgha, and the cocoanut offerings, in the month
of Phâlguna. Thus with these twelve sorts of offerings, one is to
worship the Devî in the twelve months respectively.

 

43-69. One should worship the Devî in the Madhûka tree with these names
:-- Mangalâ, Vai<u>sn</u>avî, Mâyâ, Kâla-râtri, Duratyayâ, Mahâmâyâ,
Mâtangî, Kâlî, Kamalavâsinî, S'ivâ, Sahasrachara<u>n</u>â, and Sarva
mangalarûpi<u>n</u>î (One name for each of the 12 months). Finally, to
bring the vow to a good issue and to have one’s desires fulfilled with
greater success, one is to sing stotras (hymns) to the Mâhes'varî, the
Controller of all the gods, in that Madhûka tree, thus :-- Thou art
lotus-eyed; obeisance to Thee! Thou art Jagaddhâtrî, the Upholdress of
the Universe, I bow down to Thee; Thou art Mahes’varî, Mahâ Devî, and
Mahâmangalarûpi<u>n</u>î (Thou art the great Devî, and Thou dost great
good to all). Thou destroyest the sins, Thou givest Mok<u>s</u>a or
final liberation. Thou art Parames’varî, Thou art the World Mother and
Thou art of the nature of the Highest Brahmâ. Thou art Madadâtrî (the
giver of Mada, the Supreme Felicity and rapture or excessive

 

<span id="page_795">p. 795</span>

 

delight), Thou art maddened with Mada the (Excessive Joy); Thou canst be
reached when Thou art given proper veneration; Thou art the the Most
High. Thou art Intelligent; Thou art meditated upon by the Munis; and
Thou dwellest in the Sun. Thou art the Lord of the several Lokas
(worlds); Thou art endowed with the Highest Knowledge; and Thou art of
the colour of water at the time of Pralaya (the Universal Dissolution).
Thou art worshipped by the Gods and the Asuras for the destruction of
the Great Moha. So Great Victory to Thee! Thou art the Rescuer of one
from the abode of Death; Thou art worshipped by Yama, Thou art the elder
of Yama, Thou art the Controller of Yama and Thou art worshipped by all.
Obeisance to Thee! Thou art impartial; Thou controllest all; Thou art
perfectly unattached; Thou destroyest the people’s worldly attachments;
Thou art The One to whom all look for the fructification of their
desires; and Thou art the Compassion Incarnate. Thou art, worshipped by
the names :-- Ka<u>n</u>kâla Krûra, Kâmâk<u>s</u>î; Mînak<u>s</u>î Marma
bhedinî, Mâdhûryarûpas’âlinî; and Thou art worshipped with the
Pra<u>n</u>ava Om prefixed to all the Stotras and the Mantras. Thou art
of the nature of the Seed Mâyâ (mâyâvîja); Thou canst be realised by
repeating the mantra and Thou canst be pleased by the deep concentration
(Nididyâsana) on Thee. Thou canst be reached by all men through their
minds and Thou dost things that are pleasing to the Mahâ Deva. Thou
dwellest in the trees As’vattha, Va<u>t</u>a (Peepul tree), Neem,
Mangoe, Kapittha (wood apple tree), and the tree Kul (Jujube) trees.
Thou art the Palms (Jack) tree, Thou art Arka, Karîra and K<u>s</u>îra
trees. Thou residest in Dugdha vallî (the milky juice of plants); Thou
art the Compassion Incarnate; and fit to shew mercy. Thou art sincerity
and kindness and Thou art the Consort of the Omniscient. So Victory to
Thee! O Nârada! After the worship, if one performs the stotra above
described, to the Devî, the worshipper derives all sorts of
Pu<u>n</u>yams (merits). He who reads daily the Stotra, pleasing to the
Devî, becomes freed of all sorts of diseases, pain and freed of his fear
of passions, so hard to conquer! What more than this that he who wants
money, gets money; who wants Dharma, gets Dharma; he who wants Kâma,
gets his Kâma (objects of desires); and he who wants Mok<u>s</u>a, gets
Mok<u>s</u>a. The Devî is the Awarder of the Chatur Varga fourfold
fruits.

 

If this Stotra be read, the Brâhmi<u>n</u> becomes Vedavit, the knower
of the Vedas; the K<u>s</u>attriya gets the victory; the Vais’ya gets
wealth and the S’ûdra gets happiness. If this Stotra be read with
devotion and attention, the Pitris get undying satisfaction, lasting
till Pralaya (the time of universal dissolution). Thus I have described
to you the method of

 

<span id="page_796">p. 796</span>

 

worshipping the Devî. The Devas consider it with great attention. He
gets the Devî Loka, who performs the worship of the Devî, as above
described, with devotion. O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! When the Devî is thus
worshipped, all the desires are fulfilled; all sins are destroyed; and,
in the end, one’s mind becomes pure and the worshipper is respected and
worshipped everywhere. O Son of Brahmâ! His fear of going into hell is
destroyed by the Grace of the Devî; even in dreams, he does not fear
anything. By the Grace of Mahâ Mâyâ, his sons and his grandsons, riches
and grains multiply and multiply. He becomes a great and steadfast
devotee of the Devî; there is no doubt in this. Now I have described to
you completely the rules of worship of the Devî. When one performs this,
one becomes freed of the Narakas; and all sorts of good things come to
him. O Muni! The Madhûka worship and the monthly worship have been
described also. He who performs this Madhûka worship fully, never meets
with any disease or obstacles. Now I will describe to you the other five
aspects of the Great Devî of the nature of Prakriti. Her Name, Form and
Origin give pleasure to all the worlds. O Muni! Now hear this Prakriti
Pañchaka, its narrative and the greatness thereof. Know that this is as
curious as it gives liberation.

 

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the worship of
the Devî in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000
verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

\[The Eighth Book completed.\]

 

Here ends the Second Volume.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](bk09ch01)
