[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch16)  [Next](bk09ch18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVII**

 

**On the anecdote of Tulasî**

 

<span id="page_870">p. 870</span>

 

1-19. S’rî Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! The wife of Dharmadhvaja
was Mâdhavî. Going to the Gandhamâdan mountain, She began to enjoy, with
great gladness, the pleasures with the king Dharmadhvaja. The bed was
prepared, strewn with flowers and scented with sandal-paste. She smeared
all over her body with sandal-paste. The flowers and cool breeze in
contact with the sweet scent of sandal-paste began to cool the bodies.
Mâdhavî was the jewel amongst women. Her whole body was very elegant.
Besides it was adorned all over with jewel ornaments. As she was
humorous, so the king was very expert in that respect. It seemed as if
the Creator created especially for Dharmadhvaja, the humorous lady
Mâdhavî expert in amorous affairs. Both of them were skilled in amorous
sports. So no one did like to desist from amorous enjoyments. One
hundred divine years passed in this way, day and night passed unnoticed.
The king then got back his consciousness and desisted from his amorous
embraces. But the lustful woman did not find herself satisfied. However,
by the Deva’s influence, she became pregnant and conceived for one
hundred years. In the womb there was the incarnation of Lak<u>s</u>mî;
and the body’s lustre increased day by day. Then, on an auspicious day,
on an auspicious moment, auspicious Yoga, auspicious Lagna, auspicious
Amsa, and on an auspicious combination of planetary

 

<span id="page_871">p. 871</span>

 

rulers and their houses, she delivered on the full moon night of the
month of Kârtik one beautiful daughter, the incarnation in part of
Lak<u>s</u>mî. The face of the baby looked like the autumnal moon; Her
two eyes resembled autumnal lotuses and her upper and lower lips looked
beautiful like ripe Bimba fruits. The daughter began, no sooner it was
born, to look on all sides of the lying-in-room. The palm and lower part
of feet were red. The navel was deep and below that there were three
wrinkles. Her loins were circular. Her body was hot in the winter and
cold in the summer and pleasant to touch. Her hairs on the head were
hanging like the roots of the fig tree. Her colour was bright like
Champaka; She was a jewel amongst women. Men and women cannot compare
her beauty. The holy wise men named Her Tulasî. As soon as she was born,
she looked of the female sex, full in every way. Though prevented
repeatedly by all, She went to the forest of Badarî for practising
Tapasyâ. There she practised hard Tapasyâ for one lakh divine years. Her
main object was to get Nârâya<u>n</u>a for her husband. In summer she
practise Panchatapâ (surrounded by fire on four sides and on the top);
in the winter she remained in water and in the rainy season she remained
in the open air and endured the showers of the rain, twenty thousand
years. She passed away thus in eating fruits and water. For thirty
thousand years she subsisted only on the leaves of trees. When the forty
thousandth year came, she subsisted only on air and her body became
thinner and thinner day by day. Then for ten thousand years afterwards
she left eating anything whatsoever and without any aim, stood on only
one leg. At this time the lotus-born Brahmâ, seeing this, appeared there
to grant her boons. On seeing Him, Tulasî immediately bowed down to
Brahmâ, the Four-faced One riding on His vehicle, the Swan. \[Note: --
The vehicle theory of the Devas came from Egypt. The Devas were without
vehicles at first and were faced half-beasts. Then they were rendered
men and their vehicles were fancied as beasts. The face of the Dûrgâ
Devî was thought of as that of a tiger.\]

 

20\. He then addressed her and said :-- “O Tulasî! Ask a boon that you
like. Whether it be devotion to Hari, servantship to Hari, freedom from
old age or freedom from death, I will grant that to you.”

 

21-27. Tulasî said :-- “Father! I now say you my mind. Hear. What is the
use of hiding away my views out of fear or shame to One who knows
everything reigning in One’s Heart.

 

I am Tulasî Gopî (cowherdess); I used to dwell before in the Goloka. I
was a dear she-servant of Radhikâ, the beloved of Kri<u>sn</u>a. I was
also born of Her in part, Her Sakhis (female attendants) used to love
me. Once in Râsa Ma<u>nd</u>alam I was enjoyed by Govinda; but I was not
satiated and while

 

<span id="page_872">p. 872</span>

 

I was lying down in an unconscious state, Râdhâ, the Governess-in-chief
of the Râsa circle, came there and saw me in that state. She rebuked
Gobinda and, out of anger, cursed me :-- ‘Go at once and be born as a
human being.’ At this Govinda spoke to me :-- ‘If you go and practise
Tapas in Bhârata, Brahmâ will get pleased and He will grant you boon.
When you will get Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the Four-armed, born of Me in part as
your husband.’ O Father! Thus speaking, S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a disappeared
out of sight. Out of Râdhâ’s fear, I quitted my body and am now born in
this world. Now grant me this boon that I get the peaceful, lovely,
beautiful Nara for my husband.”

 

28-37. Brahmâ said :-- “O Child Tulasî! The Gopa (cowherd) Sudâmâ was
born of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a’s body. At the present time he is very
energetic, He too, under the curse of Râdhâ, has come and taken his
birth amongst the Dânavas. He is named S’ankha Chû<u>d</u>a. No one is
equal to him in strength. In Goloka, when he saw you before, he was
overpowered with passion for you. Only out of Râdhâ’s influence, he
could not embrace you. That Sudâmâ is Jâtismara (knows all about his
previous births); and you, too, are Jâti Smarâ. There is nothing unknown
to you. O Beautiful One! You will now be his wife. Afterwards you will
get Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the Beautiful and Lovely for your husband. Thus
under the curse of Nârâya<u>n</u>a, you will be transformed into the
world purifying Tulasî tree. You will be the foremost amongst the
flowers and will be dearer to Nârâya<u>n</u>a than His life. No one’s
worship will be complete without Thee as leaf. You will remain as a tree
in Bindrâban and you will be widely known as Vrindâbanî. The Gopas and
Gopis will worship Mâdhava with Your leaves. Being the Presiding Deity
of the Tulasî tree, you will always enjoy the company of Kri<u>sn</u>a,
the best of the Gopas.” O Nârada! Thus bearing Brahmâ’s words, the Devî
Tulasî became very glad. Smile appeared in her face. She then bowed down
to the Creator and said :--

 

38-40. “O Father! I speak now truly to Thee that I am not as devoted to
the four-armed Nârâya<u>n</u>a as I am devoted to S’yâma Sundara, the
two-armed. For my intercourse with Govinda S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a was
suddenly interrupted and my desire was not gratified. It is because of
S’rî Govinda’s words that I prayed for the four-armed. Now it appears
certain that by Thy grace I will get again my Govinda, very hard to be
attained. But, O Father! Do this that I be not afraid of Râdhâ.”

 

41-48. Brahmâ said :-- “O Child! I now give you the sixteen lettered
Râdhâ mantra to you. By Her Grace you will be dear to Râdhâ as Her life.
Râdhikâ will not be able to know anything of your secret

 

<span id="page_873">p. 873</span>

 

dealings. O Fortunate! You will be dear to Govinda like Râdhâ.” Thus
saying, Brahmâ, the Creator of the world, gave her the sixteen lettered
Râdhâ mantra, stotra, Kavacha and mode of worship and
puras’chara<u>n</u>a and He blessed her. Tulasî, then, engaged herself
in worshipping Râdhâ, as directed. By the boon of Brahmâ, Tulasî
attained Siddhi (success) like Lak<u>s</u>mî. Out of the power of the
Siddha mantra, She got her desired boon. She became fortunate in getting
various pleasures, hard to be attained in this world. Her mind became
quiet. All the toils of Tapasyâ disappeared. When one gets the fruit of
one’s labour, all the troubles then transform to happiness. She then
finished her food and drink and slept on a beautiful bed strewn with
flowers and scented with sandal paste.

 

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of
Tulasî in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](bk09ch18)
