[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch20)  [Next](bk09ch22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXI**

 

**On the meeting of Mahâdeva and S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a for an encounter in
conflict**

 

<span id="page_887">p. 887</span>

 

1-33. S’rî Nârâya<u>n</u>a spoke :-- Then the Dânava, the devotee of
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, got up from his flower strewn bed, meditating on
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, early in the morning time, at the Brahmâ Muhûrta.
Quitting his night dress, he took his bath in pure water and put on a
fresh washed clothing. He then put the bright Tilak mark on his forehead
and, performing the daily necessary worship, he worshipped his
I<u>st</u>a devatâ (The Deity doing good to him). He then saw the
auspicious things such as curd, ghee, honey, fried rice, etc., and
distributed as usual, to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as the best jewels, pearls,
clothing and gold. Then for his marching to turn out auspicious, he gave
at the feet of his Guru Deva priceless gems, jewels, pearls, diamonds,
etc., and finally he gave to the poor Brâhmi<u>n</u>s with great
gladness, elephants, horses, wealth, thousands of stores, two lakhs of
cities and one hundred ko<u>t</u>is of villages. He then gave over to
his son, the charge of his kingdom and of his wife, and all the
dominions, wealth, property, all the servants and maid servants, all the
stores and conveyances. He dressed himself for the war and took up bows
and arrows and arrow cases. By the command of the King, the armies began
to gather. Three lakhs of horses, one lakh elephants, one ayuta
chariots, three Ko<u>t</u>is of bowmen, three Ko<u>t</u>is armoured
soldiers and three Ko<u>t</u>is of trident holders got themselves ready.
Then the King counted his forces and appointed one Commander-in-Chief,
(Mahâratha), skilled in arts of

 

<span id="page_888">p. 888</span>

 

warfare, over the whole army. Thus the generals were apppointed over the
three lakh Ak<u>s</u>auhi<u>n</u>î forces and their provisions were
collected by three hundred Ak<u>s</u>auhi<u>n</u>î men. He, then,
thinking of S’rî Hari, started for war, accompanied by his vast army.
(Note :-- One Ak<u>s</u>auhi<u>n</u>î consists of a large army
consisting of 21,870 chariots, as many elephants, 65,610 horses, and
109,350 foot). He then mounted on a chariot built of excellent jewels
and, headed by his Guru and all his other elders, went to S’ankara. O
Nârada! Bhagavân Mahâdeva was at that time, staying on the banks of
Pu<u>s</u>pabhadra. That place was Sidhâs’rama (the hermitage where the
yogic successes had been obtained and can easily be acquired in future
for the Siddhas as well a Siddha K<u>s</u>ettra.) It was the place where
the Muni Kapila practised Tapasyâ, in the holy land of Bhârata. It was
bounded on the east by the western ocean, on the west by the Malaya
mountain, on the south, by the S’rî S’aila mountain and on the north by
the Gandha Mâdana Mountain. It was five yojanas wide and one hundred
times as long. This auspicious river in Bhârata yields great religious
merits and is always full of clear, sparkling running water. She is the
favourite wife of the Salt Ocean and She is very blessed. Issuing from
S’arâvatî Himâlayâs, She drops into the ocean. Keeping the river Gomatî
(Goomti) by her left; She falls into the west ocean.
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, arriving there, saw Mahâdeva under a Peepul tree
near its root with a smiling countenance, like one Ko<u>t</u>i Suns
seated in a yogic posture. His colour was white like a pure crystal; as
if the Fire of Brahmâ was emitting from every pore of His body (burning
with Brahmâ-Teja); He was wearing the tiger skin and, holding the
trident and axe. He dispels the fear of death of His Bhaktas; His face
is quite calm. He, the Lord of Gaurî, is the Giver of the fruits of
Tapasyâ and of all sons of wealth and prosperity. The smiling face of
Âs’uto<u>s</u>a (one who is pleased quickly) is always thinking of the
welfare of the Bhaktas; He is the Lord of the Universe, the Seed of the
universe, the All-form (all-pervading), and the Progenitor of the
universe. He is omnipresent, All pervading, the Best in this universe,
the Destroyer of this universe, the Cause of all causes, and the Saviour
from the hells. He is the Awakener and Bestower of Knowledge, the Seed
of all knowledges, and He Himself is of the nature of Knowledge and
Bliss. Seeing that Eternal Puru<u>s</u>a, the King of the Dânavas at
once descended from his chariot and bowed down with devotion to Him and
to Bhadra Kâlî on His left and and to Kârtikeya on his front. The other
attendants did the same. S’ankara, Bhadra Kâlî and Skanda all blessed
him. Nandis’vara and others got up from their

 

<span id="page_889">p. 889</span>

 

seats on seeing the Dânava King and began to talk with each other on
that subject. The King addressed S’iva and sat by Him. Bhagavân
Mahâdeva, the Tranquil Self, then, spoke to him, thus :-- O King!
Brahmâ, the knower of Dharma and the Creator of the world, is the Father
of Dharrna, The religious Marîchi, a devotee of Vi<u>sn</u>u, is the son
of Brahmâ. The religious Prajâpati Kas’yapa is also the Brahmâ’s son.
Dak<u>s</u>a gladly gave over to Kas’yapa in marriage, his thirteen
daughters. Danu, fortunate and chaste, is also one of them.

 

34-64. Danu had forty sons, all spirited and known as Dânavas. The
powerful Viprachitti was the prominent amongst them. Viprachitti’s son
was Dambha, self controlled and very much devoted to Vi<u>sn</u>u. So
much so that for one lakh years he recited the Vi<u>sn</u>u mantra at
Pu<u>s</u>kara. His Guru (spiritual teacher) was S’ukrâchârya; and, by
his advice, he recited the mantra of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Highest
Self. He got you as his son, devoted to Kri<u>sn</u>a. In your former
birth, you were the chief attendant Gopa (cow-herd) of Kri<u>sn</u>a.
You were very religious. Now, by Râdhikâ’s curse, you are born in
Bhârata, as the Lord of the Dânavas, powerful, heroic, valorous, and
chivalrous. All the things from Brahmâ down to a blade of grass, the
Vai<u>sn</u>avas regard as very trifling; even if they get Sâlokya,
Sâr<u>st</u>i, Sâyujya and Sâmîpya of Hari, they do not care a straw for
that. Without serving Hari, they do not accept those things, even if
those are thrust on them. Even Brahmâhood and immortality, the
Vai<u>sn</u>avas count for nothing. They want to serve Hari
(Sevâ-bhâva). Indrahood, Manuhood, they do not care. You, too, are a
real Kri<u>sn</u>a Bhakta. So what do you care for those things that
belong to the Devas, that are something like false to you. Give back to
the Devas their kingdoms thus and please Me. Let the Devas remain in
their own places and let you enjoy your kingdom happily. No need now for
further quarrels. Think that you all belong to the same Kas’yapa’s
family. The sins that are incurred, for example, the murder of a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>, etc., are not even one-sixteenth of the sins incurred by
hostilities amongst the relatives. If, O King! You think that by giving
away to the Devas their possessions, your property will be diminished,
then think that no one’s days pass ever in one and the same condition.
Whenever Prakriti is dissolved, Brahmâ also vanishes. Again He appears
by the Will of God. This occurs always. True, that knowledge is
increased by true Tapasyâ; but memory fails then. This is certain. He
who is the creator of this world, does his work of creation gradually by
the help of his Knowledge-power (Jñâna-S’akti). In the Satya Yuga,
Dharma reigns in full; in the Tretâ Yuga, one quarter is diminished;
again in the Dvâpara only one-half remains. And in the Kâlî Yuga, only
one quarter remains. Thus Dharma gets increase and decrease. At the end
of the

 

<span id="page_890">p. 890</span>

 

Kâlî, the Dharma will be seen very feeble as the phase of the Moon is
seen very thin on the Dark Moon night. See, again, the Sun is very
powerful in summer; not so in winter. At midday the Sun is very hot; it
does not remain so in the morning and evening. The Sun rises at one
time; then he is considered as young at another time he becomes very
powerful and at another time he goes down. Again in times of distress
(i.e., during the cloudy days) the Sun gets entirely obscured. When the
Moon is devoured by Râhu (in the Lunar Eclipse), the Moon quivers. Again
when the Moon becomes liberated (i.e., when the eclipse passes away) She
becomes bright again. In the Full-Moon night She becomes full but She
does not remain so always. In the Dark fortnight She wanes every day. In
the bright fortnight She waxes every day. In the bright fortnight, the
Moon becomes healthy and prosperous and in the dark fortnight, the Moon
becomes thinner and thinner as if attacked with consumption. In the time
of eclipse She becomes pale and in the cloudy weather, She is obscured.
Thus the Moon also becomes powerful at one time and weak and pale at
another time. Vali now resides in Pâtâla, having lost all his fortunes;
but, at some other time, he will become Devendra (the Lord of the
Devas). This earth becomes at one time covered with grains and the
resting-place of all beings; and, at another time, She becomes immersed
under water. This universe appears at one time and disappears at
another. Everything, moving or non-moving, sometimes appears and again,
at another time, disappears. Only Brahmâ, the Highest Self, remains the
same. By His grace, I have got the name Mrityunjaya (the Conqueror of
Death). I, too, am witnessing many Prakritik dissolutions, I witnessed
repeatedly many dissolutions and will in future, witness many
dissolutions. The Paramâtman becomes of the nature of Prakriti. Again it
is He that is the Puru<u>s</u>a (male principle). He is the Self; He is
the individual soul (Jîva). He thus assumes various forms. And, again,
Lo! He is beyond all forms! He who always repeats His Name and sings His
Glory, can conquer, at some occasion, death. He is not to come under the
sway of this birth, death, disease, old age and fear. He has made Brahmâ
the Creator, Vi<u>sn</u>u the Preserver and Me the Destroyer. By His
Will, we are possessed of those influences and powers. O King! Having
deputed Kâla, Ag<u>n</u>i and Rudra, to do the destruction work, I
Myself repeat only His name and sing His glory, day and night,
incessantly. My name is, on that account, Mrityunjaya. By His Knowledge
Power, I am fearless. Death flies away fast from Me as serpents fly away
at the sight of Garû<u>d</u>a, the Vinatâ;s son. O Nârada! Thus saying,
S’ambhu, the Lord of all, the Progenitor of all, remained silent.
Hearing the above words of S’ambhu, the King thanked Mahâdeva again and
again and spoke in sweet humble words.

 

<span id="page_891">p. 891</span>

 

65-74. S’ankhachûda said :-- The words spoken by Thee are quite true.
Still I am speaking a few words. Kindly hear. Thou hast spoken just now
that very great sins are incurred by kindred hostilities. How is it,
then, that He robbed Vali of his whole possessions and sent him down
into Pâtâla? Gadâdhara Vi<u>sn</u>u could not recover Vali’s glory. But
I have done that. Why did the Devas kill Hira<u>n</u>yâksa and
Hira<u>n</u>yâkas’ipu, S’umbha and the other Dânavas? In by gone days,
we laboured hard when the nectar was obtained out of the churning of the
ocean; but the best fruit was reaped by the Devas only. However, all
these point that this universe is but the mere sporting ground of
Paramâtman, Who has become of the nature of Prakriti (the polarities of
the one and the same current to produce electric effects). Whomsoever He
grants glory and fortune, he only gets that. The quarrel of the Devas
and the Dânavas is eternal. Victory and defeat come to both the parties
alternately. So it is not proper for Thee to come here in this
hostility. For Thou art the God, of the nature of the Highest Self.
Before Thee, we both are equal. So it is a matter of shame, no doubt,
for Thee to stand up against us in favour of the gods. The glory and
fame that will result to Thee, if Thou art victorious, will not be so
much as it will be if we get the victory. On the contrary the inglory
and infamy that will result to Thee if Thou dost get dire defeat will be
inconceivably much more than what would come to us if we are defeated.
(For we are low and Thou art Great.)

 

75-79. Mahâdeva laughed very much when he heard the Dânava’s words and
replied :-- O King! You are descended from the Brâhmi<u>n</u> family. So
what shame shall I incur if I get defeat in this fighting against you.
In former days, the fight took place between Madhu and Kai<u>t</u>abha;
again between Hira<u>n</u>ya Kas’ipu and Hira<u>n</u>yâksa and S’rî
Hari. I also fought with the Asura Tripurâ. Again the serious fight took
place also between S’umbha and the other Daityas and the Highest
Prakriti Devî, the Ruler of all, and the Progenitrix of all and the
Destructrix of all. And, then, you were the Pâri<u>s</u>ada attendant of
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Highest Self.

 

Note :-- S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a is the Eternal Puru<u>s</u>a beyond the
Gu<u>n</u>as. He creates Prakriti. All the creation is effected by Him.
He is the Master of all the S’aktis. These S’aktis come from Him and go
into Him. S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a plays with these S’aktis, these lines of
Forces, very powerful and terrible, indeed, that go to create, preserve
and destroy the whole universe. These Lines of Forces have their three
properties :-- (1) Origin; (2) direction and (3) magnitude. And finally
they come back to their origin. This makes one Kalpa, one Life, one
Moment, one in the Full One. The Gu<u>n</u>as come out of these S’aktis,
these Lines of Forces. S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a

 

<span id="page_892">p. 892</span>

 

is the Great Reservoir, the Great Centre of Forces, Powerful, Lovely and
Terrible. All the events as described here, appear in the intermediate
stages when the Fourth Dimension passes into the Third Dimension, etc.
The Fourth Dimension does not at once turn out into the Third Dimension
but it takes place by degrees. This explains our dreams, visions, etc.,
which, if seen when the mind is pure, turn out to be true.

 

80-82. So the Daityas, that were killed before, cannot be compared with
you. Then why shall I feel shame in fighting against you? I am sent here
by S’rî Hari for saving the Devas. So either give back to the Devas
their possessions, or fight with Me. No need in speaking thus quite
useless talks. O Nârada! Thus speaking, Bhagavân S’ankara remained
silent. S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a got up at once with his ministers.

 

Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter in the Ninth Book on the meeting of
Mahâdeva and S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a for an encounter in conflict in the
Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahârsi
Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](bk09ch22)
