[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch34)  [Next](bk09ch36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXV**

 

**On the description of the various hells for the various sinners**

 

<span id="page_939">p. 939</span>

 

1-44. Dharmarâjan said :-- O Chaste One! Without serving the Gods, the
Karma ties can never be severed. The pure acts are the seeds of purities
and the impure acts lead to impure seeds. If any Brâhma<u>n</u>a goes to
any unchaste woman and eats her food, he will have to go ultimately to
the Kâlasûtra hell. There he lives for one hundred years when ultimately
he gets a human birth when he passes his times as a diseased man and
ultimately he gets purified. Those women who are addicted to their (one)
husbands only are called Pativratâs. Those addicted to two persons are
named Kula<u>t</u>âs; to three, are called Dhar<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>îs; to
four, called Pums’chalîs; to five, six persons, called Ves’yâs; to
seven, eight, nine persons are called Pungîs; and to more than these,
are called Mahâves’yâs. The Mahâves’yâs are unfit to be touched by all
the classes. If any Brâhma<u>n</u>a goes to Kula<u>t</u>â,
Dhar<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>î, Pums’chalî, Pungî, Ves’yâ and Mahâves’yâs, he
will have to go to the Matsyoda Ku<u>nd</u>a. Those who go to
Kula<u>t</u>âs remain there for one hundred years; those who go to
Dhar<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>îs, remain for four hundred years, those who go to
Pums’chalîs for six hundred years; those who go to Ves’yâs, for eight
hundred years;  those who go to Pungîs, remain for one thousand years
and those who go to Mahâves’yâs remain in the Matsyoda Ku<u>nd</u>a for
ten thousand years. My messengers chastise and beat and torment them
very severely. And when their terms expire, the Kula<u>t</u>â-goers
become Tittiris (a bird), the Dhar<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>î-goers

 

<span id="page_940">p. 940</span>

 

become crows, the Pums’chalî-mongers become cuckoos, the Ves’yâ haunters
become wolves; the Pungî-goers become for seven births boars. If any
ignorant person eats food during the lunar and solar eclipses, he goes
to Aruntuda Ku<u>nd</u>a for as many years as there are particles in
that food. He then becomes born diseased with Gulma (a chronic
enlargement of spleen) having no ears nor teeth, and after passing his
time so, he becomes freed of his previous sin. If anybody makes a
promise to give his daughter to one but he gives actually to a different
person, he goes to Pâms’u Ku<u>nd</u>a where he eats ashes for one
hundred years. Again if anybody sells his daughter, he sleeps on a bed
of arrows in Pams’uve<u>st</u>a Ku<u>nd</u>a for one hundred years,
chastised and beaten by My messengers. If any Brâhma<u>n</u>a does not
worship with devotion the phallic emblem of S’iva, he goes to the
dreadful S’ûlaprota Ku<u>nd</u>a for that heinous sin. He remains there
for one hundred years; then he becomes a quadruped animal for seven
births and again he becomes born a Devala Brâhmi<u>n</u> for seven
births when he becomes freed. If any Brâhma<u>n</u>a defeats another
Brâhma<u>n</u>a in a bad useless argument and trifles him and makes him
tremble, he goes to the Prakampana Ku<u>nd</u>a for as many years as
there are hairs on his body. If any woman, being very furious with
anger, chastises and uses harsh words to her husband, she goes to
Ulkâmukha Ku<u>nd</u>a for as many years as there are hairs on his body.
My servants put fiery meteors or torches in her mouth and beat on her
head. At the end of the term, she becomes a human being but she has to
bear the torments of widowhood for seven births. Then she is again born
as diseased; when at last she gets herself freed. The Brâhma<u>n</u>a
woman, enjoyed by a S’ûdra, goes to the terrible dark Andhakûpa hell,
where she remains, day and night, immersed in the impure water and eats
that for fourteen Indra’s life periods. Her pains are unbounded and My
messengers beat her severely and incessantly.

 

At the expiry of the term in that hell, she becomes a female crow for
thousand births, a female boar for one hundred births, a female fox for
one hundred births, a hen for one hundred years, a female pigeon for
seven births, and a female monkey for seven births. Then she becomes a
Châ<u>nd</u>âlî in this Bhârata, enjoyed by all. Then she becomes an
unchaste woman with the pthisis disease, a washerwoman, and then an
oilwoman with leprosy when she becomes freed. O Fair One! The Ves’yâs
live in the Vedhana, and Jalarandhra hells; the Pungîs live in the
Dan<u>d</u>atâ<u>d</u>ana hell; the Kula<u>t</u>âs live in the
Dehachûrna hells; the Svairinîs live in the Dalana hells; the
Dhar<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>îs live in S’o<u>s</u>ana hells. Their pains know
no bounds at all those places. My messengers always beat and chastise
them and they eat always the urine and faeces for

 

<span id="page_941">p. 941</span>

 

one Manvantara. Then, at the expiry of their hell period, they become
worms of faeces for one lakh years when they become freed. If a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a goes to another Brâhma<u>n</u>a’s wife, if a
K<u>s</u>attriya, Vais’ya and S’ûdra do so, they go to the Ka<u>s</u>âya
hell. There they drink the hot Ka<u>s</u>âya water for twelve years when
they become purified. The lotus-born Brahmâ has said that the wives of
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, K<u>s</u>attriyas, etc., live in hells like
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, K<u>s</u>attriyas, etc., and they then get freed. If a
K<u>s</u>attriya or a Vais’ya goes to a Brâhmi<u>n</u>’s wife, he is
involved in the sin of his going to his mother and goes and lives in the
S’ûrpa hell. There the worms of the size of a S’ûrpa bite that
K<u>s</u>attriya, that Vais’ya and that Brâhma<u>n</u>a’s wife. My
messengers chastise them and they have to eat the hot urine. Thus they
suffer pains for fourteen Indra’s life periods. When they become boars
for seven births and goats for seven births, when at last they are
freed. Now if anybody makes a false promise or swears falsely, taking
the Tûlasî leaf in his hands, if anybody makes a false promise, taking
the Ganges water, S’âlagrâma stone, or any other images of God in his
hand; if anybody swears falsely, placing his right palm on the palm of
another; if anybody swears falsely, being in a temple or touching a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a or a cow; if anybody acts against his friends or others,
if he be treacherous or if he gives a false evidence; then all these
persons go to Jvâlâ Mukha hell, and remain there for fourteen Indra’s
life periods, chastised and beaten by My messengers and feeling pain as
if one’s body is being burnt by red hot coal. One who gives a false
evidence, with the Tûlasî (holy basil) in his hand becomes a
Châ<u>nd</u>âla for seven births; one who makes a false promise with the
Ganges water in his hand, becomes a Mlechcha for five births; one who
swears falsely while touching the S’âlagrâma stone, becomes a worm of
the faeces for seven births; one who swears falsely, touching the image
of the God, becomes a worm in a Brâhmi<u>n</u>’s house for seven births;
one who gives a false evidence touching with the right hand, becomes a
serpent for seven births; then he becomes born as a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, void
of the knowledge of the Vedas, when he becomes freed. One who speaks
falsely, while in a temple, is born as a Devala for seven births.

 

45-59. If one swears falsely, touching a Brâhma<u>n</u>a, one becomes a
tiger. Then he becomes dumb for three births, then for three births he
becomes deaf, without wife, without friends, and his family becomes
extinct. Then he becomes pure. Those that rebel against their friends,
become mongoose; the treacherous persons become rhinoceroses; the
hypocrite and treacherous persons become tigers and those who give false
evidences become frogs. So much so, that their seven generations

 

<span id="page_942">p. 942</span>

 

above and seven generations below go to hell. If any Brâhma<u>n</u>a
does not perform his daily duties (Nitya Karma), he is reckoned as
Ja<u>d</u>a  (an inert matter). He has no faith in the Vedas. Rather he
laughs at the Vedic customs. He does not observe vows and fastings; he
blames others who give good advices. Such persons live in Dhûmrândhakâra
hell where they eat dark smoke only. Then he roams about as an aquatic
animal for one hundred births successively. Then he becomes born as
various fishes when he is freed. If anybody jests at the wealth of a
Deva or a Brâhma<u>n</u>a, then he with his ten

generations above and below becomes fallen and he himself goes to the
Dhûmrândhakâra hell, terribly dark and filled with smoke. There his
pains know no bounds and he lives there for four hundred years, eating
smoke only. Then he becomes a mouse for seven births, and he becomes
various birds and worms, various trees and various animals when
ultimately he gets a human birth. If a Brâhmi<u>n</u> earns his
livelihood by being an astrologer or if he be a physician and lives
thereby or if he sells lac, iron, or oil, etc., he goes to the
Nâgav<u>st</u>ana Ku<u>nd</u>a hell where he lives for as many years as
there are hairs on his body, tied up by snakes. Then he becomes born as
various birds; ultimately he gets a human birth and becomes an
astrologer for seven births and a physician for seven births. Then for
sometime he becomes a cowherd (milkman), for sometimes a blacksmith; for
sometimes a painter, when he becomes freed of his sin. O Chaste One!
Thus I have described to you all the famous Ku<u>nd</u>as or hells.
Besides there are innumerable small Ku<u>nd</u>as. The sinners go there
and suffer the fruits of their own Karmas and travel through various
wombs. O Fair One! What more do you now want to hear ? Say.

 

Here ends the Thirty-Fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the description
of the various hells for the various sinners in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am
S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 36](bk09ch36)
