[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch36)  [Next](bk09ch38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXVII**

 

**On the eighty-six Ku<u>nd</u>as and their characteristics**

 

<span id="page_945">p. 945</span>

 

1-60. Dharmarâja said :-- All the Ku<u>nd</u>as (hells) are circular in
form like the Full Moon. Of these, the Vah<u>n</u>iku<u>nd</u>a has the
fire lit at its bottom, by the help of various kinds of stones. This
Ku<u>nd</u>a will not be destroyed till Mahâpralaya comes. Here the
sinners are tormented severely. It looks like a blazing coke. The flames
are rising from it one hundred hands high. In circumference those flames
are two miles. This is named Vah<u>n</u>iku<u>nd</u>a. It is full of
sinners crying loudly. It is constantly watched by My messengers who are
chastising and punishing the sinners. Next comes the Tapta Ku<u>nd</u>a.
It is filled with hot water and full of rapacious animals. The sinners
there are severely beaten by My messengers and they are always crying
out very loudly, which is being echoed and re-echoed all around
terribly. It extends for one mile. This Ku<u>nd</u>a is filled with hot
salt water and the abode of many crows. Then there is the Bhayânaka
Ku<u>nd</u>a. It extends for two miles and it is filled with sinners.
They are being punished by My messengers and they are incessantly
crying, “Save us, save us.”

 

Next comes the Vi<u>st</u>hâ Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is filled with faeces and
excrements where the sinners are moving without any food and with their
palate and throats dry. Its size is two miles and it is very bad and
ugly with foetid and nasty smell. It is always filled with sinners, who
are being chastised by My Dûtas (messengers) and eat those faeces and
excrements. The worms therein are constantly biting and stinging them
and they are crying, “deliver us, deliver us.” Then comes the hot Mûttra
Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is filled with the hot urine and the worms thereof. The
great sinners always dwell here. It measures four miles; and it is quite
dark. My Dûtas always beat them and their throats, lips, palates are all
dry. Then comes the S’le<u>s</u>ma Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is filled with
phlegm and the insects thereof. The sinners dwell in phlegm and eat that
phlegm. Then comes the Gara Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is filled with (factitious)
poison. It measures one mile. The sinners eat this poison and dwell
here. The worms thereof bite them. They tremble at the chastisement of
My Dûtas and cry aloud. My messengers look like serpents, with teeth
like thunderbolt and they are very furious and fierce, with their
throats dry and their words very harsh. Then comes Dûsikâ Ku<u>nd</u>a.
It is filled with the rheum

 

<span id="page_946">p. 946</span>

 

and dirt of the eyes and it measures one mile. Innumerable worms are
born therein. Numberless sinners live there, and as they move, the
insects immediately bite and sting them. Next comes the Vasâ
Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is filled with the serum or marrow of the flesh and it
measures one-half mile. The sinners dwell there, chastised and punished
by My messengers. Then comes the S’ukra Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures two
miles in diameter. The insects, born in the semen, bite the sinners, and
they move on and on. Then comes the Rakta Ku<u>nd</u>a, with very
offensive, foetid smell. It is deep like a well and filled with blood.
The sinners dwell here, drinking blood. The insects therein are always
biting them. Then follows the As’ru Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures in size
one fourth the measure of the well (above-mentioned). It is always
filled with hot tears of the eyes; and many sinners are seen there
living weeping and crying and being bitten by the snakes. Then there is
the Gâtra Mala Ku<u>nd</u>a. The sinners are chastised and punished
there by My messengers and being bitten by the insects thereof, they eat
the dirts of the body and dwell there. Then comes the Kar<u>n</u>a Mala
Ku<u>nd</u>a. The sinners eat the wax of the ear and fill the place. The
insects always bite them and they are crying aloud. It measures one
fourth the measure of a Vâpî. Then comes the Majjâ Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is
filled with fat and marrow, emitting foetid offensive odour. It measures
one fourth the measure of a Vâpî. The great sinners always dwell there.
Then comes the Mâmsa Ku<u>nd</u>a. This is filled with the greasy flesh.
It measures (one-fourth) that of a Vâpî. Those who sell their daughters
dwell here. My messengers always chastise and punish them and horrible
insects bite and sting them and they cry, out of fear and agony, “Save
us, save us,” and eat at times that flesh. Then come in succession the
four Ku<u>nd</u>as Nakha, Loma and others. They also measure each
one-fourth that of a Vâpî. The sinners dwell there, always chastised by
My messengers. Next comes the very hot Tâmra Ku<u>nd</u>a. Burning cokes
exist on the top of very hot coppers. There are lakhs and lakhs of very
hot copper figures in that Ku<u>nd</u>a. The sinners, being compelled by
My messengers, are made to embrace each of these hot copper figures and
they cry loudly and live there. It measures four miles. Then come the
burning Angâra Ku<u>nd</u>a and the hot Lauha Dhâra Ku<u>nd</u>a. Here
the sinners are made to embrace the hot iron figures and, feeling
themselves burnt, cry out of fear and agony. Whenever My messengers
punish them, they immediately cry out, “Save us, save us.” It measures
eight miles; and it is pitch dark and very awful. This is named the hot
Lauha Ku<u>nd</u>a. Then come the Charma Ku<u>nd</u>a and Surâ
Ku<u>nd</u>a. The sinners, beaten by My men, eat the skin and drink the
hot urine and

 

<span id="page_947">p. 947</span>

 

dwell there. Then comes the S’âlmalî Ku<u>nd</u>a; it is overspread with
thorns and thorny trees, causing intense pain. It measures two miles.
Millions and millions of great sinners are made by My men to fall from
the tops of those trees down below where their bodies get pierced by
very sharp thorns, six feet long; and thus they dwell there, beaten by
My men. Out of thirst, their palates get dried up; and they cry out
repeatedly, “Water, water.” Out of fear, they get very anxious and then
their heads get broken by the clubs brought down on them by My men. So
they move there like the beings burnt in very hot oil. Then comes the
Vi<u>s</u>oda Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures two miles in diameter and is
filled with the poison of the serpent called Tak<u>s</u>akas. My men
punish the sinners and they drink the poison thereof and dwell there.
Then comes the hot Taila Ku<u>nd</u>a. There are no insects here. Only
the great sinners dwell. All around burning coals are flaring and when
My men beat the sinners, they run hither and thither. It is filled with
horrible intense darkness and it is exceedingly painful. It looks
dreadful and measures two miles. Then comes the Kunta Ku<u>nd</u>a.
Sharp pointed iron weapons like tridents are placed in order all round.
The sinners, pierced by those weapons, are seen encircling the
Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures one-half mile. Beaten by My men, their throats
and lips get dried up. Then comes the Krimi Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is filled
with terrible worms and insects, snake-like with sharp teeth, of the
size of a S’anku (a Sâl tree) deformed and hideous looking; and it is
filled with pitch darkness, terrible to look at. Beaten by My men, the
great sinners dwell there. Then comes the Pûya Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures
eight miles in diameter (or in circumference?). The sinners dwell and
eat the pus thereof and, are beaten by My men. Then comes the Sarpa
Ku<u>nd</u>a. Millions and millions of snakes of the length of a Tâl
tree are existing there. These serpents encircle the sinners and as they
bite them, My men also beat them at the same time. So there arises a
general hue and cry, “Save us, save us; we are done for.” Then come in
order the Dams’a Ku<u>nd</u>a, Mas’aka Ku<u>nd</u>a, and the Garala
Ku<u>nd</u>a. These are filled with gad-flies, mosquitoes, and poison
respectively. Each of them measures one mile. The sinners’ hands and
feet are tied up. So when the gad-flies and mosquitoes fiercely sting
them, and My men violently beat them simultaneously, they raise a loud
uproar and are made to move on, in their tied states by My persons.
Their bodies get thoroughly reddened and covered with blood by the
stinging of the flies, etc. Then come the Vajra Ku<u>nd</u>a and the
Vris’chika Ku<u>nd</u>a filled respectively with Vajra insects and the
scorpions. Each of them measures one-half that of the Vâpî. The

 

<span id="page_948">p. 948</span>

 

sinners that dwell there, are incessantly bitten by insects (Vajras and
scorpions). Then come in order the S’ara Ku<u>nd</u>a, S’ûla
Ku<u>nd</u>a, and the Kha<u>d</u>ga Ku<u>nd</u>as. They are filled
respectively with arrows, spikes, and scimitars. Each of them measures
one half that of the Vâpî. The sinners are pierced by arrows, etc., and
become covered over with blood and dwell there. Then comes the Gola
Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is filled with boiling hot water and it is pitch dark.
The sinners live there, bitten by the insects. This Ku<u>nd</u>a
measures half that of the Vâpî. The insects bite them and My men beat
them so their fear knows no bounds; everyone of them is weeping and
crying loudly. This Ku<u>nd</u>a is filled with hideously offensive
smells. So the pains of the sinners are infinite. The Nakra Ku<u>nd</u>a
comes next. It measures half the Vâpî, is filled with millions and
millions of crocodiles living in water. The horrible looking deformed
sinners live there. The Kâka Ku<u>nd</u>a then follows. The sinners here
are being bitten by hundreds of deformed crows eating faeces, urines and
phlegm. Then come the Manthâna Ku<u>nd</u>a and Vîja Ku<u>nd</u>a. These
are filled respectively with insects called Manthâna and Vîja. Each of
them measures one hundred Dhanus (one Dhanu - four hastas). Those
insects are stinging the sinners and they cry out very loudly. Then
follows the Vajra Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures one hundred Dhanus. Many
insects with their teeth as hard as thunderbolt live there and bite the
sinners who cry out loudly. It is pitch dark. Then comes the hot
Pâ<u>s</u>â<u>n</u>a Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures twice that of the Vâpî.
It is so built of hot stones as it resembles a burning mass of coal. The
sinners become restless with the heat and turn round and round in the
middle. Then comes the Pâ<u>s</u>â<u>n</u>a Kunda and the Lâlâ Kunda.
The Pâ<u>s</u>â<u>n</u>a Ku<u>nd</u>a is made up of the sharp pointed
stones, having sharp edges. Innumerable sinners dwell there. Many red
beings live in the Lâlâ Ku<u>nd</u>a. Then comes the Mapî Kunda. Its
size is one hundred Dhanus and its depth is two miles. It is made up of
hot stones, each measuring the Anjana mountain. The sinners, beaten and
driven by My persons, move on and on in the middle. Then comes the
Chûr<u>n</u>a Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures two miles (in circumference) and
is filled with (seven) chûr<u>n</u>as (powders). The sinners, driven and
beaten by My men, go on, restless hither and thither and eat the powders
and get themselves burnt. Then comes the Chakra Ku<u>nd</u>a. Here a
potter’s wheel with sixteen sharp-edged spokes is constantly whirling
round and round; the sinners are being crushed by this wheel.

 

61-80. Then comes the Vakra Ku<u>nd</u>a. Its depth is eight miles. lt
is fashioned very much curved; and with and sharp slope it has gone
down. It is built on the plan of a mountain cave, filled with hot water
and it is enveloped with deep dense darkness. The aquatic animals there
are biting

 

<span id="page_949">p. 949</span>

 

the sinners, who got very much restless and are crying out very loudly.
Then comes the Kûrma Ku<u>nd</u>a. Here millions and millions of
tortoises in the water awfully distorted, are biting the sinners. Then
comes the Jvâlâ Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is built of fierce fiery flames. It
measures two miles in circumference. The sinners here are always in
great difficulty, with intense pain and crying out loudly. Next follows
the Bha<u>s</u>ma Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures two miles. The sinners get
themselves well burnt in hot ashes and live there, eating the ashes. It
is filled with hot stones and hot irons. The sinners here are always
being burnt in hot irons and hot stones and their throats and palates
are being parched up. Then comes the Dagdha Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is deep and
horrible. It measures two miles in circumference. My messengers threaten
always the sinners there. Then comes the Sûchî Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is
filled with salt water. Waves are always rising there. It is filled with
various aquatic animals making all sorts of noises. It measures eight
miles in circumference and it is deep and dark. The sinners here cannot
see each other and are bitten by the animals. Pained very much, they cry
out loudly. Then comes the Asipattra Ku<u>nd</u>a. On the top surface of
the Ku<u>nd</u>a there is a very big Tâl tree very high. The edges of
the leaves of this tree are sharp like the edge of a sword. One mile
below this Tâl tree is situated the Ku<u>nd</u>a. The sharp-edged Tâl
leaves, then, fall on the bodies of the sinners from the height of a
mile and they get cut and wounded; blood comes out of them and the
sinners, in great pain, cry out “save, save.” It is very deep, very dark
and filled with Rakta Kî<u>t</u>a a kind of blood like insects. This is
the horrible Asipatra Ku<u>nd</u>a. Next comes the K<u>s</u>ura Dhâra
Ku<u>nd</u>a, measuring one hundred Dhanus (one Dhanu - four hastas). It
is filled with keen-edged weapons, as sharp as nice razors. The blood of
the sinners is flowing here profusely. Then comes the Sûchî Mukha
Ku<u>nd</u>a, filled with sharp weapons of the form of long needles. It
measures fifty Dhanus. The sinners get pierced by them end are
constantly emitting blood. Their intense pain knows no bounds. Then
comes the Gokâmukha Ku<u>nd</u>a; inhabited by a sort of insect, called
Gokâ. They look like mouths; hence they are named Gokâmukha. It is deep
like a well and it measures twenty Dhanus. The great sinners suffer an
intense amount of pain there. They have got to keep their mouths always
downwards as the Gokâ insects always bite and sting them. Then comes the
Nakra Ku<u>nd</u>a. It resembles like the mouth of a crocodile and
measures sixteen Dhanus. It is deep like a well and numbers of sinners
dwell there. Then comes the Gaja Dams’a Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures one
hundred Dhanus. Next comes the Gomukha Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures thirty
Dhanus and resembles the mouth of a cow. It gives incessant pains and
troubles to the sinners.

 

<span id="page_950">p. 950</span>

 

81-101. Then comes the Kumbhîpâka Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is like a wheel
resembling that of this Kâlachakra, very horrible; and it is rotating
incessantly. It looks like a water-jar, measuring eight miles, and it is
quite dark. Its depth is one lakh Puru<u>s</u>as of the height of
100,000 persons. There are many other Ku<u>nd</u>as, Tapta Taila
Ku<u>nd</u>a and Tapta Taila Tâmra Ku<u>nd</u>a, etc., within it. This
Ku<u>nd</u>a is filled with almost unconscious great sinners and
insects. They beat each other and cry out loudly. My messengers also
threaten them with clubs and Mu<u>s</u>alas. So at times they fall
dizzy-headed, at times they get unconscious, and sometimes they get up
and cry. O Fair One! The numbers of sinners here equal to four times
that of all the other sinners in all the other Ku<u>nd</u>as. They know
no death, however much you beat them. Their lives persist. For the body
is built up for sufferance, it is indestructible. This Kumbhîpâka
Ku<u>nd</u>a is the chief of all the Ku<u>nd</u>as. This Ku<u>nd</u>a
where the sinners are tied to a thread built by Kâla, where My men lift
the sinners on high at one time, and sink them down below at another
time, where the sinners becoming suffocated for a long time, get
unconscious, where their sufferings know no bounds, where it is filled
with boiling oil, is named the Kâlasutra Ku<u>nd</u>a. Then comes the
Matsyoda Ku<u>nd</u>a, hollow like a well. It is filled with boiling
water and it measures twenty-four Dhanus. Next comes the Aba<u>t</u>oda
Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures one hundred Dhanus. The sinners get their
bodies burned and chastised by My persons, live there. No sooner they
drop into the water of this Ku<u>nd</u>a, then they are attacked with
all sorts of diseases. Then comes the Krimikantuka Ku<u>nd</u>a. The
sinners are bitten by the Krimi Kantuka insects and cry out loudly,
creating a general consternation and live there. Its another name is
Aruntuda Ku<u>nd</u>a. Next comes the Pâms’u Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures
one hundred Dhanus. It is overspread with burning rice husks. The
sinners eat those hot husks and live there. Then comes the
Pas’ave<u>s</u>tana Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures two miles. No sooner the
sinners fall in this Ku<u>nd</u>a than they are twined round by this
rope or Pâs’a. Hence its name. Then comes the Sûlaprota Ku<u>nd</u>a. It
measures twenty Dhanus. No sooner the sinners fall here than they are
encircled with the Sûlâstra (darts). Then comes the Prakampana
Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures one mile. It is filled with ice-cold water.
The sinners, going there, shiver at once. Next follows the Ulka
Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures twenty Dhanus. It is filled with burning to
ashes and meteors. My messengers thrust the torches and meteors into the
mouths of the sinners living there. Next comes the Andha-Kûpa
Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is pitch-dark, shaped like a well, circular and very
horrible. The sinners beat each other and eat the insects thereof. Their
bodies are burnt with hot water; they cannot see anything on account of
dire darkness.

 

<span id="page_951">p. 951</span>

 

102-118. The Ku<u>nd</u>a where the sinners are pierced by various
weapons is known as the Vedhana Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures twenty Dhanus.
Then comes the Da<u>nd</u>atâ<u>d</u>a<u>n</u>a Ku<u>nd</u>a. It
measures sixteen Dhanus. The sinners dwell here, threatened by My
messengers. Then comes the Jâlarandhra Ku<u>nd</u>a. Here the sinners
live encompassed by a great net as fishes, etc., are tied in a net. Next
comes the Dehachûr<u>n</u>a Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is quite dark and its depth
is that of the height of one ko<u>t</u>i persons; its circumference is
twenty Dhanus. The sinners, here, encompassed by iron chains are made to
fall below where their bodies are reduced to powders and they are inert
and almost unconscious. The Ku<u>nd</u>a where the sinners are crushed
and threatened by My messengers is known as the Dalana Ku<u>nd</u>a; it
measures sixteen Dhanus in circumference. Next comes the S’o<u>s</u>ana
Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is deep up to the height of one hundred persons and it
is very dark. It measures thirty Dhanus. On falling on the hot sand, the
throats and palates of sinners get dried up. Their pain knows no bounds.
Hence it is called the S’o<u>s</u>ana Ku<u>nd</u>a. Then comes the
Ka<u>s</u>a Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures one hundred Dhanus. It is filled
with the juices of skins and its smell is very offensive. The sinners
eat those astringent waters and live there. Then comes S’ûrpa
Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures twelve Dhanus and is extended like a winnowing
basket. It is filled with hot iron dust and many sinners live there,
eating those foetid iron dusts. Next comes the Jvâlâmukha Ku<u>nd</u>a.
It is filled with red hot sand. From the (bottom) centre rises a flame,
over-spreading the mouth of the Ku<u>nd</u>a. It measures twenty Dhanus.
The sinners are burnt here by the flame and live awfully; they get
fainted no sooner they are dropped in this Ku<u>nd</u>a. Then comes the
Dhumrândha Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is dark, quite filled with smoke. Within
that the hot bricks are placed. The sinners get suffocated with smoke;
and their eye-sight becomes also obstructed. It measures one hundred
Dhanus. Then comes the Nâgabe<u>st</u>ana Ku<u>nd</u>a. It is encircled
and filled with the serpents. No sooner the sinners are let fall there,
than they are surrounded by the snakes. O Sâvitrî! Thus I have spoken to
you about the eighty-six Ku<u>nd</u>as and their characteristics. Now
what more do you want to hear? Say.

 

Here ends the Thirty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on the eighty-six
Ku<u>nd</u>as and their characteristics in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S'rî
Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 38](bk09ch38)
