[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch45)  [Next](bk09ch47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XLVI**

 

**On the anecdote of <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî**

 

<span id="page_985">p. 985</span>

 

1\. Nârada said :-- “O Thou, the foremost of the Knowers of the Vedas! I
have heard from you the anecdotes of many Devîs. Now I want to hear the
lives of other Devîs also. Kindly describe.”

 

2\. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- “O Best of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as! The lives
and glorious deeds of all the Devîs are described separately. Now say,
which lives you want to hear.”

 

3\. Nârada said :--“O Lord! <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî, Mangalâ Cha<u>nd</u>î,
and Manasâ, are the parts of Prakriti. Now I want to hear the lives of
them.”

 

4-22. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Child! The sixth part of Prakriti is
named as <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî. The Devî <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî is the
Presiding Deity of infants and children; She is the Mâyâ of Vi<u>sn</u>u
and She bestows sons to all. She is one of the sixteen Mâtrikâs. She is
known by the name of Devasenâ. She performs Vratas (vows); She is the
chaste and dearest wife of Skanda. She decides on the longevity of
children and is always engaged in their preservation. So much so, that
this Siddha Yoginî always keeps the children on her side.

 

O Best of Brâhma<u>n</u>as! I will now talk about the method of
worshipping this Devî and the history about Her bestowing children that
I heard from Dharma Deva. Hear. Svâyambhuva Manu had one son Priyavrata.
He was a great Yogîndra and remained in practising austerities. So he
was not inclined to have any wife. At last by the effort and request of
Brahmâ, he got himself married. But many days passed, and he could not
see the face of a son. Then Mahar<u>s</u>i Kas’yapa became his priest in
the Putre<u>st</u>i Sacrifice (to get a son); and when the sacrifice was
over, he gave the sacrificial offering called charu to his wife Mâlinî.
On eating the charu, the queen Mâlinî become pregnant. For twelve Deva
years she held the womb. After twelve years she delivered a full
developed son, of a golden colour; but the son was lifeless and his two
eyeballs were upset. At this, the friends’ wives became very sorry and
began to weep. The mother of the child became so very sorrowful that she
became senseless. O Muni! The King himself took the son on his breast
and went to the burning ground. There with his child on his breast he
began to cry aloud. Rather he got himself ready to quit his own

 

<span id="page_986">p. 986</span>

 

life than leave the son from away his breast. At this time he saw in the
space overhead an aerial car, white as crystal, made of excellent
jewels, coming towards him. The car was shining with its own lustre,
encircled with woven silken cloth, which added to its beauty.
Innumerable garlands of variegated colours gave it a very nice and
charming appearance. On that car was seated a Siddha Yoginî, very
beautiful, of a lovely appearance of a colour like that of white
champakas, always youthful, smiling, adorned with jewel ornaments, ever
gracious to show favour to the devotees. On seeing Her, the King
Priyavrata placed the child from his breast on the ground and began to
worship Her and chant hymns to Her with great love and devotion. And he
then asked that peaceful lady, the wife of Skanda, Who was shining like
a summer sun :-- “O Beautiful! Who art Thou? Whose wife art Thou and
whose daughter art Thou? From Thy appearance it seems that Thou art
fortunate and respected amongst the female sex.”

 

23-24. O Nârada! In ancient times, when the Daityas dispossessed the
Devas of their positions, this Lady was elected as a general and got
victory for the Devas; hence She was named Devasenâ. Hearing the words
of the King Priyavrata, Devasenâ, who fought for the Devas and was all
good to the whole world, said :--

 

25-42. O King! I am the mind-born daughter of Brahmâ. My name is
Devasenâ. The Creator before created Me out of His mind and made Me over
to the hands of Skanda. Amongst the Mâtrikâs, I am known as
<u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî, the wife of Skanda. I am the sixth part of
Prakriti; hence I am named <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî. I give sons to those
who have no sons, wives to those who have no wives, wealth to the poor,
and I give works to those who are workers (karmîs.)

 

Happiness, pain, fear, sorrow, joy, good, and wealth and adversity all
are the fruits of Karmas. As the result of one’s Karmas, people get lots
of sons and it is due to the result of one’s Karma again that people are
denuded of all the issues of their family. As the result of Karma, the
people get dead sons; and as the result of Karma the people get long
lives. All enjoy the fruits of their Karmas, whether they be well
qualified, or deformed or whether they have many wives, or whether they
have no wife, whether they be beautiful, religious, diseased, it is all
through Karmas, Karmas. Disease comes out of their Karmas. Again they
get cured by their Karmas. So, O King! It is stated in the Vedas that
Karma is the most powerful of all. Thus saying, Devasenâ took the dead
child on her lap; and, by the wisdom, early made the child alive. The
King saw the child, of a golden colour got back his life and

 

<span id="page_987">p. 987</span>

 

began to smile. Thus bidding goodbye to the King, Devasenâ took the
child and became ready to depart. At this the King’s palate and throat
got dry and he began again to chant hymns to Her. The Devî
<u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî became pleased at the stotra made by the King. The
Devî then addressed the King and said :-- “O King! All that is stated in
the Vedas, is made up of Karmas. You are the son of Svâyambhuva Manu,
and the Lord of the three worlds. You better promulgate My worship in
the three worlds and you yourself worship Me. Then I will give you your
beautiful son, the lotus of your family. Your son, born in part of
Nârâya<u>n</u>a, will be famous by the name of Suvrata. He will be
well-qualified, a great literary man, able to remember his conditions in
his former lives, the best of Yogis, performer of one hundred Yajñas,
the best of all, bowed down by the K<u>s</u>attriyas, strong as one lakh
powerful elephants, wealthy, fortunate, pure, favourite of literary
persons, learned and bestower of the fruits of the ascetics, renowned
and bestower of wealth and prosperity to the three worlds.” Thus saying
Devasenâ gave the the child to the king. When the king promised that he
would promulgate Her worship, the Devî granted him boons and went up to
the Heavens.

 

43-57. The king, too, becoming very glad and surrounded by his
ministers, returned to his own abode and informed all about the son. The
ladies of the house, become highly delighted when they heard everything.
On the occasion of the son’s getting back his life, the king performed
everywhere auspicious ceremonies. The worship of <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî
Devî commenced. Wealth was bestowed to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s. Since then,
on every sixth day of the bright fortnight in every month, great
festivals in honour of <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî began to be celebrated.
Since then, throughout the kingdom, on every sixth day after the birth
of a child in the lying-in-chamber, <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî began to
be worshipped. On the twenty-first day, the auspicious moment, at the
ceremony of giving rice to a child for the first time, when sixth months
old, and on all other auspicious ceremonies of the children,
<u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî’s worship was made extant and the king himself
performed those worships with great care and according to due rules. Now
I will tell you about the Dhyânam and method of worship and stotra as I
heard from Dharma Deva, and as stated in Kauthuma S’âkhâ. Hear. He has
said :-- In a S’âlagrâma stone, in a jar, on the root of a Ba<u>t</u>a
tree, or drawing the figure on the floor of the rooms, or making an
image of <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî, the sixth part of Prakriti and
installing it, one should worship the Devî. The Dhyânam is this :-- “O
Devasenâ Thou art the bestower of good sons, the giver of good luck;
Thou art mercy and kindness and the progenitor of the world; Thy colour
is

 

<span id="page_988">p. 988</span>

 

bright like that of the white Champaka flowers. Thou art decked with
jewel ornaments. Thou art pure, and the highest and best Devî. Obeisance
to Thee! I meditate on Thee.” Thus meditating, the worshipper should
place flower on his own head. Then again meditating and uttering the
principal mantra one is to offer the Pâdya (water for washing feet),
Arghya, Âchamanîya, scents, flowers, dhûp, lights, offerings of food and
best roots and fruits and one should worship thus with various things
Sasthî Devî. “Om Hrîm <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devyai Svaha” is the
principal Mantra of <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî. This great Mantra of
eight letters a man should repeat as his strength allows. After the
Japam, the worshipper should chant hymns with devotion and undivided
attention and then bow down. The Stotra (hymn) of <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî
Devî as per Sâma Veda is very beautiful and son-bestowing.The lotus-born
Brahmâ has said :-- If one repeats (makes Japam) this eight lettered
mantra one lakh of times, one gets certainly a good son. O Best of
Munis! Now I am going to say the auspicious stotra of
<u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî as composed by Priyavrata. Hear.

 

58-73. One’s desires are fulfilled when one reads this very secret
stotra. Thus the King Priyavrata said :-- “O Devî, Devasenâ! I bow down
to Thee. O Great Devî! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the bestower of
Siddhis; Thou art peaceful; obeisance to Thee! Thou art the bestower of
good; Thou art Devasenâ; Thou art <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî, I bow down
to Thee! Thou grantest boons to persons; Thou bestowest sons and wealth
to men. So obeisance to Thee! Thou givest happiness and mok<u>s</u>a;
Thou art <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî; I bow down to Thee. Thou thyself art
Siddha; so I bow down to Thee. O <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî! Thou art the
sixth part of this creation; Thou art Siddha Yoginî, so I bow down to
Thee. Thou art the essence, Thou art Sâradâ; Thou art the Highest Devî.
So I bow down again and again to Thee. Thou art the Presiding Deity
<u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî of the children; I bow down to Thee. Thou
grantest good; Thou Thyself art good and Thou bestowest the fruits of
all Karmas. O Thou O <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî! Thou shewest thy form to
thy devotees; I bow down to Thee! Thou art S’uddha Sattva and respected
by all the persons in all their actions. Thou art the wife of Skanda.
All worship Thee. O <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî! Thou hadst saved the
Devas. So obeisance to Thee O <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî! Thou hast no
envy, no anger; so obeisance to Thee. O Sures’varî! Give me wealth, give
me dear things, give me sons. Give me respect from all persons; give me
victory; slay my enemies. O Mahe<u>s</u>varî! Give me Dharma; give me
name and fame; I bow down again again to <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî. O
<u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî! worshipped reverentially by all! Give me
lands, give me subjects, give me learning; have welfare for me; I bow
down again and

 

<span id="page_989">p. 989</span>

 

again to <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî.” O Nârada! Thus praising the Devî,
Priyavrata got a son, renowned and ruling over a great kingdom through
the favour of <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî. If any man that has no son,
hears this stotra of <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî for one year with
undivided attention, he gets easily an excellent son, having a long
life. If one worships for one year with devotion this Devasenâ and hears
this stotra, even the most barren woman becomes freed from all her sins
and gets a son. Through the grace of <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî, that son
becomes a hero, well qualified, literate, renowned and long-lived. If
any woman who bears only a single child or delivers dead children hears
with devotion for one year this stotra, she gets easily, through the
Devî’s grace, a good son. If the father and mother both hear with
devotion, this story during the period of their child’s illness, then
the child becomes cured by the Grace of the Devî.

 

Here ends the Forty-sixth chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of
<u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî Devî in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 47](bk09ch47)
