[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch48)  [Next](bk09ch50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XLIX**

 

**On the anecdote of Surabhi**

 

<span id="page_1000">p. 1000</span>

 

1\. Nârada said :-- “O Bhagavân! Who was that Surabhi, who came down
from the region of Goloka. I want to hear Her life. Kindly describe.”

 

2-23. Nârâya<u>n</u>a spoke :-- “O Devar<u>s</u>i! The Devî Surabhi
sprang in the Goloka. She was the first in the creation of cows; and,
from Her, all the other cows have come. She is the Presiding Deity of
the cows. I will now speak Her history from the very beginning. Hear.
Before, She appeared in the holy Vrindâban. One day the Lord of Râdhâ,
surrounded by the Gopîs, was going gladly with Râdhâ to the Holy
Vrindâvan. There he began to enjoy in a solitary place with great
pleasure. He is All Will and suddenly a desire arose in His mind that He
would drink milk. Then He created easily the Devî Surabhi, full of milk,
with Her calf, from His own left side. The calf of Surabhi is nothing
else but Her wish personified. Seeing Surabhi, S’rîdâma milked Her in a
new earthen jar. The milk is more sweet than even the nectar and it
prevents birth and death! The Lord of the Gopîs drank the milk. What
milk dropped out of the jar, created a big tank! The tank measured one
hundred Yojanas in length and in breadth and is known in Goloka by the
name of K<u>s</u>îrasâgara. The Gopîkas and Râdhâ play therein. At the
will of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, Whose Nature is All Will, that tank become
full of excellent gems and jewels. Then, from every pore of Surabhi,
there appeared suddenly one lakh ko<u>t</u>i Kâmadhenus (cows who yields
according to one’s desires). So much so that every Gopa who used to live
there in Goloka had one Kâmadhenu and each house had one such. Their
calves again became so many that no limit can be put to them. Thus, by
degrees, the whole universe was filled with cows. This is the origin of
the Cow Creation. O Nârada! Surabhi was first worshipped by Bhagavân
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. Therefore She is so much honoured everywhere. On the
day next the Divâlî night (new moon in the month of October), Surabhi
was worshipped by the command of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. This is heard from
the mouth of Dharma Deva. O Child! Now hear the Dhyânam, Stotra, and the
method of worship of Surabhi as

 

<span id="page_1001">p. 1001</span>

 

mentioned in the Vedas. I will now speak on this. “Om Surabhyai namah,”
is the principal six-lettered mantra of Surabhi. If anybody repeats this
mantra one lakh times, he becomes Siddha in this mantra. This is like
Kalpa Vrik<u>s</u>a (a tree yielding all desires) to the devotees. The
Dhyânam of Surabhi is mentioned in the Yajur Vedas. Success, prosperity,
increase and freedom come as the result of worshipping Surabhi. The
Dhyânam runs as follows :-- “O Devî Surabhi! Thou art Lak<u>s</u>mî,
Thou art best, Thou art Râdhâ; Thou art the chief companion of S’rî
Râdhâ, Thou art the first and the source of the cow-creation, Thou art
holy and Thou sanctifiest the persons; Thou fufillest the desires of the
devotees and Thou purifiest the whole universe. Therefore I meditate on
Thee.” Reciting this Dhyânam, the Brâhma<u>n</u>as worship the Devî
Surabhi in jars, on the heads of cows, or on the pegs where cows are
fastened or on S’âlagrâma stone or in water or in fire. O Muni! He who
worships with devotion on the next day morning after Divâlî night,
becomes also worshipped in this world. Once a day in the Vârâhakalpa
Surabhi did not yield milk, by the influence of Vi<u>sn</u>u Mâyâ. The
Devas became very anxious. Then they went to the Brahmaloka and began to
praise Brahmâ. At His advice, Indra began to chant hymns (Stotra) to
Surabhi :--

 

24-33. The Devendra said :-- “O World-Mother! O Devî! O Mahâ Devî! O
Surabhi! Thou art the source of the cow creation. Obeisance to Thee!
Thou art the dear companion of Râdhâ; Thou art the part of Kamalâ; Thou
art dear to S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a; Thou art the mother of cows, I bow down
to Thee. Thou art like the Kalpa Vrik<u>s</u>a (a tree yielding all
desires), Thou art the Chief of all; Thou yieldest milk, wealth and
prosperity and increase thereof. So I bow down to Thee. Thou art
auspicious, Thou art good, Thou bestowest cows. Obeisance to Thee! Thou
givest fame, name and Dharma. So I bow down to Thee.” O Nârada! Thus
hearing the praise sung by Indra, the eternal Surabhi, the originator of
the world, became very glad and appeared in the Brahmaloka. Granting
boon to Mahendra, so very rare to others and desired by him, Subrabhi
went to the Goloka. The Devas, also, went back to their own abodes. The
whole world was now full of milk; clarified butter came out of the milk;
and from clarified butter sacrifices began to be performed and the Devas
were fed and they became pleased. O Child! He who recites this holy
Stotra of Surabhi with devotion, gets cows, other wealth, name, fame and
sons. The reciting of this Stotra qualifies one as if he had bathed in
all the sacred places of pilgrimages and he had acquired the fruits of
all the sacrifices. Enjoying happiness in this world, be goes in

 

<span id="page_1002">p. 1002</span>

 

the end to the Temple of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. There living long in the
service of Kri<u>sn</u>a, he becomes able to be a son of Brahmâ.

 

Here ends the Forty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of
Surabhi in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 50](bk09ch50)
