[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch39)  [Next](bk09ch41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XL**

 

**On the birth of Lak<u>s</u>mî in the discourse of Nârada and
Nârâya<u>n</u>a**

 

<span id="page_959">p. 959</span>

 

1-2. Nârada said :-- “O Lord! How did the eternal Devî Mahâ
Lak<u>s</u>mî the dweller in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, the beloved of
Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the Presiding Deity of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, come down to
the earth and how She, became the daughter of the ocean? By whom was She
first praised? Kindly describe all these in detail to me and oblige.”

 

3-10. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! In ancient days when on
Durvâsâ’s curse, Indra was dispossesed of his kingdom, all the Devas
came down to earth. Lak<u>s</u>mî, too, getting angry, quitted the
Heavens, out of pain and sorrow and went to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha and took
the shelter of Nârâya<u>n</u>a. The Devas, then, went to Brahmâ with
their hearts full of sorrow and, taking Him from there, they all went to
Nârâya<u>n</u>a in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. Going there they all took refuge of
the Lord of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. They were very much distressed and their
throats, palate and lips were quite dry. At that time Lak<u>s</u>mî, the
wealth and prosperity of all, came down on earth by the command of
Nârâya<u>n</u>a and became born in part as the daughter of the ocean.
The Devas, then with the Daityas churned the K<u>s</u>îroda Ocean and,
out of that, Mahâ

 

<span id="page_960">p. 960</span>

 

Lak<u>s</u>mî appeared. Vi<u>sn</u>u looked on Her. Her joy knew no
bounds. She smiling, granted boons to the Devas and then offered a
garland of flowers on the neck of Nârâya<u>n</u>a (as a symbol of
marriage celebrated). O Nârada! the Devas, on the other hand, got back
their kingdoms from the Asuras. They then worshipped and chanted hymns
to Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî and since then they became free from further
dangers and troubles.

 

11-12. Nârada said :-- “O Bhagavân! Durvâsâ was the best of the Munis;
he was attached to Brahmâ and had spiritual knowledge. Why did he curse
Indra? What offence had he committed? How did the Devas and Daityas
churn the ocean? How, and by what hymns Lak<u>s</u>mî became pleased and
appeared before Indra? What passed on between them. Say all this, O
Lord.”

 

13-25. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- In ancient days, Indra the Lord of the
three worlds, intoxicated with wine and becoming lustful and shameless,
began to enjoy Rambhâ in a lonely grove. After having enjoyed her, he
became attracted to her; his mind being wholly drawn to her, he remained
there in that forest, his mind becoming very passionate. Indra then saw
the Muni Durvâsâ on his way from Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha to Kailâs’a burning
with the fire of Brahmâ. From the body of the Ri<u>s</u>i, emitted, as
it were, the rays of the thousand midday Suns. On his head was the
golden matted hair. On his breast there was the hoary holy thread; he
wore torn clothes; on his hands there was the Da<u>nd</u>a and
Kama<u>nd</u>alu; on his forehead there was the bright Tilaka in the
form of the Crescent Moon. (Tilaka - a sectarian mark on the forehead
made with coloured earth or sandalpaste.)

 

One hundred thousand disciples, thoroughly-versed in the Vedas and the
Vedângas, were attending him. The intoxicated Purandara, seeing him,
bowed down to him and he began to chant with devotion hymns to his
disciples also. They were very glad. The Ri<u>s</u>i with his disciples
then blessed Indra and gave him one Pârijâta flower.

 

When the Muni was returning from the region of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha,
Vi<u>sn</u>u, gave him that beautiful Pârijâta flower. Old age, death,
disease, sorrows, etc., all are removed by the influence of the flower;
and the final liberation is also attained. The Devendra was intoxicated
with his wealth; so taking the flower given by the Ri<u>s</u>i, he threw
it on the head of the elephant Airârata. No sooner the elephant touched
the flower, than he became suddenly like Vi<u>sn</u>u, as it were, in
beauty, form, qualities, fire and age. The elephant, then, forsook Indra
and

 

<span id="page_961">p. 961</span>

 

entered into a dense forest. The Lord of the Devas could, in no way, get
him under his control. On the other hand, the Muni Durvâsâ seeing that
Mahendra had thus dishonoured the flower, became inflamed with rage and
cursed him saying, “O Indra! You are so mad with wealth that you have
dishonoured me. The flower that I gave you so lovingly, you have thrown
that, out of vanity, on the elephant’s head!

 

26-46. No sooner one gets the food, water, fruits that had been offered
to Vi<u>sn</u>u, one should eat that at once. Otherwise one incurs the
sin of Brahmahattyâ. If anybody forsakes the things offered to
Vi<u>sn</u>u, that he has got perchance, he becomes destitute of wealth,
prosperity, intelligence, and his kingdom. And if he eats the food
already offered to Vi<u>sn</u>u with devotion, he then elevates his
hundred families passed before him and he himself becomes liberated
while living. If anybody daily eats Vi<u>sn</u>u’s Naivedyam (food
offered to Vi<u>sn</u>u) and bow down before Him or worships Hari with
devotion and chants hymns to Him, he becomes like Vi<u>sn</u>u in energy
and wealth. By mere touch with the air round about his body, the places
of pilgrimage become all purified. O You Stupid! The earth becomes
purified by the contact of the dust of the feet of such a one devoted to
Vi<u>sn</u>u. If anybody eats the food unoffered to Hari and flesh that
is not offered to any Deity; if he eats the food of any unchaste woman,
any woman without husband and sons, the food offered at any S’ûdra’s
Srâdh (funeral) ceremony, the food offered by a Brâhma<u>n</u>a, who is
a priest to the S’ûdras in honour of a S’iva Lingam, the food of a
Brahmâ<u>n</u> priest who subsists on the presents of a temple, the food
of one who sells his daughter, the food of one who subsists on dealing
with womb concerns, the leavings of others, the stale food left after
all others had eaten, the food of the husband of an unmarried girl
(twelve years old in whom menstruation has commenced), the driver of
oxen, the food of one uninitiated in one’s I<u>st</u>amantram, of one
who burns a corpse, of a Brâhmi<u>n</u> who goes to one not fit for
going, the food of a rebel against friends, of one who is faithless,
treacherous, who gives false evidence, the food of a Brâhmi<u>n</u> who
accepts offerings in a sacred place of pilgrimage, all his sins
(incurred in the ways above-mentioned) will be removed if he eats the
prasâdam of Vi<u>sn</u>u, i.e., the food offered to Vi<u>sn</u>u. Even
if a Châ<u>nd</u>âla be attached to the service of Vi<u>sn</u>u, he
sanctifies his millions of persons born in his family before him. And
the man who is devoid of the devotion to Hari is not able even to save
himself. If anybody takes unknowingly the remains of an offering (such
as flowers) made to Vi<u>sn</u>u,

 

<span id="page_962">p. 962</span>

 

he will certainly be freed from all the sins incurred in his seven
births. And if he does this knowingly and with intense devotion, he will
certainly be freed of all sorts of sins incurred in his Ko<u>t</u>i
births. So, O Indra! I am a devotee of S’rî Hari. And when you have cast
away the Pârijâta to flower offered by me on the elephant’s head, then I
say unto you that the Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî will leave you and She will go
back to Nârâya<u>n</u>a. I am highly devoted to Nârâya<u>n</u>a; so I do
not fear anybody, I fear neither the Creator, nor Kâla, the Destroyer,
nor old age, nor death; what to speak of other petty persons! I do not
fear your father Prajâpati Kas’yapa nor do I fear your family priest
Brihaspati. Now he, on whose head there lies the flower Pârijâta offered
by me, verily he should be worshipped by all means.” Hearing these words
of Durvâsâ, Indra became bewildered with fear, and being greatly
distressed and holding the feet of Muni, cried out loudly. He said :--
“The curse is now well inflicted on me; and it has caused my delusion to
vanish. Now I do not want back my Râja Lak<u>s</u>mî from you; instruct
me on knowledge. This wealth is the source of all coils; it is the cause
of the veil to all knowledge, it hides the final liberation and it is a
great obstacle on the way to get the highest devotion.”

 

47-67. The Muni said :--“This birth, death, old age, disease, and
afflictions, all come from wealth and the manipulation of great power.
Being blind by the darkness of wealth, he does not see the road to
Mukti. The stupid man that is intoxicated with wealth is like the one
that is intoxicated with wine. Surrounded by many friends, he is
surrounded by the unbreakable bondage. The man that is intoxicated with
wealth, blind with property and overwhelmed with these things has no
thought for the real knowledge. He who is Râjasik, is very much addicted
to passions and desires; he never sees the path to Sattvagu<u>n</u>a.
The man that is blind with sense-objects is of two kinds, firstly,
Râjasik and secondly Tâmasik. He who has no knowledge of the S’âstras is
Tâmasik and he who has the knowledge of the S’âstras is Râjasik. O Child
of the Devas! Two paths are mentioned in the S’âstras; one is Pravritti,
going towards the sense objects and the other is Nivritti, going away
from them. The Jîvas first follow the path of Pravritti, the path that
is painful, gladly and of their own accord like a mad man. As bees,
blind with the desire of getting honey, go to the lotus bud and get
themselves entangled there, so the Jîvas, the embodied souls, desirous
first of getting enjoyments come to this very painful circle of births
and deaths, this worldly life, which in the end is realised as vapid and
the only cause of old age, death, and sorrow and get themselves
enchained there.

 

<span id="page_963">p. 963</span>

 

For many births he travels gladly in various wombs, ordained by his own
Karmas, till at last by the favour of gods, he comes in contact with the
saints. Thus one out of a thousand or out of a hundred finds means to
cross this terrible ocean of world. When the saintly persons kindle the
lamp of knowledge and show the way to Mukti, then the Jîva makes an
attempt to sever this bondage to the world. After many births, many
austerities and many fastings, he then finds safely the way to Mukti,
leading to the highest happiness. O Indra! What you asked me, I thus
heard from my Guru.” O Nârada! hearing the words of the Muni Durvâsâ
Indra became dispassionate towards the Samsâra. Day by day his feeling
of dispassion increased. One day, when he returned to his own home from
the hermitage of the Muni, he saw the Heavens overspread by the Daityas
and it had become terrible. At some places outrage and oppression knew
no bounds; some places were devoid of friends; at some places, some
persons had lost their fathers, mothers, wives, relations; so no rest
and repose could be found. Thus, seeing the Heavens in the hands of the
enemies, Indra went out in quest of Brihaspati, the family preceptor of
the Devas. Seeking to and fro Indra ultimately went to the banks of the
Mandâkinî and saw that the Guru Deva had bathed in the waters of the
Mandâkinî and sitting with his face turned towards the East towards the
Sun, was meditating on Para Brahmâ, Who has His faces turned everywhere.
Tears were flowing from his eyes and the hairs of the body stood erect
with delight. He was elderly in knowledge; the spiritual Teacher of all,
religious, served by all great men; he was held as most dear to all the
friends. Those who are Jñânins regard him as their Guru. He was the
eldest of all his brothers; he was considered as very unpopular to the
enemies of the Devas. Seeing the family priest Brihaspati merged in that
state of meditation, Indra waited there. When after one Prahara (three
hours), the Guru Deva got up, Indra bowed down to his feet and began to
weep and cry out repeatedly. Then he informed his Guru about his curse
from a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, his acquiring the true knowledge as so very rare,
and the wretched state of Amarâvatî, wrought by the enemies.

 

68-92. O Best of Brâhma<u>n</u>as! Hearing thus the words of the
disciple, the intelligent speaker Brihaspati spoke with his eyes
reddened out of anger. “O Lord of the Devas! I have heard everything
that you said; do not cry; have patience; hear attentively what I say.
The wise politicians of good behaviour, with moral precepts, never lose
their heads and get themselves distressed in times of danger. Nothing is
everlasting; whether property or adversity; all are transient;

 

<span id="page_964">p. 964</span>

 

they only give troubles. All are under one’s own Karma; one is master of
one’s own Karma. What had been done in previous births, so one will have
to reap the fruits afterwards. (Therefore property or adversity, all are
due to one’s own Karma.) This happens to all persons eternally, births
after births. Pain and happiness are like the ring of a rolling wheel.
So what pain is there? It is already stated that one’s own Karma must be
enjoyed in this Holy Bhârata. The man enjoys the effects of his own
Karmas, auspicious or inauspicious. Never the Karma gets exhausted in
one hundred Ko<u>t</u>i Kalpas, without their effects being enjoyed. The
Karma, whether auspicious or inauspicious must be enjoyed. Thus it is
stated in the Vedas and as well by S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Supreme
Spirit. Bhagavân S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a addressed Brahmâ, the lotus-born, in
the Sâma Veda Sâkhâ that all persons acquire their births, whether, in
Bhârata or in any other country, according to the Karma that he had
done. The course of a Brâhma<u>n</u>a comes though this Karma; and the
blessings of a Brâhma<u>n</u>a come again by this Karma. By Karma one
gets great wealth and prosperity and by Karma again one gets poverty.
You may take one hundred Ko<u>t</u>i births; the fruit of Karma must
follow you. O Indra! The fruit of Karma follows one like one’s shadow.
Without enjoyment, that can never die. The effects of Karma become
increased or decreased according to time, place, and the person
concerned. As you will give away anything to persons, of different
natures, in different times and in different places, your merit acquired
will also vary accordingly. Gifts made on certain special days bring in
Ko<u>t</u>i times the fruits (merits, pu<u>n</u>yam) or infinite times
or even more than that. Again gifts, similar in nature, made in similar
paces yield pu<u>n</u>yam the same, in character also. Gifts made in
different countries yield pu<u>n</u>yams, Ko<u>t</u>i times, infinite
times, or even more than that. But similar things given to similar
persons yield similar pu<u>n</u>yams. As the grains vary in their
natures as the fields differ, so gifts made to different persons yield
different grades of pu<u>n</u>yas infinitely superior or infinitely
inferior as the case may be.

 

Giving things to a Brâhma<u>n</u>a on any ordinary day yields simple
pu<u>n</u>ya only. But if the gift be made to a Brahmâ<u>n</u> on an
Amavasyâ day (new moon day) or on a Sankrânti day (the day when the Sun
enters another’s sign) then hundred times more pu<u>n</u>yam is
acquired. Again charities made on the Châturmâsya period (the vow that
lasts for four months in the rainy season) or on the full moon day,
yield infinite pu<u>n</u>yams. So charities made on the occasion of the
lunar eclipses yield Ko<u>t</u>i times the result and if made on the
occasion of the solar eclipse yield ten times more pu<u>n</u>yams.
Charities made on Ak<u>s</u>ayaya Tritîyâ or the Navamî day yield
infinite and endless results. So charities on other holy days yield
religious merits

 

<span id="page_965">p. 965</span>

 

higher than those made on ordinary days. As charities made on holy days
yield religious merits, so bathing, reciting mantrams, and other holy
acts yield meritorious results. As superior results are obtained by
pious acts; inferior results are obtained by impious acts. As an earthen
potter makes pots, jars, etc., out of the earth with the help of rod,
wheel, earthen cups or plates and motion, so the Creator awards
respective fruits to different persons, by the help of this thread
(continuity) of Karma. Therefore if you want to have cessation of this
fruition of Karma, then worship Nârâya<u>n</u>a, by whose command all
these things of Nature are created. He is the Creator of even Brahmâ,
the Creator, the Preserver of Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Preserver, the Destroyer
of S’iva, the Destroyer and the Kâla (the great Time) of Kâla (the
Time). S’ankara has said :-- He who remembers Madhusûdana (a name of
Vi<u>sn</u>u) in great troubles, his dangers cease and happiness
begins.” O Nârada! The wise Brihaspati thus advised Indra and then
embraced him and gave him his hearty blessings and good wishes.

 

Here ends the Fortieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the birth of
Lak<u>s</u>mî in the discourse of Nârada and Nârâya<u>n</u>a in the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 41](bk09ch41)
