[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch23)  [Next](bk09ch25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXIV**

 

**On the glory of Tulasî**

 

<span id="page_897">p. 897</span>

 

1\. Nârada said :-- How did Nârâya<u>n</u>a impregnate Tulasî? Kindly
describe all that in detail.

 

2-11. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- For accomplishing the ends of the Devas,
Bhagavân Hari assumed the Vai<u>sn</u>avî Mâyâ, took the Kavacha from
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a and assuming his form, went to the house of Tulasî.
Dundubhis (celestial drums) were sounded at Her door, shouts of

 

<span id="page_898">p. 898</span>

 

victory were proclaimed and Tulasî was informed. The chaste Tulasî,
hearing that sound very gladly looked out on the royal road from the
window. Then for auspicious observances, She offered riches to the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s; then She gave wealth to the panegyrists (or bards
attached to the courts of princes), to the beggars, and the other
chanters of hymns. That time Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a alighted from His
chariot and went to the house of the Devî Tulasî, built of invaluable
gems, looking exceedingly artistic and beautiful. Seeing her dear
husband before her, She became very glad and washed his feet and shed
tears of joy and bowed down to Him. Then She, impelled by love, made him
take his seat on the beautiful jewel throne and giving him sweet scented
betels with camphor, began to say :-- “Today my life has been crowned
with success. For I am seeing again my lord returned from the battle.”
Then she cast smiling glances askance at him and with her body filled
with rapturous joy lovingly asked him the news of the war in sweet words
:--

 

12-13. O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Now tell me of your heroic valour,
how you have come out victorious in war with Mahâdeva who destroys
countless universes. Hearing Tulasî’s word, the Lord of Lak<u>s</u>mî,
in the guise of S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, spoke these nectar-like words with
a smiling countenance.

 

14-17. O Dear! Full one Samvatsara the war lasted betwixt us. All the
Daityas were killed. Then Brahmâ Himself came and mediated. Peace, then,
was brought about and by the command of Brahmâ, I gave over to the Devas
their rights. When I returned to my home, S’iva went back to His
S’ivaloka. Thus saying, Hari, the Lord of the world, slept and then
engaged in sexual intercourse with her. But the chaste Tulasî, finding
this time her experience quite different from what She used to enjoy
before, argued all the time within herself and at last questioned him
:--

 

18-22. Who are you? O Magician! By spreading your magic, you have
enjoyed me. As you have taken my chastity, I will curse you. Bhagavân
Nârâya<u>n</u>a, hearing Tulasî’s words and being afraid of the curse,
assumed His real beautiful figure. The Devî then saw the Eternal Lord of
the Devas before her. He was of a deep blue colour like fresh
rain-clouds and with eyes like autumnal lotuses and with playful Lîlâs
equivalent to tens and tens of millions of Love personified and adorned
with jewels and ornaments. His face was smiling and gracious; and he
wore his yellow-coloured robe. The love-stricken Tulasî, seeing That
Lovely Form

 

<span id="page_899">p. 899</span>

 

of Vâsudeva, immediately fell senseless; and at the next moment,
regaining consciousness, she began to speak.

 

23-27. O Lord! Thou art like a stone. Thou hast no mercy. By hypocrisy
Thou hast destroyed my chastity, my virtue and for that reason didst
kill my husband. O Lord! Thou had no mercy; Thy heart is like a stone.
So Let Thee be turned into a stone. Those who declare Thee as a saint,
are no doubt mistaken. Why didst Thou for the sake of others, kill
without any fault, another Bhakta of Thine. Thus speaking, Tulasî
overpowered with grief and sorrow, cried aloud and repeatedly gave vent
to lamentations. Seeing her thus very distressed, Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the
Ocean of Mercy, spoke to her to cheer her up according to the rules of
Dharma.

 

28-102. O Honoured One! For a long time you performed tapasyâ in this
Bhârata, to get Me. S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, too, performed tapasyâ for a
long time to get you. By that tapas, S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a got you as
wife. Now it is highly incumbent to award you also with the fruit that
you asked for. Therefore I have done this. Now quit your this terestrial
body and assume a Divine Body and marry Me. O Râme! Be like
Lak<u>s</u>mî. This body of yours will be known by the name of
Ga<u>nd</u>akî, a very virtuous, pure and pellucid stream in this holy
land of Bhârata. Your hairs will be turned into sacred trees and as they
will be born of you, you will be known by the name of Tulasî. All the
three worlds will perform their Pûjâs with the leaves and flowers of
this Tulasî. Therefore, O Fair-faced One! This Tulasî will be reckoned
as the chief amongst all flowers and leaves. In Heavens, earth, and the
nether regions, and before Me, O Fair One, you will reign as the chief
amongst trees and flowers. In the region of Goloka, on the banks of the
river Virajâ, in the Râsa circle (the celestial ball dance,) where all
amorous sentiments are played in Vrindârana forest, in Bhâ<u>n</u>dîra
forest, in Champaka forest, in the beautiful Chandana (Sandal Forests
and in the groves of Mâdhavî, Ketakî, Ku<u>nd</u>a, Mallikâ, and Mâlatî,
in the sacred places you will live and bestow the highest religious
merits. All the Tîrthas will reside at the bottom of the Tulasî tree and
so religious merits will accrue to all. O Fair-faced One! There I and
all the Devas will wait in expectation of the falling of a Tulasî leaf.
Anybody who will be initiated and installed with the Tulasî leaves
water, will get all the fruits of being initiated in all the sacrifices.
Whatever pleasure Hari gets when thousands and thousands of jars filled
with water are offered to him, the same pleasure He will get when one
Tulasî leaf will be offered to Him. Whatever fruits are acquired by
giving Ayuta cows as presents, those will be also acquired by giving
Tulasî leaves. Especially

 

<span id="page_900">p. 900</span>

 

if one gives Tulasî leaves in the month of Kârtik, one gets the fruits
same as above mentioned. If one drinks or gets the Tulasî leaf water at
the momentous Time of Death, one becomes freed of all sins and is
worshipped in the Vi<u>sn</u>u Loka. He who drinks daily the Tulasî leaf
water certainly gets the fruit of one lakh horse sacrifices. He who
plucks or culls the Tulasî leaf by his own hand and holding it on his
body, quits his life in a Tîrath, goes to Vi<u>sn</u>u Loka. Whoever
holds in his neck the garland made up of Tulasî wood, gets certainly the
fruit of horse sacrifices at every step. He who does not keep his word,
holding the Tulasî leaf in his hand, goes to the Kâlasûtra Hell as long
as the Sun and Moon last. He who gives false evidence in the presence of
the Tulasî leaf, goes to the Kumbhîpâka Hell for the life-periods of
fourteen Indras. He who drinks or gets a bit of the Tulasî leaf water at
the time of death, certainly goes to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, ascending on a
car made up of jewels. Those who pluck or cull the Tulasî leaves in the
Full Moon night, on the twelfth lunar day, on the passing of the sun
from one sign to another, the mid-day, or on the twilights, on the
night, while applying oil on their bodies, on the impurity periods, and
while putting on night dresses, verily eat off the Nârâya<u>n</u>a’s
head. O Chaste One! The Tulasî leaf kept in the night, is considered
sacred. It is considered good in S’râddha, vow ceremony, in the making
over of any gift, in the installation of any image or in worshipping any
Deva. Again, the Tulasî leaf fallen on the ground or fallen in water or
offered to Vi<u>sn</u>u, if washed out can be used in holy and other
purposes. Thus, O Good One! You will remain as tree in this earth and
will remain in Goloka as the Presiding Deity thereof and will enjoy
daily the sport with Kri<u>sn</u>a. And also you will be the Presiding
Deity of the river Ga<u>nd</u>akî and thus bestow religious merits in
Bhârata; you will be the wife of the Salt Ocean, which is My part. You
are very chaste; in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha you will enjoy me as Râma lives
with Me. And as for Me, I will be turned into stone by your curse; I
will remain in India close to the bank of the river Ga<u>nd</u>akî.
Millions and millions of insects with their sharp teeth will make rings,
(the convolutions in the S’âlagrâma or sacred stones), on the cavities
of the mountains there, representing Me. Of these stones, those that
have one door (entrance hole), four convolutions, adorned by the garland
of wild flowers (having a mark like this) and which look like fresh
rain-cloud, are called Lak<u>s</u>mî Nârâya<u>n</u>a Mûrtis (forms). And
those that have one door, four convolutions and look like fresh
rain-clouds but no garlands are called Lak<u>s</u>mî Jânardana Chakras
(discus). Those that have two doors, four convolutions, and decked with
mark like cow’s hoof and void of the garland mark are called Raghunâtha
chakras. Those that are very small in size, with two Chakras and look
like fresh rain

 

<span id="page_901">p. 901</span>

 

clouds and void of the garland marks are named Vâmana Chakras. Those
that that are very small in size, with two Chakras and the garland mark
added, know then to be the S’rîdhara Chakras. These always bring in
prosperity to the household. Those that are big, circular, void of
garland mark, with two circular Chakras, are known as Dâmodara forms.
Those that are mediocre in size, with two Chakras and marked as if
struck by an arrow, having marks of arrows and bow-cases are known as
Ra<u>n</u>a-Râmas. Those that are middling, with seven Chakras, having
marks of an umbrella and ornaments, are called Râjarâjes’varas. They
bestow the royal Lak<u>s</u>mî to persons. Those that have twice seven
chakras, and are big, looking like fresh rain-clouds are named Anantas.
They bestow four fold fruits (Dharma, wealth, desire and liberation).
Those that are in their forms like a ring, with two chakras, beautiful,
looking like rain-clouds, having cow-hoof marks and of mediocre size are
named Madhusûdanas. Those that have one Chakra are called Sudars’anas.
Those that have their Chakras hidden are called Gadâdharas. Those that
have two Chakras, looking horse-faced, are known as Hayagrîvas. O Chaste
One! Those that have their mouths very wide and extended, with two
Chakras, and very terrible, are known as Narasimhas. They excite
Vairâgyas to all who serve them. Those that have two Chakras, mouths
extended and with garland marks (elliptical marks) are called
Lak<u>s</u>mî Nrisinghas. They always bless the householders who worship
them. Those that have two Chakras near their doors (faces), that look
even and beautiful, and with marks manifested are known as Vâsudevas.
They yield all sorts of fruits. Those that have their Chakras fine and
their forms like fresh rain-clouds and have many fine hole marks within
their wide gaping facets are called Pradyumnas. They yield happiness to
every householder. Those that have their faces of two Chakras stuck
together and their backs capacious, are known as
Sa<u>n</u>kar<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>as. They always bring in happiness to the
householders. Those that look yellow, round and very beautiful are
Anirudhas. The sages say, they give happiness to the householder. Where
there is the S’âlagrâma stone there exists S’rî Hari Himself; and where
there is Hari, Lak<u>s</u>mî and all the Tîrthas dwell there.
Worshipping S’âlagrâm S’ilâ, destroys the Brahmahatyâ (killing a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>) and any other sin whatsoever. In worshipping the
S’âlagrâma stone looking like an umbrella, kingdoms are obtained; in
worshipping circular S’ilâs,

great prosperity is obtained; in worshipping cart-shaped stones,
miseries arise; and in worshipping stones, whose ends look like spears
(S’ûlas), death inevitably follows. Those whose facets are distorted,
bring in poverty; and yellow stones bring in various evils and
afflictions. Those whose Chakras look broken, bring in diseases; and
those whose Chakras

 

<span id="page_902">p. 902</span>

 

are rent asunder bring in death certainly. Observing vows, making gifts,
installing images, doing S’râddhas, worshipping the Devas, all these
become highly exalted, if done before the S'âlagrâma S’ilâ. One acquires
the merits of bathing in all the Tîrthas and in being initiated in all
the sacrifices, if one worships the Sâlagrâma S’ilâ. What more than
this, that the merits acquired by all the sacrifices, all the Tîrthas,
all vows, all austerities and reading all the Vedas are all acquired by
duly worshipping by the holy S’âlagrâma S’ilâ. He who performs his
Abhi<u>s</u>’eka ceremony always with S’âlagrâma water (being sprinkled
with S’âlagrâma water at the initiation and Installation ceremonies),
acquires the religious merits of performing all sorts of gifts and
circumambulating the whole earth. All the Devas are, no doubt, pleased
with him who thus worships daily the S’âlagrâma. What more than this,
that all the Tîrthas want to have his touch. He becomes a Jîvanmukta
(liberated while living) and becomes very holy; ultimately he goes to
the region of S’rî Hari and remains in Hari’s service there and dwells
with him for countless Prakritic dissolutions. Every sin, like Brahmâ
Hatyâ, flies away from him as serpents do at the sight of Garu<u>d</u>a.
The Devî Vasundharâ (the Earth) becomes purified by the touch of the
dust of his feat. At his birth, all his predecessors (a lakh in number),
are saved. He who gets the S’âlagrâma S’ilâ water during the time of his
death, he is freed of all his sins and goes to the Vi<u>sn</u>u Loka and
gets Nirvâ<u>n</u>a; he becomes freed entirely from the effects of Karma
and he gets, no doubt, dissolved and diluted for ever in (the feet of)
Vi<u>sn</u>u. He who tells lies, holding S’âlagrâma in his hands, goes
to the Kumbhîpâka Hell for the life-period of Brahmâ. If one does not
keep his word, uttered with the S’âlagrâma stone in his hand, one goes
to the Asipatra Hell for one lakh manvantaras. He who worships the
S’âlagrâma stone without offering Tulasî leaves on it or separates the
Tulasî leaves from the stone, will have to suffer separation from his
wife in his next birth. So if one does not offer the Tulasî leaves in
the conchshell, for seven births he remains without his wife and he
becomes diseased. He who preserves the S’âlagrâma stone, the Tulasî and
the conchshell, in one place, becomes very learned and becomes dear to
Nârâya<u>n</u>a. Look! He who casts his semen once in his wife, suffers
intense pain, no doubt, at each other’s separation. So you become dear
to S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a for one Manvantara. Now, what wonder! That you
will suffer pain, at his bereavement. O Nârada! Thus saying, S’rî Hari
desisted. Tulasî quitted her mortal coil and assumed a divine form,
began to remain in the breast of S’rî Hari like S’rî Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî.
Hari also went with her to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. Thus Lak<u>s</u>mî,
Sarasvatî, Gangâ, and Tulasî, all the four came so

 

<span id="page_903">p. 903</span>

 

very dear to Hari and are recognised as Îs’varîs. On the other hand, the
mortal coil of Tulasî, no sooner quitted by Tulasî, became transformed
into the river Gandakî. Bhagavân Hari, too, became also converted into a
holy mountain, on the banks thereof, yielding religious merits to the
people. The insects cut and fashion many pieces out of that mountain. Of
them, those that fall into the river, yield fruits undoubtedly. And
those pieces that fall on the ground become yellow coloured; they are
not at all fit for worship. O Nârada! Thus I have spoken to you
everything. What more do you want to hear now? Say.

 

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the glory of
Tulasî in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](bk09ch25)
