[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch14)  [Next](bk09ch16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter XV**

** **

**On the anecdote of Tulasî**

 

<span id="page_863">p. 863</span>

 

1-6. Nârada said :-- O Bhagavân! How came the pure chaste Tulasî to be
the wife of Nârâya<u>n</u>a? Where was Her birth place? And what was She
in Her previous birth? What family did She belong to? Whose daughter was
She? And what austerities did She practise, that She got

 

<span id="page_864">p. 864</span>

 

Nârâya<u>n</u>a for Her husband, Who is above Prak<u>r</u>iti, not
liable to change without any effort, the Universal Self, Para Brahmâ and
the Highest God; Who is the Lord of all, omniscient, the Cause of all,
the Receptacle of all, Omnipresent, and the Preserver of all. And how
did Tulasî, the chief Devî of Nârâya<u>n</u>a, turn out into a tree?
Herself quite innocent, how She was attacked by the fierce Asura? O
Remover of all doubts! My mind, plain and simple, has become restless. I
am eager to hear all this. So kindly cut asunder all my doubts.

 

7-40. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! The Manu Dak<u>s</u>a
Sâvar<u>n</u>i was very religious, devoted to Vi<u>sn</u>u, of wide
renown, of a great name, and born with Vi<u>sn</u>u's parts.
Dak<u>s</u>a Sâvar<u>n</u>i’s son Brahmâ Sâvar<u>n</u>i was also very
religious, devoted to Vi<u>sn</u>u and of a pure S'uddha Sattva
Gu<u>n</u>a. Brahmâ Sâvar<u>n</u>i's son, Dharma Sâvar<u>n</u>i was
devoted to Vi<u>sn</u>u and He was the master of his senses. Dharma
Sâvar<u>n</u>i's sons Rudra Sâvar<u>n</u>i was also a man of restraint
and very devoted. Rudra Sâvar<u>n</u>i's son was Deva Sâvar<u>n</u>i,
devoted to Vi<u>sn</u>u. Deva Sâvar<u>n</u>i's son was Indra
Sâvar<u>n</u>i. He was a great Bhakta of Vi<u>sn</u>u. His son was
Vri<u>s</u>adhvaja. But He was a fanatic S'aiva (devoted to S'iva). At
his house S'iva Himself remained for three Yugas according to the Deva
measure. So much so that Bhagavân Bhûtanâtha loved him more than His own
son. Vri<u>s</u>adhvaja did not recognise Nârâya<u>n</u>a, nor
Lak<u>s</u>mî nor Sarasvatî nor another body. He discarded the worship
of all the Devas. He worshipped S'ankara only. The greatly exciting
Lak<u>s</u>mî Puja (worship of Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî) in the month of
Bhâdra and S’rî Pañchamî Puja in the month of Mâgha, which are approved
of by the Vedas, Vri<u>s</u>adhvaja put an entire stop to these and the
Sarasvatî Puja. At this the Sun became angry with the King
Vri<u>s</u>adhvaja, the discarder of the holy thread, the hater of
Vi<u>sn</u>u, and cursed Him thus :-- “O King! As you are purely devoted
to S’iva and S’iva alone, and as you do not recognise any other Devas, I
say within no time, you will be deprived of all your wealth and
prosperity.” S'ankara, hearing this curse, became very angry and taking
His trident, ran after the Sun. The Sun, becoming afraid, accompanied
His father Kas'yapa and took refuge of Brahmâ. Bhagavân S'ankara went to
the Brahmâ Loka, with trident in His hands. Brahmâ became afraid of
Mahâdeva and took Sun to the region of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. Out of terror,
the throats of Brahmâ, Kas'yapa, and Sun became parched and dry and they
all went afraid for refuge to Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the Lord of all. They all
bowed down to Him and praised Him frequently and finally informed Him of
the cause of their coming and why they were so much afraid.
Nârâya<u>n</u>a showed them mercy and granted them “Abhaya” (no fear). O
You! Who are afraid, take rest. What cause of fear there can be to you,
when I am here!

 

<span id="page_865">p. 865</span>

 

Whoever remembers Me, wherever he may be, involved in danger or fear, I
go there with the Sudars'an disc in My hand and save him. O Devas! I am
always the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of this universe. In the
form of Vi<u>sn</u>u, I am the Preserver; in the form of Brahmâ, I am
the Creator; and in the form of Mahes'a, I am the Destroyer. I am S’iva;
I am you; and I am the Sûrya, composed of the three qualities. It is I
who assumes many forms and preserves the universe. Better go to your
respective places. What fear can ye suspect? I say, all your fears due
to S'ankara, are verily removed from this day. Bhagavân S'ankara, the
Lord of all, is the Lord of the Sâdhus. He always hears the words of His
Bhaktas; and He is kind to them. He is their Self. Both the Sun and
S’iva are dearer to Me than My life. No one is more energetic than
S'ankara and the Sun. Mahâdeva can easily create ten million Suns and
ten million Brahmâs. There is nothing impossible with S'ûlapâni. Having
no consciousness of any outer thing, immersed, day and night, in
meditating on Me with His whole heart concentrated, He is repeating with
devotion My Mantra from His five faces and He always sings My glories. I
am also thinking, day and night, of His welfare. Whoever worships Me in
whichever way, I also favour him similarly. Bhagavân Mahâ Deva is of the
nature of S’iva, all auspiciousness; He is the presiding deity of S'iva,
that is, liberation. It is because liberation is obtained from Him, He
is called S’iva. O dear Nârada! While Nârâya<u>n</u>a was thus speaking,
the trident bolder Mahâdeva, with his eyes red like reddened lotuses,
mounting on His bull, came up there and getting down from His Bull,
humbly bowed down with devotion to the Lord of Lak<u>s</u>mî, peaceful
and higher than the highest. Nârâya<u>n</u>a was then seated on His
throne, decked with jewel ornaments. There was a crown on His crest; two
earrings were hanging from His ears; the disc was in His hand, forest
flower's garlands on His neck; of the colour of fresh blue rain cloud;
His form exceedingly beautiful. The four-armed attendants were fanning
Him with their four hands; His body smeared all over with sandal-paste
and He is wearing the yellow garment. That Bhagavân, distressed with the
thought of welfare for His Bhaktas, the Highest Self was sitting on a
jewel throne and chewing the betel offered by Padmâ and with smiling
countenance, seeing and hearing the dancing and singing of the
Vidyâdharîs. When Mahâdeva bowed down to Nârâya<u>n</u>a, Brahmâ also
bowed down to Mahâdeva. The Sun, too, surprised, bowed down to Mahâdeva
with devotion. Kas'yapa, too, bowed and with great bhakti, began to
praise Mahâdeva. On the other hand, S’ankara praised Nârâya<u>n</u>a and
took His seat on

 

<span id="page_866">p. 866</span>

 

the throne. The attendants of Nârâya<u>n</u>a began to fan Mahâdeva with
white chowries. Then Vi<u>sn</u>u addressed Him with sweet nectar like
voice and said :-- “O Mahes'vara! What brings Thee here? Hast Thou been
angry?”

 

41-45. Mahâdeva said : -- “O Vi<u>sn</u>u! The King Vri<u>s</u>adhavaja
is My great devotee; he is dearer to Me than My life. The Sun has cursed
him and so I am angry. Out of the affection for a son I am ready to kill
Sûrya. Sûrya took Brahmâ's refuge and now he and Brahmâ have taken Thy
refuge. And Those who being distressed take Thy refuge, either in mind
or in word, become entirely safe and free from danger. They conquer
death and old age. What to speak of them, then, of those who come
personally to Thee and take Thy refuge. The remembrance of Hari takes
away all dangers. All good comes to them. O Lord of the world! Now tell
me what becomes of My stupid Bhakta who has become devoid of fortune and
prosperity by the curse of Sûrya.”

 

46-51. Vi<u>sn</u>u said :-- “O S'ankara! Twenty-one yugas elapsed
within this one-half Gha<u>t</u>ikâ, by the coincidence of Fate (Daiva).
Now go quickly to Thy abode. Through the unavoidable coincidence of the
cruel Fate, Vri<u>s</u>adhvaja died. His son Rathadhvaja, too, died.
Rathadhvaja had two noble sons Dharmadhvaja and Kus'adhvaja. Both of
them are great Vai<u>sn</u>avas; but, through Sûrya's curse, they have
become luckless. Their kingdoms are lost; they have become destitute of
all property, prosperity and they are now engaged in worshipping Mahâ
Lak<u>s</u>mî. Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî will be born in parts of their two
wives. Then again, by the grace of Lak<u>s</u>mî, Dharmadhvaja and
Kus'adhvaja will be prosperous and become great Kings. O S'ambhu Your
worshipper Vri<u>s</u>adhvaja is dead. Therefore Thou dost go back to
Thy place. O Brahmâ, O Sun! O Kas'yapa! You all also better go to your
places respectively.” O Nârada! Thus saying, Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u went
with His wife to the inner rooms. The Devas also went gladly to their
own places respectively. And Mahâdeva, too, Who is always quite full
within Himself, departed quickly to perform His Tapas.

 

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter on the question of anecdote of Tulasî in
the Ninth Book in the Mahâpura<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](bk09ch16)
