[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch42)  [Next](bk09ch44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XLIII**

 

**On the history of Svâhâ**

 

<span id="page_973">p. 973</span>

 

1-4. Nârada said :-- “O Ri<u>s</u>i Nârâya<u>n</u>a! O Highly Fortunate
One! O Lord! Thou art equal to Nârâya<u>n</u>a whether in beauty or in
qualities, or in fame or in energy or in everything. Thou art equal to
Nârâya<u>n</u>a. Thou art the foremost of the Jñânins; there cannot be
found a second like Thee as a Siddha Yogî, the ascetics and the Munis.
And Thou art the crest of the knowers of the Vedas. I have heard the
wonderful anecdote of Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî that Thou hast told me. Now
tell me any other thing that is unknown, very good in everyway, in
accordance with Dharma, in the Vedas, and that which is not as yet
written in the Purâ<u>n</u>as.”

 

5-6. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- “There are many wonderful hidden anecdotes
that are not published as yet in the Purâ<u>n</u>as. What you have heard
is very small in fact. Please mention to me what you like to hear, what
you think as best amongst them and I will describe that to you.”

 

7-8. Nârada said :-- “When clarified butter is poured as libations in
all the sacrificial ceremonies to the gods, Svâhâ is to be uttered
everywhere as excellent, and commendable; so Svadhâ is to be repeated in
the offerings when the oblations are offered to the Pitris, the deceased
ancestors. Then, again, Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â (the sacrificial fee) is
always to be paid as right and excellent. So, O Knower of the Vedas! I
like to hear the accounts of Svadhâ, and Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â and their
merits. Please now tell me about them.”

 

9\. Sûta said :-- “Hearing the words of Nârada, Nârâya<u>n</u>a
Ri<u>s</u>i smiled and began to speak the very ancient words of the
Purâ<u>n</u>as.”

 

10-11. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Before the creation, the Devas assembled
in the beautiful Brahmâ’s Council to decide on their food question.

 

<span id="page_974">p. 974</span>

 

They all brought to the notice of Brahmâ the scarcity about their food.
Brahmâ promised to remove their food difficulties and began to chant
hymns to Hari.

 

12\. Nârada said :-- “O Lord! Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a Himself
incarnated in part as Sacrifice. Are not the Devas satisfied when the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as pour oblations of ghee to the Devas in those
sacrifices?”

 

13-17. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Muni! The Devas, in fact, did not get
the offerings of the clarified butters that were poured in with devotion
in sacrificial acts by the Brâhma<u>n</u>as and K<u>s</u>attriyas. So
they were very much depressed and went again to the council of Brahmâ
and informed Him that they could not get any food for themselves. On
hearing this, Brahmâ at once meditated and took refuge of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a; Kri<u>sn</u>a advised them to worship Mûla Prakriti.
Brahmâ then, by the command of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, began to meditate on
Prakriti, worship Her and chant hymns to Her. Then from the part of
Prakriti, an all-powerful Devî appeared. She was very beautiful, Shyâmâ
(of a blue colour) and very lovely. This Devî was Svâhâ. She looked
always gracious with smile in Her face; it seemed that She was always
ready to show favour towards the Bhaktas. She appeared before Brahmâ and
said :-- “O Lotus born! Want any boon you desire.”

 

18-22. Hearing Her words, the Creator spoke reverentially :-- “O Devî!
Let Thou be the burning power of Fire; without Thee Fire would not be
able to burn anything. At the conclusion of any Mantra, whoever taking
Thy name, will pour oblations in the Fire to the Gods, will cause those
oblations to go to the Gods and reach them. And then they will be very
glad. O Mother! Let Thou be the wealth of Fire, the beauty and housewife
of Fire; let Thou be incessantly worshipped in the regions of the Gods
and amongst men and other beings.” Hearing these words of Brahmâ, Svâhâ
Devî became very sad and expressed Her own intentions :-- “I will get
Kri<u>sn</u>a as my husband; let me perform Tapasyâ as long as it takes.
This is my object. All other things are false as dreams.

 

23-28. I always meditate with devotion on the lotus-feet of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a, serving Which You have become the Creator of this world,
S’ambhu has become the Conqueror of death, Ananta Deva is supporting
this universe, Dharma is the Witness of the virtuous, Ganes’a is
getting, first of all, the first worship. Prakriti Devî has become the
adorable of all and the Munis and the Ri<u>s</u>is respected by all.” O
Child! Having spoken thus to the Lotus-born, Padmâ, with Her lotus-face,
meditating incessantly on the Lotus-Feet of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, free
from any disease, started to perform

 

<span id="page_975">p. 975</span>

 

tapasyâ for attaining Him. She, first of all, stood on one leg and
practised austerities for one lakh years. Then She saw the Highest
Puru<u>s</u>a S’rî Krisna, Who is beyond Prakriti and Her attributes.
The beautiful amorous Svâhâ, seeing the Lovely Form of the Lord of Love,
fainted.

 

29-43. The omniscient Bhagavân Kri<u>sn</u>a knowing Her intentions,
took Her to His lap, reduced very much in body by long continued
Tapasyâ, and He said :-- “O Devî! Thou shalt be My wife in the next
Varâha Kalpa. Then Thou wilt be the daughter of Nagnajit and wilt be
known by the name of Nâgnajitî. O Beloved! At present let Thou be the
Energy of Fire and be His wife. By My boon Thou wilt be worshipped by
all. Fire will make Thee the Lady of His house and take the utmost care
of Thee. Thou wilt be able to enjoy easily with Him.” O Nârada! Thus
saying to Svâhâ, Bhagavân disappeared. On the other hand, Fire came in
there by the command of Brahmâ, with a doubtful mind and began to
meditate on Her, the World Mother as per Sâma Veda and worshipped Her.
He then pleased and married Her with mantrams, etc. For one hundred
divine years they enjoyed each other. In a very solitary place while
they were enjoying each other, Svâhâ Devî felt pregnant. For full twelve
divine years She retained Her pregnancy. Then She delivered gradually
three sons Daksi<u>n</u>âgni, Gârhyapatyâgnî, and Âhavanîyâgni. The
Ri<u>s</u>is, Munis, Brâhma<u>n</u>as, K<u>s</u>attriyas poured
oblations of clarified butter pronouncing the terminal mantra “Svahâ.”
He who pronounces this excellent terminal Mantra “Svâhâ” gets immediate
success in his actions. Then all the mantras without “Svâhâ” in the end
became impotent as snakes become when void of poison, the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as when they are devoid of the knowledge of the Vedas, the
wife when she does not serve her husband, the men when they turn
illiterate and the trees, when void of fruits and branches. O Child! The
Brâhma<u>n</u>as then became satisfied. The Devas began to receive the
oblations. With the “Svâhâ” mantra everything turned out fruitful. Thus
I have described to you the anecdote of “'Svâhâ.” One who hears this
essential anecdote gets his happiness enhanced and the Mok<u>s</u>a in
his hands. What more do you want to hear ? Say.

 

44\. Nârada said :-- I like to hear how Fire worshipped Svâhâ and
recited stotras (hymns of praise) to Her. Kindly tell me the method of
worship, the Dhyânam and Stotra.

 

45-49. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Best of Brâhma<u>n</u>as! I now tell
you the meditation (Dhyânam) as per Sâma Veda, the method of worship and
stotra. Listen attentively. At the commencement of any sacrificial
ceremony, one should first of all worship whether on the S’âlagrâma
stone or in an earthen jar (gha<u>t</u>a), the Devî Svâhâ and then
commence the

 

<span id="page_976">p. 976</span>

 

ceremony with the expectation of getting the desired fruit. The
following is the Dhyânam (meditation) of Svâhâ Devî :-- O Devî Svâhâ!
Thou art embodied of the Mantras; Thou art the success of the Mantras;
Thou art Thyself a Siddhâ; Thou givest success and the the fruits of
actions to men; Thou dost good to all. Thus meditating, one should offer
Pâdya (water for washing the feet), etc., uttering the basic Mantra;
success then comes to him. Now hear about the Radical Seed Mantra. The
said mantra (Mûla mantra) is this :-- “Om Hrîm S’rîm Vahnijâyâyai Devyai
Svâhâ.” If the Devî be worshipped with this Mantra, all the desires come
to a successful issue.

 

50-54. Fire recited the following stotra :-- “Thou art Svâhâ, Thou art
the Beloved of Fire, Thou art the wife of Fire; Thou pleasest all; Thou
art the S’akti, Thou art the action, Thou art the bestower of Kâla
(time); Thou dost digest the food; Thou art the Dhruvâ; Thou art the
resort of men; Thou art the burning power; Thou canst burn everything,
Thou art the essence of this world; Thou art the deliverer from the
terrible world; Thou art the life of the gods and Thou nourishest the
Gods.” O Nârada! He who reads with devotion these sixteen names, gets
success both in this world as well as in the next. None of his works
become deficient in any way; rather all the works are performed
successfully and with a successful issue. Reading this stotra, one who
has no wife, gets wife. So much so that the man who recites the stotra
gets for his wife equal to Rambhâ, the heavenly nymph, and passes his
time in greatest bliss.

 

Here ends the Forty-third Chapter of the Ninth Book on the history of
Svâhâ in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 44](bk09ch44)
