[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch22)  [Next](bk09ch24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXIII**

 

**On the killing of S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a**

 

<span id="page_895">p. 895</span>

 

1-6. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said : -- S’iva, versed in the knowledge of the
Higher Reality, hearing all this, went himself with His whole host to
the battle. Seeing Him, S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a alighted from his chariot
and fell prostrate before him. With great force he got up and, quickly
putting on his armour he took up his huge and heavy bow case. Then a
great fight ensued between

 

<span id="page_896">p. 896</span>

 

S’iva and S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a for full one hundred years but there was
no defeat nor victory on either side. The result was stalemate. Both of
them, Bhagavân and the Dânava quitted their weapons.
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, remained on his chariot and Mahâdeva role on His
Bull. Hundreds and hundreds of Dânavas were slain. But extraordinarily
endowed with divine power, S’ambhu restored to life all those of His
party that were slain.

 

7-30. In the meanwhile, an aged Brâhma<u>n</u>a, very distressed in his
appearance, came to the battlefield and asked S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, the
King of Dânavas :-- “O King! Grant me what I beg of you; you give away
in charity all sorts of wealth and riches; give me also what I desire;
give me, a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, something also. I am a quiet peaceable aged
Brâhmi<u>n</u>, very very thirsty. Make your Promise first and then I
will speak to you what I desire.” (Note :-- The Brâhmi<u>n</u>s only are
fit for receiving frauds and cheatings.)

 

The King S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, with a gracious countenance and pleasing
eyes swore before him that He would give him what he would desire. Then
the Brâhmi<u>n</u> spoke to the King with great affection and Mâyâ :--
“I am desirous of your Kavacha (amulet).” The King, then, gave him the
Kavacha (the amulet, mantra written on a Bhurja bark and located in a
golden cup). Bhagavân Hari (in the form of that Brâhmi<u>n</u>) took
that Kavacha and, assuming the form of S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a came to
Tulasî. Coming there, He made His Mâyâ (magic) manifest and held sexual
intercourse with her. At this time Mahâdeva took up the Hari’s
trident-aiming at the king of the Dânavas. The trident looked like the
Mid-day Sun of summer, flaming like a Pralaya fire. It looked
irresistible and invincible as if quite powerful to kill the enemies. In
brilliance it equalled the Sudars’an Chakra (disc) and it was the chief
of all the weapons. No other body than S’iva and Kes’ava could wield
such a weapon. And everybody feared that but S’iva and Kes’ava. In
length it was one thousand Dhanus and in width it was one hundred hands.
It seemed lively, of the nature of Brahmâ, eternal and not capable to be
noticed, whence and how it proceeded. The weapon could destroy, by its
own free Lîlâ (Will) all the worlds. When S’iva held it aloft and aiming
at S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, He hurled it on him, the King of the Demons
quitted his bows and arrows and with mind collected in a yoga posture,
began to meditate on the lotus-feet of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a with great
devotion. At that moment, the trident, whirling round fell on
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a and easily burnt him and his chariot to ashes. He,
then assuming the form of a two-armed Gopa, full of youth, divine,
ornamented with jewels, holding flute, mounted on a Divine Chariot,
surrounded by ko<u>t</u>is

 

<span id="page_897">p. 897</span>

 

and ko<u>t</u>is of Gopas who came there from the region of Goloka,
whose bodies were built up of excellent jewels, and S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a
then went up to the Heavens (Goloka, where S’rî Brindâbana is located in
the middle). He went to Vrindâban, full of Râsas (sentiments) and bowed
down at the lotus feet of Râdhâ Kri<u>sn</u>a with devotion. Both of
them were filled with love when they saw Sudâmâ, and, with a gracious
countenance and joyful eyes, they took him on their laps. On the other
hand the S’ûla weapon came with force and gladness back again to
Kri<u>sn</u>a. The bones of S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, O Narada! were
transformed into conch-shells. These conch-shells are always considered
very sacred and auspicious in the worship of the Devas. The water in the
conch-shell is also very holy and pleasing to the Devas. What more than
this, that the water in the conch-shell is as holy as the water of any
Tîrtha. This water can be offered to all the Gods but not to S’iva.
Wherever the conch-shell is blown, there Lak<u>s</u>mî abides with great
pleasure. If bathing be done with conch-shell water, it is equivalent to
taking bath in all the Tîrthas. Bhagavân Hari resides direct in the
conch-shell. Where S’ankha is placed, there Hari resides. Lak<u>s</u>mî
also resides there and all inauspicious things fly away from there.
Where the females and S’ûdras blow the S’ankhas, Lak<u>s</u>mî then gets
vexed and, out of terror, She goes away to other places. O Nârada!
Mahâdeva, after killing the Dânava, went to His own abode. When He
gladly went away on His Vehicle, on the Bull’s back, with His whole
host, all the other Devas went to their respective places with great
gladness. Celestial drums were sounded in the Heavens. The Gandharbas
and the Kinnaras began to sing songs. And showers of flowers were strewn
on S’iva’s head. All the Munis and Devas and their chiefs began to chant
hymns to Him.

 

Here ends the Twenty-Third Chapter of the Ninth Book on the killing of
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](bk09ch24)
