[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch24)  [Next](bk09ch26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXV**

 

**On the method of worship of Tulasî Devî**

 

<span id="page_903">p. 903</span>

 

1-2. Nârada said :-- When the Devî Tulasî has been made so dear to
Nârâya<u>n</u>a and thus an object for worship, then describe Her
worship and Stotra (the hymn of Tulasî) now. O Muni! By whom was She
first worshipped? By whom were Her glories first sung? And how did She
become therefore an object of worship? Speak out all these to me.

 

3\. Sûta said :-- Hearing these words of Nârada, Nârâya<u>n</u>a,
laughing, began to describe this very holy and sin-destroying account of
Tulasî.

 

4-15. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Bhagavân Hari duly worshipped Tulasî, and
began to enjoy her with Lak<u>s</u>mî; He raised Tulasî to the rank of
Lak<u>s</u>mî and thus made her fortunate and glorious Lak<u>s</u>mî and
Gangâ allowed and bore this new union of Nârâya<u>n</u>a and Tulasî. But
Sarasvatî could not endure this high position of Tulasî owing to Her
anger. She became self-conceited and beat Tulasî on some quarrel before
Hari. Tulasî became abashed and insulted and vanished off. Being the
Îs’varî of all the Siddhis, the Devî, the Self-manifest and the Giver of
the Siddhiyoga to the Jñânins, Tulasî, Oh! what a wonder, became angry
and turned out as invisible to S’rî Hari even.

 

Not seeing Tulasî, Hari appeased Sarasvatî and getting Her permission
went to the Tulasî forest. Going there and taking a bath in due accord,
and with due rites, worshipped with His whole heart the chaste Tulasî
and then began to meditate on Her with devotion. O Nârada! He gets
certainly all siddhis who worships Tulasî duly with the ten lettered
mantra :-- “S’rîm Hrîm Klîm Aim Vrindâvanyai Svâhâ,” the King of
mantras, yielding fruits and all gratifications like the Kalpa Tree. O
Nârada! At the time of worship, the lamp of ghee, was

 

<span id="page_904">p. 904</span>

 

lighted and dhûp, sindûra, sandal, offerings of food, flowers, etc.,
were offered to Her. Thus hymned by Hari, Tulasî came out of the tree,
pleased. And She gladly took refuge at His lotus feet. Vi<u>sn</u>u,
then, granted her boon that, “You will be worshipped by all; I will keep
you in My breast and in My head and the Devas also will hold you on
their heads.” And He then took her to His own abode.

 

16\. Nârada said :-- “O Highly Fortunate One! What is Tulasî’s dhyân,
stotra and method of worship? Kindly describe all these.”

 

17\. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- When Tulasî vanished, Hari became very
much agitated at her bereavement and went to Vrindâvana and began to
praise her.

 

18-44. The Bhagavân said :-- The Tulasî trees collect in multitudinous
groups; hence the Pundits call it Vrindâ. I praise that dear Tulasî. Of
old, She appeared in the Vrindâvana forest and therefore known as
Vrindâvanî. I worship that fortunate and glorious One. She is worshipped
always in innumerable universes and is, therefore, known as Vis’vapûjitâ
(worshipped by all). I worship that Vis’vapûjitâ. By whose contact,
those countless universes are always rendered pure and holy; and
therefore She is called Vis’vapâvani (purifying the whole universe). I
am suffering from her bereavement, I remember the Devî. Without Tulasî,
the Devas do not get pleased, though other flowers be heaped on them;
therefore She is considered as the essence of all the flowers. Now I am
in sorrow and trouble and I am very eager to see her, who is of the
nature of purity incarnate. The whole universe gets delighted when the
Bhaktas receive her; hence She is called Nandinî; so may She be pleased
with me. There is nothing in the universe that can be compared to Her;
hence She is called Tulasî; I take refuge of that clear Tulasî. That
chaste dear one is the life of Kri<u>sn</u>a, hence She is known as
Kri<u>sn</u>ajîvanî. Now may She save my life. O Nârada! Thus praising,
Ramâpatî remained there. The chaste Tulasî then came to His sight and
bowed down to His lotus feet; when She becoming sensitive out of the
insult, began to weep. Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u, seeing that sensitive dear
one, immediately took her to His breast. Taking, then, Sarasvatî’s
permission, He took her to His own home and brought about, first of all,
the agreement between her and Sarasvatî. Then He granted her the boon,
“You will be worshipped by all, respected by all, and honoured by all;
and all will carry you on their heads.” I will also worship, respect and
honour you and keep you on My head. Receiving this boon from
Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Devî Tulasî became very glad.

 

<span id="page_905">p. 905</span>

 

Sarasvatî then attracted her to her side, made her sit close to her.
Lak<u>s</u>mî and Gangâ both with smiling faces attracted her and made
her enter into the house. O Nârada! Whosoever worships her with her
eight names Vrindâ, Vrindâvanî, Vis’vapûjitâ, Vis’vapâvanî, Tulasî,
Pu<u>s</u>pasârâ, Nandanî and Kri<u>sn</u>a Jîvanî and their meanings
and sings this hymn of eight verses duly, acquires the merit of
performing As’vamedha Yajña (horse sacrifice). Specially, on the Full
Moon night of the month of Kârtik, the auspicious birth ceremony of
Tulasî is performed. Of old Vi<u>sn</u>u worshipped her at that time.
Whoever worships with devotion on that Full Moon combination, the
universe purifying Tulasî, becomes freed of all sins and goes up to the
Vi<u>sn</u>u Loka. Offerings of Tulasî leaves to Vi<u>sn</u>u in the
month of Kârtik bring merits equal to those in giving away Ayuta Cows.
Hearing this stotra at that period gives sons to the sonless persons,
wives to the wifeless persons and friends to friendless persons. On
hearing this stotra, the diseased become free of their diseases, the
persons in bondage become free, the terrified become fearless, and the
sinners are freed of their sins. O Nârada! Thus it has been mentioned
how to chant stotra to her. Now hear her dhyân and method of worship. In
the Vedas, in the Kâ<u>n</u>va S’âkhâ branch, the method of worship is
given. You know that one is to meditate on the Tulasî plant, without any
invocation (âvâhana) and then worship her with devotion, presenting all
sorts of offerings as required to her. Now hear Her Dhyânam. Of all the
flowers, Tulasî (the holy basil) is the best, very holy, and captivating
the mind. It is a flame burning away all the fuel of sins committed by
man. In the Vedas it is stated that this plant is called Tulasî, because
there can be made no comparison with Her amongst all the flowers. She is
the holiest of them all. She is placed on the heads of all and desired
by all and gives holiness to the universe. She gives Jîvanmukti, mukti
and devotion to S’rî Hari. I worship Her. Thus meditating on Her and
worshipping Her according to due rites, one is to bow down to Her. O
Nârada! I have described to you the full history of S’rî Tulasî Devî.
What more do yo want to hear now, say.

 

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the method of
worship of Tulasî Devî in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](bk09ch26)
