[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch03)  [Next](bk09ch05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IV**

** **

**On the hymn, worship and Kavacha of Sarasvatî Devî**

 

<span id="page_819">p. 819</span>

 

1-3. Nârada said :-- By your Grace I have heard everything very sweet
like nectar, of the origin of things. Now may I ask you which Devî of
these five Prakritis has been worshipped by what Mantra? and by whom?
How has each of them been praised? and by whom? How has the worship of
their Mûrtis (form) become prevalent in this world? What are the Stotram
(hymn of praise), the Dhyân (meditation) glory and life of these? Also
what sort of boon do each of the Devîs grant? and to whom? Kindly
describe all these in detail.

 

4-29. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Child! Durgâ, the mother of
Ga<u>n</u>es'a, Râdhâ, Lak<u>s</u>mî, Sarasvatî and Sâvitrî, these are
the five Prakritis sprung directly from Mûla Prakriti. The methods of
their worship, wonderful glorious acts, excellent stotrams, and their
lives, inculcating good to all, and sweet like nectar are all widely
written in the Vedas, Purâ<u>n</u>as, Tantras and other S'âstras. So
there is no need to describe them here again. Now I am describing in
detail the auspicious character of these that are sprung from the parts
and Kalâs of the Prakriti. Hear attentively. Kâlî, Vasundharâ, Gangâ,
<u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî, Mangal Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ, Tulasî, Manasâ, Nidrâ,
Svadhâ, Svâhâ, and Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â, these are the parts of
Prakriti. By and by I will describe, briefly, the merit-giving
characters and pleasant to hear. Along with these I will describe the
Karmas of the Jîvas, and the great exalted lives of Durgâ and Râdhâ. I
am now describing Sarasvatî's character. Hear, O Muni! S'rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a introduced first in this Bhârata, the worship of the Devî
Sarasvatî, the holder of Vî<u>n</u>â in Her hands, under whose
influence, the hearts of illiterate stupid persons become illumined with
knowledge. The amorous Devî Sarasvatî sprang from the end of the lips of
Râdhâ and so she desired to marry Kri<u>sn</u>a out of amorous feelings.
S'ri Kri<u>sn</u>a, the controller of the hearts of all, knew it
instantly and addressed the Mother of the people in true words proper to
Her and beneficial to Her in the end. O Chaste One! The four-armed
Nârâya<u>n</u>a is born from My parts; He is young, of good

 

<span id="page_820">p. 820</span>

 

features and endowed with all qualifications; so much so, he is like Me.
He is a Knower of amorous sentiments of women and He fulfils those
desires; what to speak of His beauty, ten millions of the God of love
are playing in His body. O Beloved! And if you desire to marry and
remain with Me, that will not be of any good to you. For Râdhâ is near
to Me; She is more powerful than you. If a man be stronger than another,
he can rescue one who takes his shelter; but if he be weaker, how can he
then, himself weak, protect his dependant from others. Though I am the
Lord of all, and rule all, yet I cannot control Râdhâ. For She is equal
to me in power, in beauty, in qualifications, equal to Me in every
respect. Again it is impossible for Me to quit Râdhâ for She is the
presiding Deity of My life. Who can relinquish life? Though a son is
very dear to his father, still it may be questioned, is he dearer than
his father's life? So, O Auspicious One! Go to the abode
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha; you will get your desires fulfilled there. You will
get for your husband the Lord of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha and you will live ever
in peace and enjoy happiness. Though Lak<u>s</u>mî is residing there yet
like you she is not under the control of lust, anger, greed, delusion
and vanity. She is also equal to you in beauty, qualities, and power. So
you will live with her in great delight and Hari, the Lord of
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, will treat both of you equally. Moreover, I say this
in particular that in every universe, on the fifth day of the bright
fortnight of the month of Mâgha, every year, the day when the learning
is commenced, a great festival will be held and men, Manus, Devas, and
the Munis desirous of liberation, Vasus, Yogis, Nâgas, Siddhas,
Gandarbhas, Râk<u>s</u>asas, all will perform your worship with devotion
in every Kalpa till the time of Mahâ Pralaya comes. All are required to
be Jitendriya (having their senses under control) and Samyamî
(concentrating his mind, and with a religious vow) and they will invoke
Thee on a jar or on books and then meditate according to what is stated
in the Ka<u>n</u>va S'âkhâ of Yajurveda and then worship and sing hymns
to Thee. Thy Kavacha (an armour; a mystical syllable \*\* considered as
a preservative like armour) is written on the bark of the Bhûrja tree
and then with eight kinds of scents mingled with it is placed within a
golden nut or ring named Mâduli and then held on the neck or on the
right arm. The learned should recite Thy Stotras during worship. Thus
saying, the Pura<u>n</u> Brahmâ S'rî Kri<u>sn</u>a Himself worshipped
the Devî Sarasvatî. Since then, Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes'a, Ananta
Deva, Dharma, Sanaka and other Munîndras, all the Devas, Munis, all the
kings and all the human beings are worshipping the Devî Sarasvatî. O
Nârada! Thus the worship of the Eternal Devî is made extant in the three
worlds.

 

30-31. Nârada said :-- O Chief of the Knowers of the Vedas! Now describe
to me the methods of worship, Dhyân, Kavacham, hymns, the

 

<span id="page_821">p. 821</span>

 

appropriate offerings of the Pûjâ flowers, sandalpaste and other good
things necessary in these worships and which are so sweet to hear. I am
ever very eager and anxious to hear these.

 

32-59. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! I am now stating the method of
worship of the Devî Sarasvatî, the Mother of the Worlds, according to
Ka<u>n</u>va S'âkhâ of the Yajurveda. Hear. On the day previous to the
fifth day of the bright fortnight of the month of Mâgh or the day of
commencement of education, the devotee should control his senses,
concentrate his mind and take his bath. Then he is to perform his daily
duties and install the jar (Gha<u>t</u>a) with devotion and according to
the Mantras of the Ka<u>n</u>va S'âkhâ or the Tantra, as the case may
be. He is to worship first on that Ghata (jar) Ga<u>n</u>apati
(Ganes'a), then meditate the Devî Sarasvatî as described below, invoke
Her and again read the Dhyân and then worship with So<u>d</u>as'opachâra
(sixteen good articles offered in the worship). O Good One! Now I am
speaking, according to my knowledge, about the offerings as ordained in
the Vedas or Tantras. Hear. Fresh butter, curd, thickened milk, rice
freed from the husk by frying, sweetmeats (Til Laddu) prepared of Til,
sugar cane, sugarcane juice, nice Gu<u>d</u> (molasses), honey, svastik,
sugar, rice (not broken) out of white Dhân, chipi<u>t</u>ak of table
rice (Âlo châl), white Modak, Harbi<u>s</u>yânna prepared of boiled rice
with clarified butter and salt, Pi<u>st</u>aka of jaoâ or wheaten flour,
Paramânna with ghee, nectar like sweetmeats, cocoanut, cocoanut water,
Svastik Pi<u>st</u>aka, Svastik and ripe plantain Pi<u>st</u>aka, Kaseru
(root), Mûlâ, ginger, ripe plantains, excellent Bel fruit, the jujube
fruit, and other appropriate white purified fruits of the season and
peculiar to the place are to be offered in the Poojâ. O Nârada! White
flowers of  good scent, white sandalpaste of good scent, new white
clothes, nice conchshell, nice garlands of white flowers, nice white
necklaces, and beautiful ornament are to be given to the Devî. I say now
the Dhyânam sweet to hear, of the Devî Sarasvatî according to the Vedas,
capable to remove errors! Hear. I hereby bow down to the Devî Sarasvatî,
of a white colour, of a smiling countenance and exceedingly beautiful,
the lustre of whose body overpowers that of the ten millions of Moons,
whose garment is purified by fire, in whose hands there are Vî<u>n</u>â
and books, who is decorated with new excellent ornaments of jewels and
pearls and whom Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes'vara and the other Devas,
Munis, Manus and men constantly worship. Thus meditating the Devî, the
intelligent persons should offer all articles, after pronouncing the
root Mantra. Then he is to hymn and hold Kavacha and make
Sâ<u>st</u>â<u>n</u>ga pra<u>n</u>âms before the Devî. O Muni! Those
whose Devî Sarasvatî is the presiding Deity, are not to be spoken of at
all (i.e., they

 

<span id="page_822">p. 822</span>

 

will naturally do all these things and with a greater fervour). Besides
all should worship the Devî Sarasvatî on the day of commencement of
education and every year on the S'ûkla Panchamî day of the month of
Mâgh. The eight-lettered Mantra, as mentioned in the Vedas is the root
Mantra of Sarasvatî. (Aim Klîm Sarasvatyai nama<u>h</u>). Or the Mantra
to which each worshipper is initiated is his Mûlmantra (not Mantra). Or
uttering the Mantra “S'rîm Hrîm Sarasvatyai Svâhâ” one is to offer
everything to the Devî Sarasvatî. This Mantra is the Kalpa Vrik<u>s</u>a
(i. e., the tree which yields all desires). Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the ocean
of mercy, gave in ancient times, this very Mantra to Vâlmikî in the holy
land Bhârata Var<u>s</u>a on the banks of the Ganges; next Bhrîgu gave
this Mantra on the occasion of solar eclipse to Mahar<u>s</u>i
Sukrâcharya on the Pu<u>s</u>kara Tîrtha; Mârîcha gave to Brihaspati on
a lunar eclipse; Brahmâ gave to Bhrîgu in the Vadarikâ Âs'rama;
Jaratkarâ gave to Âstika on the shore of the K<u>s</u>iroda ocean;
Bibhân<u>d</u>aka gave this to the intelligent Ri<u>s</u>yasri<u>n</u>ga
on the Sumeru mountain, S'iva gave this to Ka<u>n</u>âda and Gotama,
Sûrya gave to Yâjñavalkya and Kâtyâyana, Ananta Deva gave to
Pâ<u>n</u>ini, to the intelligent Bhâradvâja and to S'âka<u>t</u>âyana
in Bali's assembly in the Pâtâla. If this Mantra be repeated four lakhs
of times, all men attain success. And when they become Siddhas with this
Mantra, they become powerful like Brihaspati. In past times, the Creator
Brahmâ gave a Kavacha named Vis'vajaya to Bhrîgu on the Gandhamâdana
Mountain. I now speak of that. Hear.

 

60-61. Once on a time Bhrîgu asked Brahmâ the Lord of all, and adored by
all, thus :-- “O Brahmân! Thou art the foremost of those that know the
Vedas; there is none equal to thee in matters regarding the knowledge of
the Vedas (so much so that there is nothing that is not known to thee;
for all these have sprung from thee). Now say about the Vis'vajaya
Kavacha of the Devî Sarasvatî, that is excellent, without any faults and
embodying in it all the properties of all the Mantras.”

 

62-91. Brahmâ said :-- “O Child! What you have asked about the Kavacha
of Sarasvatî that is sweet to hear, ordained and worshipped by the
Vedas, and the giver of all desired fruits, now hear of that. In the
very beginning, the all-pervading S'rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Lord of the
Râsa circle, mentioned this Kavacha to me in the holy Brindâvana forest
in the abode Goloka at the time of Râsa in Râsa Mandala. This is very
secret; it is full of holy unheard, wonderful Mantras. Reading this
Kavacha and holding it (on one's arm) Brihaspati has become foremost in
matters of intelligence; by the force of this Kavacha S'ukrâchârya

 

<span id="page_823">p. 823</span>

 

has got his ascendancy over the Daityas; the foremost Muni Vâlmikî has
become eloquent and skilled in language and has become Kavîndra and
Svâyambhuva Manu; holding this Kavacha he has become honoured
everywhere. Ka<u>n</u>âda, Gotama, Ka<u>n</u>va, Pa<u>n</u>ini,
S'akatâyana, Dak<u>s</u>a, and Kâtyâyana all have become great authors
by virtue of this Kavacha; Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyana Veda Vyâsa made the
classification of the Vedas and composed the eighteen Purâ<u>n</u>as.
S'âtâtapa, Samvarta, Vas'i<u>st</u>ha, Parâsara and Yâjñavalkya had
become authors by holding and reading this Sarasvatî Kavacha.
Ri<u>s</u>yas'ri<u>n</u>ga, Bhâradvâja, Âstika, Devala,
Jaigi<u>s</u>avya, and Yâyâti all were honoured everywhere by virtue of
this Kavacha. O Dvija! The Prajâpati Himself is the Ri<u>s</u>i of this
Kavacha; Brihatî is its Chha<u>nd</u>a; and S'âradâ Ambikâ is its
presiding Deity. Its application (Viniyoga) is in the acquisition of
spiritual knowlege, in the fruition of any desires or necessities, in
composing poems or anywhere wheresoever success is required. May S'rîm
Hrîm Sarasvatyai Svâhâ protect fully my head; S’rîm Vâgdevatâyai Svâhâ,
my forehead; Om Hrîm Sarasvatyai Svâhâ, my ears always; Om S’rîm Hrîm
Bhagabatyai Sarasvatyai Svâhâ always my eyes; Aim Hrîm Vâgvâdinyai
Svâhâ, always my nose; Om Hrîm Vidyadhi<u>st</u>hâtrî Devyai Svâhâ, my
lips always; Om S’rîm Hrîm Brahmyai Svâhâ my rows of teeth; Aim, this
single letter protect my neck; Om S’rîm Hrîm my throat; S'rîm, my
shoulders, Om Hrîm Vidyâdhi<u>st</u>hâtrî Devyai Svâhâ, always my chest;
Om Hrîm Vidyadhisvarûpâyai Svâhâ my navel;  Om Hrîm Klîm Vâ<u>n</u>yai
Svâhâ my hands; Om Svarva vârnatmî Kâyai Svâhâ my feet; and let Om
Vâgadhis<u>t</u>hâtridevyai Svâhâ protect all my body. Let Om
Sarvakan<u>t</u>havâsinyai Svâhâ protect my east; Let Om Svarvajibhâgra
vâsinyai Svâhâ, the South-east; Om Aim Hrîm S’rîm Klîm Sarasvatyai
budhajananyai Svâhâ, my South; Aim Hrîm S’rîm, this three lettered
Mantra my South-west; Om Aim Jhibhagravâsinyai Svâhâ, my West; Om
Svarvam bikâyai Svâhâ, my North west; Om Aim S’rîm Klîm Gadyavâsinyai
Svâhâ my North; Aim Sarvas'âstra vasinyai Svâhâ, my North-east; Om Hrîm
Sarvapujitayai Svâhâ, my top; Hrîm Pustakavasinyai Svâhâ my below and
let Om Grantha vîjasvarupâyai Svâhâ protect all my sides. O Nârada! This
Vis'vajaya Kavacha of the nature of Brahmâ and its embodied Mantra I
have now spoken to you. I heard this before from the mouth of Dharma
Deva in the Ga<u>n</u>dhâmâdana mountain. Now I speak this to you out of
my great affection for you. But never divulge this to anybody. One is
worship one's spiritual Teacher (Guru Deva) according to due rites and
ceremonies with clothings, ornaments, and sandalpaste and then fall down
prostrate to him and then hold this Kavacha. Repeating this

 

<span id="page_824">p. 824</span>

 

five lakhs of times, one gets success and becomes a Siddha. The holder
of this Kavacha becomes intelligent like Brihaspati, eloquent,
Kavîndras, and the conqueror of the three worlds, no sooner one becomes
a Siddlha in this. In fact, he can conquer everything by virtue of this
Kavacha. O Muni! Thus I have described to you this Kavacha according to
Kâ<u>n</u>va S'âkhâ. Now I am speaking about the method of worship,
Dhyâna and the praise of this Kavacha. Hear.

 

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the hymn, worship and
Kavacha of Sarasvatî Devî in S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses
by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](bk09ch05)
