[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch08)  [Next](bk09ch10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IX**

** **

**On the origin of the S’akti of the Earth**

 

<span id="page_840">p. 840</span>

 

1-4. S’rî Nârada said :-- In the twinkling of an eye of the Devî, the
Pralaya takes place; and in that very time also the Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a
(cosmos) is dissolved, which is called the Pralaya of Prakriti. During
this Pralaya, the Devî Vasundharâ (Earth) disappears; the whole world is
deluged with water and all this appearance of five elements called
Prapañcha vanishes in the body of Prakriti. Now where does Vasundharâ
(Earth), thus vanished, reside? And how does She again appear at the
beginning of the creation! What is the cause of her being so much
blessed, honoured and capable to hold all and victorious. So tell about
Her birth, the source of all welfare.

 

5-23. S’rî Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! So it is heard that the
Earth appears at the very outset of the creation. Her appearance and
disappearance so occur in all the Pralayas. (This earth) the
manifestation of the great S’akti, sometimes becomes manifest in Her and
sometimes remains latent in Her (the S’akti). It is all the will of that
Great S’akti. Now hear the anecdote of appearance (birth) of the earth,
the cause of all good, the source of destruction of all calamities, the
destroyer of sin and the cause of furtherance of one's religious merits.
Some say that this earth has come out of the marrow of the Daityas,
Madhu and Kai<u>t</u>abha; but that is not the fact. Hear now the real
fact. Those two Daityas were greatly pleased with Vi<u>sn</u>u's valour
and prowess in the fight between them and Vi<u>sn</u>u; and they said
:-- “Kill us on that part of the earth which is not under water.” From
their words it is evident that the earth was existent during their
lifetime but she was not visible. After their death, the marrow came out
after their bones. Now hear how the name “Medinî” came to be applied to
the earth. She was taken out of the water, and the marrow came to be
mixed with the earth. It is on account of this mixing that she is called
Medinî, Now I will tell you what I heard before in Pu<u>s</u>kara, the
sacred place of pilgrimage, from the mouth of Dharma Deva, about the
origin of earth, approved by the S'rutis, consistent, and good. Hear.
When the mind of Mahâ Virâ<u>t</u>, merged in water, expanded all over
his body, it entered into every pore of his body. Next the Mahâprithvî
or the Great Earth appeared at the time of Pañchî Kara<u>n</u>a (mixing
of one-half of each of the elements with one-eighth of each of the other
four elements). This Mahâprithvî was broken into pieces and placed in
every pore. It is this differentiated earth that appears during creation
and disappears during Pralaya. From this mind, concentrated in every
pore of the body

 

<span id="page_841">p. 841</span>

 

of Mahâ Virâ<u>t</u>, is born this earth, after a long interval. In
every pore in the skin of this Virâ<u>t</u> Puru<u>s</u>a there is one
earth. She gets manifested and she disappears. This occurs again and
again. When she appears, she floats on the water; and when she
disappears, she gets merged in the water. There is this earth (world) in
every universe; and along with her, there are mountains, forests, seven
oceans, seven islands, Sumeru mountain, the Moon, the Sun and other
planets, Brahmâloka, Vis<u>nu</u>loka (the abode of Vi<u>sn</u>u)
S'ivaloka and the regions of the other Devas, sacred places of
pilgrimage, the holy land of Bhâratavar<u>s</u>a, the Kânchanî Bhûmi,
seven heavens, seven Pâtâlas or nether regions, on the above Brahmâloka,
and Dhruvaloka. This law holds good in every world in every universe. So
every universe is the work of Mâyâ and thus it is transient. At the
dissolution of Prakriti, Brahmâ falls. Again when creation takes place,
the Mahâ Virât appears from S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Supreme Spirit.
Eternal is this flow of creation, preservation and destruction; eternal
is this flow of time, Ka<u>st</u>hâ; eternal is this flow of Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes'a, etc. And eternal is this flow of Vasundharâ
who is worshipped in the Vârâha Kalpa by the Suras, Munis, Vipras,
Gandarbhas, etc. The S'ruti says that the Presiding Deity of this
eternal earth is the wife of Vi<u>sn</u>u in His boar-form. Mangala
(Mars) is the son of that earth and Mangala's son is Gha<u>t</u>es'a.

 

24-26. Nârada said :-- In what form was the Earth worshipped by the
Devas in Vârâha Kalpa. The Vârâhi, the receptacle of all things, moving
and non-moving, how did she appear, by what method of Pañchî
Kara<u>n</u>a, from the Mûlaprakriti? What is the method of her worship
in this Bhûrloka and in the Heavens (Svarloka). Also tell me, O Lord! in
detail, the auspicious birth of Mangala (Mars).

 

27-34. Nârâya<u>n</u>a spoke :-- In ancient days, in the Vârâha Kalpa,
Varâha Deva (the boar incarnation) when entreated and praised by Brahmâ,
killed the Daitya Hira<u>n</u>yâk<u>s</u>a and rescued the earth from
the nether regions Rasâtala. He then placed the earth on the waters
where she floated as the lotus leaf floats on water. In the meantime
Brahmâ began to fashion the wonderful creation on the surface of the
earth. Bhagavân Hari, in His boar form and brilliant like ten million
suns saw the beautiful and lovely appearance of the presiding deity of
the earth, possessed of amorous sentiments. He then assumed a very
beautiful form, fit for amorous embraces. They then held their sexual
intercourse and it lasted day and night for one Deva year. The beautiful
Earth, in the pleasant amorous plays, fainted away; for the intercourse
of the lover with the beloved is exceedingly pleasant. And Vi<u>sn</u>u,
too, at the same time was very much exhausted by the pleasant touch of
the

 

<span id="page_842">p. 842</span>

 

body of the Earth. He did not become conscious even how days and nights
passed away. When full one year passed away, they got back their senses
and the amorous man then left his hold of the loved. He assumed easily
his former Boar form and worshipped Her as the incarnate of the Devî,
with incense, lights, offerings of food, with vermilion (Sindur,
red-powder), sandal-paste, garments, flowers and various other offerings
of food, etc. He then said :--

 

35-37. O Auspicious One! Let Thou beest the receptacle of all things.
All the Munis, Manus, Devas, Siddhas, and Dânavas, etc., will worship
Thee with pleasure and willingness. On the day the Ambuvâchi ceremony
closes, on the day when the house construction, i.e., the foundation is
laid, on the day when the first entry is made into the newly built
houses, when the digging of the well or tank commences, and on the day
when tilling the ground commences, all will worship Thee. Those stupid
fools that will not observe this, will certainly go to hell.

 

38-41 The Earth spoke :-- “O Lord! By Thy command I will assume the form
of Vârâhî (female boar) and support easily on my back this whole world
of moving and non-moving things, but the following things, pearls, small
shells, S'âlagrâm, (a black stone, usually round, found in the river
Gan<u>d</u>akî, and worshipped as a type of Vi<u>sn</u>u), the phallus
or emblem of S'iva, the images of the goddesses, conch-shells, lamps
(lights), the Yantras, gems, diamonds, the sacred upanayana threads,
flowers, books, the Tulasî leaves, the bead (Japa mâlâ), the garland of
flowers, gold, camphor, Gorochanâ (bright yellow pigment prepared from
the urine or bile of a cow), Sandal, and the water after washing the
S'âlagrâma stone, I will not be able to bear. I will be very much pained
in case I were to bear these on Me.”

 

42-45. S’rî Bhagavân said :-- “O Fair One! The fools that will place the
above articles on Thy back will go to the Kâlasutra hell for one hundred
divine years.” O Nârada! Thus saying, the Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a
remained silent. Now the Earth became pregnant and the powerful planet
Mars was born. By the command of S’rî Hari, all began to meditate on
Earth according to what is mentioned in Kâ<u>n</u>vas'âkhâ and began to
praise Her. Offerings of food were given, uttering the root Mantra. Thus
became extant all over the three worlds Her worship and praise.

 

46\. Nârada said :-- O Bhagavân! Very sacred is the meditation, hymn and
the root Mantra of the Earth. I am very anxious to hear them. Kindly
describe it in detail.

 

47-48. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- The Earth was first worshipped by Varâha
Deva; next She was worshipped by Brahmâ. Next She was worshipped by all
the Munis, Devas, Manus and men. O Nârada! Now hear the Dhyân, praise
and Mantra of the Devî Earth.

 

<span id="page_843">p. 843</span>

 

49-51. The Earth was first worshipped by Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u with this
root Mantra (mûl mantra) “On Hrîm S’rîm Klîm Vasundharâyai Svâhâ.” Next
He said :-- O Devî Earth! O Thou Smiling One! I worship Thee, who art
worshipped by the three worlds, whose colour is white like white lotus,
whose face is beautiful like the autumnal moon, who art the Store-house
of all gems and jewels, and in whose womb all the precious stones and
pearls are inbedded, and who has put on a raiment purified by fire. All
then began to worship Her with this Mantra.

 

52-63. S’rî Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Now hear the hymn sung before Her
according to Kâ<u>n</u>va S'âkhâ :-- O Thou, the Giver of Victory!
Holder of water! Endowed with water, full of victory; Consort of the
Boar Incarnation, Carrier of victory! Bestow victory on me. O Thou
Auspicious One! The Store-house of all good, O Thou incarnate of all
auspiciousness! Bestower of good, Thou, the Source of all good to bestow
all sorts of welfare! Bestow all things that are good and auspicious to
me in this world.

 

O Thou! The Receptacle of all, the Knower of all, all powerful, the
Bestower of all desires, O Devî Earth! Give me the fruits that I desire.

 

O Thou! Who art all merits, Thou, the Seed of all religious merits, O
Thou, the Eternal, the receptacle of all religious merits, the home of
all religious persons, Thou bestowest merits to all.

 

O Thou! The Store-house of all grains, enriched with all sorts of corns,
Thou bestowest harvests to all; Thou takest away all the grains in this
world and again, Thou producest all corns of various kinds here. O
Earth! Thou art all-in-all to the landlords, the Best Source of refuge
and happiness. O Bestower of lands! Give me lands. The above hymn yields
great religious merits. He becomes the sovereign of the whole earth for
millions and millions of births who rising early in the morning reads
this stotra. Men who read this acquire merits due to giving away lands
as gifts. People become certainly freed of their sins, if they read this
stotra, who take back the lands after making them as gifts, who dig
earth on the day of Ambuvâchî, who dig wells without permission on
another's well, who steal other's lands, who throw their semen on earth,
who place lamps on the earth. Religious merits, equivalent to one
hundred horse sacrifices accrue from reading this stotra. There is no
doubt in this. This stotra of the great Devî is the source of all sorts
of welfare and auspiciousness.

 

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the origin of the
S’akti of the earth in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](bk09ch10)
