[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch47)  [Next](bk09ch49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XLVIII**

 

**On the anecdote of Manasâ**

 

<span id="page_992">p. 992</span>

 

1-30. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! I will now speak of the Dhyânam
and the method of worship of S’rî Devî Manasâ, as stated in the Sâma
Veda. Hear. “I meditate on the Devî Manasâ, Whose colour is fair like
that of the white champaka flower, whose body is decked all over with
jewel ornaments, whose clothing is purified by fire, whose sacred thread
is the Nâgas (serpent), who is full of wisdom, who is the foremost of
great Jñanins, who is the Presiding deity of the Siddhas, Who Herself is
a Siddha and who bestows Siddhis to all.” O Muni! Thus meditating on
Her, one should present Her, flowers, scents, ornaments, offerings of
food and various other articles, pronouncing the principal Seed Mantra.
O Nârada! The twelve lettered Siddha Mantra, to be mentioned below,
yields to the Bhaktas their desires like the Kalpa Tree. Now the Radical
mantra as stated in the Vedas is “Om Hrîm S’rîm Klîm Aim Manasâ Devyai
Svâhâ.” Repetition of this, five lakhs of times, yields success to one
who repeats. He who attains success in this mantra gets unbounded name
and fame in this world. Poison becomes nectar to him and he himself
becomes famous like Dhanvantari. O Nârada! If anybody bathes on any
Samkrânti day (when the sun enters from one sign to another) and going
to a private room (hidden room), invokes the Devî

 

<span id="page_993">p. 993</span>

 

Manasâ Îs’ânâ and worships Her with devotion, or makes sacrifices of
animals before the Devî on the fifth day of the fortnight, he becomes
certainly wealthy, endowed with sons and name and fame. Thus I have
described to you the method of worship of Manasâ Devî. Now hear the
anecdote of the Devî as I heard from Dharma. In olden days, men became
greatly terrified on earth from snakes and took refuge of Kas’yapa, the
supreme amongst the Munis. The Mahar<u>s</u>i Kas’yapa became very
afraid. He then with Brahmâ, and by His command composed a mantra
following the principal motto of the Vedas. While composing this mantra,
he intensely thought of the Devî, the Presiding Deity of that Mantra,
through the power of his Tapasyâ and through the mental power, the Devî
Manasâ appeared and was named so, as She was produced from the sheer
influence of mind. On being born, the girl went to the abode of S’ankara
in Kailâs’a and began to worship Him and chant hymns to Him with
devotion. For one thousand Divine years, the daughter of Kas’yapa served
Mahâdeva when He became pleased. He gave her the Great Knowledge, made
Her recite the Sâma Veda and bestowed to her the eight-lettered
Kri<u>sn</u>a mantra which is like the Kalpa Tree. S’rîm Hrîm Klîm
Kri<u>sn</u>âya Namah was the eight lettered Mantra. She got from Him
the Kavacha (amulet) auspicious to the three worlds, the method of
worship and all the rules of Pura<u>s</u>chara<u>n</u>a (repetition of
the name of a deity attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) and
went by His command to perform in Pu<u>s</u>kara very hard austerities.
There she worshipped Kri<u>sn</u>a for the three Yugas. S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a then appeared before Her. On seeing Kri<u>sn</u>a,
immediately the girl, worn out by austerities, worshipped Him, and she
was also worshipped by S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. Kri<u>sn</u>a granted her the
boon, “Let you be worshipped throughout the world” and departed. O
Nârada! She was thus first worshipped by the Supreme Spirit, the Devî
Kri<u>sn</u>a; secondly by S’ankara; thirdly by the Mahar<u>s</u>i
Kas’yapa and the Devas. Then she was worshipped by the Munis, Manus,
Nâgas, and men; and She became widely renowned in the three worlds.
Kas’yapa gave Her over to the hands of Jaratkâru Muni. At the request of
the Brâhmi<u>n</u> Kas’yapa, the Muni Jarat Kâru married Her. After the
marriage, one day, being tired with his long work of Tapasyâ, Jarat Kâru
laid his head on the hip and loins of his married wife and fell fast
asleep. Gradually the evening came in. The sun set. Then Manasâ thought,
“If my husband fails to perform the Sandhyâ, the daily duty of the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, he would be involved in the sin of Brahmahatyâ. It is
definitely stated in the S’âstras, that if any Brâhma<u>n</u>a does not
perform his Sandhyâ in the morning and in the evening, he becomes wholly
impure and the sins

 

<span id="page_994">p. 994</span>

 

Brahmahattyâ and other crimes come down on his head.” Arguing thus,
these thoughts in her mind, as commanded by the Vedas, at last she
awakened her husband, who then got up from his sleep.

 

31-60. The Muni Jarat Kâru said :-- “O Chaste One! I was sleeping
happily. Why have you thus interrupted my sleep? All his vows turn out
useless who injures her husband. Her tapas, fastings, gifts, and other
meritorious works all come to vain who do things unpleasant to her
husband. If she worships her husband, she is said to have worshipped
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. For the sake of fulfilling the vows of the chaste
women, Hari himself becomes their husbands. All sorts of charities,
gifts, all sacrifices, fastings, practising all the virtues, keeping to
truth, worshipping all the Devas, nothing can turn out equal to even
one-sixteenth part of serving one’s husband. She ultimately goes with
her husband to the region of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, who serves her husband in
this holy land Bhârata. She comes certainly of a bad family who does
unpleasant acts to her husband or who uses unpleasant words to her
husband. She goes to the Kumbhîpâka hell as long as the Sun and Moon
last and then she becomes born as a Cha<u>nd</u>âlî, without husband and
son.” Speaking thus, Jarat Kâru, the best of the Munis, became angry and
his lips began to tremble. Seeing this, the best Manasâ, shivering with
fear, addressed her husband :--

 

I have broken your sleep and awakened you, fearing you might miss your
time of Sandhyâ. I have committed an offence. Punish me as you think. I
know that a man goes to the Kâlasûtra hell as long as the Sun and Moon
last in this world, who throws an obstacle when any man eats, sleeps or
enjoys with the opposite sex. O Nârada! Thus saying, the Devî Manasâ
fell down at the feet of her husband and cried again and again. On the
other hand, knowing the Muni angry, and ready to curse her, the Sun came
there with Sandhyâ Devî. And He humbly spoke to him with fear :-- “O
Bhagavân! Seeing Me going to set, and fearing that you may miss Dharma,
your chaste wife has  awakened you. O Brâhmi<u>n</u>! Now I am also
under your refuge; forgive me. O Bhagavân! You should not curse Me. The
more so, a Brâhma<u>n</u>a’s heart is as tender as the fresh butter. The
anger of a Brâhma<u>n</u> lasts only half the twinkling of an eye
(K<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>). When a Brâhma<u>n</u>a becomes angry, he can burn
all this world and can make a new creation. So who can possess an
influence like a Brâhma<u>n</u>a. A Brâhmi<u>n</u> is a part of Brahmâ;
he is shining day and night with the Tejas of Brahmâ. A Brâhma<u>n</u>a
meditates always on the Eternal Light of Brahmâ.” O Nârada! Hearing the
words of the Sun, the Brâhmi<u>n</u> became satisfied and blessed Him.
The Sun also went to His own place, thus blessed daily. To keep his
promise, the Brâhmin Jaratkâru quitted

 

<span id="page_995">p. 995</span>

 

Manasâ. She became very sorry and began to cry aloud with pain and
anguish. Being very much distressed by the then danger, she remembered
Her Î<u>st</u>a Deva, Mahâdeva, Brahmâ, Hari and Her father
Mahar<u>s</u>i Kas’yapa. On the very instant when Manasâ remembered S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Lord of the Gopis, Mahâdeva, Brahmâ and
Mahar<u>s</u>i Kas’yapa appeared there. Then seeing his own desired
Deity S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, superior to Prakriti, beyond the attributes,
Jaratkâru began to praise Him and bowed down to Him repeatedly. Then
bowing down to Mahâdeva, Brahmâ and Kas’yapa, he enquired why they had
come there. Brahmâ, then, instantly bowed down at the lotus feet of
Hri<u>s</u>îkes’a and spoke in befitting words at that time if the
Brâhmi<u>n</u> Jaratkâru leaves at all his legal wife, devoted to her
own Dharma, he should first of all have a son born of her to fulfil his
Dharma. O Muni! Any man can quit his wife, after he has impregnated her
and got a son. But if without having a son, he leaves his wife, then all
his merits are lost as all water leaks out of a sieve or a strainer. O
Nârada! Hearing thus the words of Brahmâ, the Muni Jaratkâru by his
Yogic power recited a Mantra and touching the navel of Manasâ spoke to
her :-- “O Manasâ! A son will be born in your womb self-controlled,
religious, and best of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as.

 

61-77. That son will be fiery, energetic, renowned, well-qualified the
foremost of the Knowers of the Vedas, a great Jñânin and the best of the
Yogis. That son is a true son, indeed, who uplifts his family who is
religious and devoted to Hari. At his birth all the Pitris dance with
great joy. And the wife is a true wife who is devoted to her husband,
good-natured and sweet-speaking and she is religious, she is the mother
of sons, she is the woman of the family and she is the preserver of the
family. He is the true friend, indeed, the giver of one’s desired
fruits, who imparts devotion to Hari. That father is a true father who
shows the way to devotion to Hari. And She is the True Mother, through
whom this entering into wombs ceases for ever, yea, for ever! That
sister is the true kind sister from whom the fear of Death vanishes.
That Guru is the Guru who gives the Vi<u>sn</u>u Mantra and the true
devotion to Vi<u>sn</u>u. That Guru is the real bestower of knowledge
who gives the Jñânam by which S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a is meditated in whom
this whole universe, moving and non-moving from the Brahmâ down to a
blade of grass, is appearing and disappearing. There is no doubt in
this. What knowledge can be superior to that of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. The
knowledge derived from the Vedas, or from the sacrifices or from any
other source is not superior to the service to S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. The
devotion and knowledge of S’rî Hari is the Essence of all knowledge; all
else is vain and mockery. It is through this Real Knowledge; that this
bondage from this world is severed. But the Guru who does not impart
this devotion

 

<span id="page_996">p. 996</span>

 

and knowledge of S’rî Hari is not the real Guru; rather he is an enemy
that leads one to bondage. Verily he kills his disciple when he does not
free him. He can never be called a Guru, father or friend who does not
free his disciple from the pains in the various wombs and from the pains
of death. Verily he can never be called a friend who does not show the
way to the Undecaying S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Source of the Highest
Bliss. So, O Chaste One! You better worship that Undecaying Para Brahmâ
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, Who is beyond the attributes. O Beloved! I have left
you out of a pretence; please excuse me for this. The chaste women are
always forgiving; never they become angry because they are born of
Sattvagu<u>n</u>as. Now I go to Pu<u>s</u>kara for Tapasyâ; you better
go wherever you like. Those who have no desire have their minds always
attached to the lotus feet of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a.” O Nârada! Hearing the
words of Jaratkâru, the Devî Manasâ became very much distressed and
bewildered with great sorrow. Tears began to flow from her eyes. She
then humbly spoke to her dearest husband :-- “O Lord! I have not
committed any such offence, as you leave me altogether when I have thus
broken your sleep.

 

78-115. However kindly show Thyself to me when I will recollect you. The
bereavement of one’s friend is painful; more than that is the
bereavement of a son. Again one’s husband is dearer than one hundred
sons; so the bereavement of one’s husband is the heaviest of all. To
women, the husband is the most beloved of  all earthly things; hence he
is called Priya, i.e., dear. As the heart of one who has only one son is
attached to that son, as the heart of a Vai<u>sn</u>ava is attached to
S’rî Hari; as the mind of one-eyed man to his one eye, as the mind of
the thirsty is attached to water, as the mind of the hungry is attached
to food, as the mind of the passionate is attached to lust, as the mind
of a thief is attached to the properties of others, as the mind of a
lewd man to his prostitute, as the mind of the learned is attached to
the S’âstras, as the mind of a trader is attached to his trade, so the
minds of chaste women are attached to their husbands.” Thus saying,
Manasâ fell down at the feet of her husband. Jaratkâru, the ocean of
mercy, then, took her for a moment on his lap and drenched her body with
tears from his eyes. The Devî Manasâ, too, distressed at the bereavement
of her husband also drenched the lap of the Muni with tears from her
eyes. Some time after, the true knowledge arose in them and they both
became free from fear. Jaratkâru then enlightened his wife and asked her
to meditate on the lotus feet of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a the Supreme Spirit
repeatedly; thus saying he went away for his Tapasyâ. Manasâ, distressed
with sorrow, went to his Î<u>st</u>a Deva Mahâdeva on Kailâs’a. The
auspicious S’iva and Pârvatî both consoled her with knowledge and
advice. Some days after, on an

 

<span id="page_997">p. 997</span>

 

auspicious they and on an auspicious moment she gave birth to a son born
in part of Nârâya<u>n</u>a, and as the Guru of the Yogis and as the
Preceptor of the Jñânins. When the child was in mother’s womb, he heard
the highest knowledge from the mouth of Mahâdeva; therefore he was born
as a Yogîndra and the Spiritual Teacher of the Jñânins. On his birth,
Bhagavân S’ankara performed his natal ceremonies and performed various
auspicious ceremonies. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as chanted the Vedas for the
welfare of the child; various wealth and jewels and Kirî<u>t</u>as and
invaluable gems were distributed by S’ankara to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as;
and Pârvatî gave one lakh cows and various jewels to others. After some
days, Mahâdeva taught him the four Vedas with their Angas (six limbs)
and gave him, at last, the Mrityumjaya Mantra. As in Manasâ’s mind there
reigned the devotion to her husband, the devotion to her Î<u>st</u>a
Deva and Guru, the child’s name was kept Âstika.

 

Âstika then got the Mahâ Mantra from S’ankara and by his command went to
Pu<u>s</u>kara to worship Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Supreme Spirit. There he
practised tapasyâ for three lakh divine years. And then he returned to
Kailâs’a, to bow down to the great Yogi and the Lord S’ankara, Then,
bowing down to S’ankara, he remained there for some time when Manasâ
with her son Âstika went to the hermitage of Kas’yapa, her father.
Seeing Manasâ with son, the Mahar<u>s</u>i’s gladness knew no bounds. He
fed innumerable Brâhma<u>n</u>as for the welfare of the child, and
distributed lakhs and lakhs of jewels. The joy of Aditi and Diti (the
wives of Kas’yapa) knew no bounds; Manasâ remained there for a long,
long time with his son. O Child! Hear now an anecdote on this. One day
due to a bad Karma, a Brâhma<u>n</u>a cursed the king Parik<u>s</u>it,
the son of Abhimanyu; one Ri<u>s</u>i’s son named S’ringî, sipping the
water of the river Kaus’ikî cursed thus :-- “When a week expires, the
snake Tak<u>s</u>aka will bite you, and you will be burnt with the
poison of that snake Tak<u>s</u>aka.” Hearing this, the King
Parik<u>s</u>it, to preserve his life, went to a place, solitary where
wind even can have no access and he lived there. When the week was over,
Dhanvantari saw, while he was going on the road, the snake
Tak<u>s</u>aka who was also going to bite the king. A conversation and a
great friendship arose between them; Tak<u>s</u>aka gave him voluntarily
a gem; and Dhanvantari, getting it, became pleased and went back gladly
to his house. The king Parik<u>s</u>it was lying on his bed-stead when
Tak<u>s</u>aka bit the king. The king died soon and went to the next
world. The king Janamejaya then performed the funeral obsequies of his
father and commenced afterwards the Sarpa Yajñâ (a sacrifice where the
snakes are the victims). In that sacrifice, innumerable snakes gave up
their lives by the Brahmâ Teja (the fire of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s). At
this, Tak<u>s</u>aka became

 

<span id="page_998">p. 998</span>

 

terrified and took refuge of Indra. The Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, then, in a
body, became, ready to burn Tak<u>s</u>aka along with Indra, when, Indra
and the other Devas went to Manasâ. Mahendra, bewildered with fear,
began to chant hymns to Manasâ. Manasâ called his own son Âstika who
then went to the sacrificial assembly of the king Janamejaya and begged
that the lives of Indra and Tak<u>s</u>aka be spared. The king, then, at
the command of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, granted their lives. The king,
then, completed his sacrifice and gladly gave the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âs
to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as, Munis, and Devas collected
and went to Manasâ and worshipped Her separately and chanted hymns to
Her. Indra went there with the various articles and He worshipped Manasâ
with devotion and with great love and care; and He chanted hymns to Her.
Then bowing down before Her, and under the instructions of Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a, offered her sixteen articles, sacrifices and
various other good and pleasant things. O Nârada! Thus worshipping Her,
they all went to their respective places. Thus I have told you the
anecdote of Manasâ. What more do you want to hear. Say.

 

Nârada said :-- “O Lord! How did Indra praise Her and what was the
method of His worshipping Her; I want to hear all this.”

 

116-124. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Indra first took his  bath; and,
performing Âchamana and becoming pure, He put on a fresh and clean
clothing and placed Manasâ Devî on a jewel throne. Then reciting the
Vedic mantras he made Her perform Her bath by the water of the
Mandâkinî, the celestial river Ganges, poured from a jewel jar and then
He made Her put on the beautiful clothing, uninflammable by fire. Then
He caused sandalpaste to be applied to Her body all over with devotion
and offered water for washing Her feet and Arghya, an offering of grass
and flowers and rice, etc., as a token of preliminary worship. First of
all the six Devatâs Ganes’a, Sun, Fire, Vi<u>sn</u>u, S’iva, and S’ivâ
were worshipped. Then with the ten lettered mantra, “Om Hrîm S’rîm
Manasâ Devyai Svâhâ” offered all the offerings to Her. Stimulated by the
God Vi<u>sn</u>u, Indra worshipped with great joy the Devî with sixteen
articles so very rare to any other person. Drums and instruments were
sounded. From the celestial heavens, a shower of flowers was thrown on
the head of Manasâ. Then, at the advice of Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and
Mahes’a, the Devas and the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, Indra, with tears in his
eyes, began to chant hymns to Manasâ, when his whole body was thrilled
with joy and hairs stood on their ends.

 

125-145. Indra said :-- “O Devî Manase! Thou standest the highest
amongst the chaste women. Therefore I want to chant hymns to

 

<span id="page_999">p. 999</span>

 

Thee. Thou art higher than the highest. Thou art most supreme. What I
now praise Thee? Chanting hymns is characterised by the description of
one’s nature; so it is said in the Vedas. But, O Prakriti! I am unable
to ascertain and describe Thy qualities. Thou art of the nature of
S’uddha Sattva (higher than the pure sattva unmixed with any other
Gu<u>n</u>as); Thou art free from anger and malice. The Muni Jaratkâru
could not forsake Thee; therefore it was that he prayed for Thy
separation before. O Chaste One! I have now worshipped Thee. Thou art an
object of worship as my mother Aditi is. Thou art my sister full of
mercy; Thou art the mother full of forgiveness. O Sures’varî! It is
through Thee that my wife, sons and my life are saved. I am worshipping
Thee. Let Thy love be increased. O World-Mother! Thou art eternal;
though Thy worship is extant everywhere in the universe; yet I worship
Thee to have it extended further and further. O Mother! Those who
worship Thee with devotion on the Sankrânti day of the month of
Â<u>s</u>û<u>d</u>ha, or on the Nâga Pañchamî day, or on the Sankrânti
day of every month or on every day, they get their sons and grandsons,
wealth and grains increased and become themselves famous, well
gratified, learned and renowned. If anybody does not worship Thee out of
ignorance, rather if he censures Thee, he will be bereft of
Lak<u>s</u>mî and he will be always afraid of snakes. Thou art the Griha
Lak<u>s</u>mî of all the householders and the Râja Lak<u>s</u>mî of
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. Bhagavân Jarat Kâru, the great Muni, born in part of
Nârâya<u>n</u>a, is Thy husband. Father Kas’yapa has created Thee
mentally by his power of Tapas and fire to preserve us; Thou art his
mental creation; hence thy name is Manasâ. Thou Thyself hast become
Siddha Yoginî in this world by thy mental power; hence thou art widely
known as Manasâ Devî in this world and worshipped by all. The Devas
always worship Thee mentally with devotion; hence the Pundits call Thee
by the name of Manasâ. O Devî! Thou always servest Truth, hence Thou art
of the nature of Truth. He certainly gets Thee who always thinks of Thee
verily as of the nature of truth.” O Nârada! Thus praising his sister
Manasâ and receiving from her the desired boon, Indra went back, dressed
in his own proper dress, to his own abode. The Devî Manasâ, then,
honored and worshipped everywhere, and thus worshipped by her brother,
long lived in Her father’s house, with Her son.

 

One day Surabhi (the heavenly cow) came from the Goloka and bathed
Manasâ with milk and worshipped Her with great devotion and revealed to
Her all the Tattva Jñânas, to be kept very secret. (This is now made the
current story wherever any Lingam suddenly becomes visible.) O Nârada!
Thus worshipped by the Devas and Surabhi, the Devî Manasâ went to the
Heavenly regions. O Muni! One gets no fear from snakes who recites

 

<span id="page_1000">p. 1000</span>

 

this holy Stotra composed by Indra and worships Manasâ; his family
descendants are freed from the fear due to snakes. If anybody becomes
Siddha in this Stotra, poison becomes nectar to him. Reciting the stotra
five lakhs of times makes a man Siddha in this Stotra. So much so that
he can sleep on a bed of snakes and he can ride on snakes.

 

Here ends the Forty-eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of
Manasâ in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 49](bk09ch49)
