[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch30)  [Next](bk09ch32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXI**

 

**On the Yama's giving S’akti Mantra to Sâvitrî**

 

<span id="page_925">p. 925</span>

 

1-2. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! Hearing thus the supreme nature
of Mûla Prakriti from Dharmarâja Yama, the two eyes of Sâvitrî were
filled with tears of joy and her whole body was filled with a thrill of
rapture, joy and ecstacy. She again addressed Yama :-- “O Dharmarâja! To
sing the glories of Mûla Prakriti is the only means of saving all. This
takes away the old age and death of both the speaker and the hearer.

 

3-12. This is the Supreme Place of the Dânavas, the Siddhas, the
ascetics. This is the Yoga of the Yogins and this is studying the Vedas
of the Vaidiks. Nothing can compare even to one sixteenth of the
sixteenth parts of the (full) merits of those who are in S’akti’s
Service; call it Mukti, immortality, or attaining endless Siddhis,
nothing can come to it. O Thou, the foremost of the Knowers of the
Vedas! I have heard by and by everything from Thee. Now describe to me
how to worship Mûla Prakriti and what are the ends of karmas, auspicious
and inauspicious.” Thus saying, the chaste Sâvitrî bowed down her head
and began to praise Yama in stotras according to the Vedas. She said :--
“O Dharmarâjan! The Sun practised of yore very hard austerities at
Pu<u>s</u>kara and worshipped Dharma. On this, Dharma Himself became
born of Sûrya as his son. And Thou art that son of Sûrya, the
incarnation of Dharma. So I bow down to Thee. Thou art the Witness of
all the Jîvas; Thou seest them equally; hence Thy name is Samana. I bow
down to Thee. Sometimes Thou by Thy own will takest away the lives of
beings. Hence Thy name is Kritânta. Obeisance to Thee! Thou holdest the
rod to distribute justice and pronounce sentence on them and to destroy
the sins of the Jîvas; hence Thy name is Da<u>nd</u>adhara; so I bow
down to Thee. (Note :-- Any Jîva, in course of his travelling towards
Mukti, can expect to pass through the stage Yamaship; and if he pleases,
he can become a Yama.) At all times Thou destroyest the universe. None
can resist Thee. Hence Thou art named Kâla; so obeisance to Thee! Thou
art an ascetic, devoted to Brahmâ, self-controlled, and the distributor
of the fruits of Karmas to the Jîvas; Thou restrainest Thy senses. Hence
Thou art called Yama. Therefore I bow down to Thee.

 

<span id="page_926">p. 926</span>

 

13-17. Thou art delighted with Thy Own Self; Thou art omniscient; Thou
art the Tormentor of the sinners and the Friend of the Virtuous. Hence
Thy name is Pu<u>n</u>ya Mitra; so I bow down to Thee. Thou art born as
a part of Brahmâ; the fire of Brahmâ is shining through Thy body. Thou
dost meditate on Para Brahmâ, Thou art the Lord. Obeisance to Thee!” O
Muni! Thus praising Yama, She bowed down at the feet of Him. Yama gave
her the mantra of Mûla Prakriti. How to worship Her and He began to
recite the fruition of good Karmas. O Nârada! He who recites these eight
hymns to Yama early in the morning, getting up from his bed, is freed of
the fear of death. Rather he becomes freed of all his sins. So much so,
that even if he be a veritable awful sinner and if he recites daily with
devotion this Yamâ<u>st</u>akam, Yama purifies him thoroughly.

 

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Yama’s
giving S’akti Mantra to Sâvitrî in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](bk09ch32)
