[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch18)  [Next](bk09ch20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIX**

 

**On the going of the Devas to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha after Tulasî’s marriage
with S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a**

 

<span id="page_878">p. 878</span>

 

1\. Nârada said :-- “O Bhâgavân! Wonderful is the story that has been
now recited by you. My ears are not satisfied. So tell me what happened
afterwards.”

 

2-94. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! The Creator Brahmâ, blessing
them, departed to His own abode. The Dânava married Tulasî under the
Gandharba method. The celestial drums sounded and the flowers were
showered. In the beautiful lovely house the Dânavendra, remained in
perfect enjoyment. Tulasî, too, being busy with fresh intercourses,
became almost mad after them. The chaste Tulasî and S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a
both became deeply immersed in the ocean of bliss in their sexual union
and began to enjoy sixty-four sorts of amorous sports. In the S’âstras
on love affairs, all the connections of limbs with limbs that are
described, as the lover and the loved desire, they both enjoyed those
with perfect freedom and pleasure. The place was solitary; to add to it,
the scenery was grand and lovely; so nothing remained untasted of the
several tastes of amorous pleasures. On the banks of the river, in
flower-gardens, they slept on the flower beds smeared with sandal-paste,
and enjoyed the amorous pleasures. Both were adorned with

 

<span id="page_879">p. 879</span>

 

jewel ornaments; both were skilled in amorous practices; so no one
desisted. The chaste Tulasî out of her nimbleness due to young age,
easily stole into the heart of her husband. S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, too, a
great expert in knowing other’s amorous sentiments, attracted the heart
of Tulasî. Tulasî obliterated the sandal marks from the breast of the
King and the sign of tilak from his nose. The King also wiped away the
dot of Sindur and Alakâ (vermillion) marks from Tulasî’s forehead and
put marks of nails on her round plump breasts. Tulasî also hurt the
King’s left side by her bracelets. Then the King bit the lips of Tulasî.
Thus each one embraced the other, kissed each other and each one began
to champoo the thighs, legs, etc. When both of them thus spent their
time in amorous sports, they got up and began to dress themselves as
they desired. Tulasî smeared S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a’s nose with red
sandal-paste mixed with kumkum (saffron), smeared his body with
sweet-scented sandal-paste, offered sweet-scented betels in his mouth,
made him put on celestial garments (fireproof; brought from Fire) put
unto his neck the wonderful garland of Pârijâta flowers, destructive of
disease and old age, invaluable jewel rings on his hand and offering him
excellent gems, rare in the three worlds, said :-- “O Lord! I am your
maidservant” and uttering this repeatedly bowed down to the feet of her
husband with devotion. She then got up and with smiling countenance
began to look on his face with a steadfast gaze. The king
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a then attracted his dear Tulasî to his breast and
took off the veil fully from her face and began to look on that, next
moment he kissed on her cheek and lips and gave her a pair of garments
brought from the Varu<u>n</u>a’s house, a necklace of jewels, hard to
get in the three worlds, the tinklets of Svâhâ, the wife of Ag<u>n</u>i,
the Keyura (armlets) of the Sun’s wife Chhâyâ, the two earrings of
Rohi<u>n</u>î, the wife of the Moon, the finger rings of Rati, the wife
of Kâmadeva, and the wonderfully beautiful conch, given by Vis’va Karmâ,
excellent bedding studded with pearls and jewels and various ornaments;
and when he gave her all these things, he smiled. The king then put
garlands on Tulasî’s braid of hair, nicely variegated Alakâs on her
cheek, three crescent lines of sweet-scented sandal paste within the
Alakâs, dots of saffron all around that, the brilliant Sindura mark
looking like a flame, and red Âltâ on the feet and toes; he then placed
those feet on his breast and utterred repeatedly :-- “I am your servant”
and then held her on his breast. They then left the hermitage, in that
state and began to travel in various places. In the Malaya mountain, in
mountains after mountains, in solitary flower gardens, in the mountain
caves, in beautiful sea-beaches, on the banks of the Pu<u>s</u>pabhadrâ
river, cool with

 

<span id="page_880">p. 880</span>

 

watery breeze, in various rivers and riversides, in Vi<u>s</u>pandana
forest echoed with sweet songs of the birds of the vernal season. They
then went from Vi<u>s</u>pandana forest to the Surasana forest, from the
Surasana, forest to the Nandana forest, from the Nandana forest to the
nice Chandana forests, from Chandana forest to Champaka, Ketakî; Mâdhavî
Ku<u>nd</u>a, Mâlatî, and Kumuda and lotus forests; thence they went to
the forest of desire gratifying trees (Kalpavrik<u>s</u>a forest,) and
Pârijâta trees. They then went to the solitary place Kânchan, thence to
the Kânchî (forest) they then went to the Kîñjalaka forest, thence to
the Kânchanâkar (the gold mine), thence to Kanchuka and various other
forests echoed with the sweet sounds of cuckoos. There, on beds strewn
with flowers and scented with sandal paste they both enjoyed each other
to their hearts content and with great pleasure. But none of them,
whether S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a or Tulasî, got quenched with their thirst.
Rather their passions were inflamed like the fire on which clarified
butter is poured (in sacrifices). The King of the Dânavas, then, brought
Tulasî to his own kingdom and, there, in his own beautiful garden house,
he incessantly enjoyed her. Thus the powerful king of the Dânavas passed
away one Manvantara in the enjoyment of his kingdom. He spread his sway
over the Devatâs, Asuras, Dânavas, Gandharbas, Kinnaras, and
Râk<u>s</u>asas. The Devas, dispossessed of their realms, wandered
everywhere like beggars. At last they united in a body and went to the
Brahmâ’s assembly and there they began to cry and then related the whole
history how the Dânava S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a oppressed them. Hearing all
this, Brahmâ took them to S’ankara and informed Him of the whole history
of the case. When Mahâdeva heard all this, He took them all to the
highest place, Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha devoid of old age and death. Going
towards the first entrance of Nârâya<u>n</u>a’s abode, they saw the
gate-keepers watching the gate, taking their seats on jewel thrones.
They all looked brilliant, clothed with the yellow garments, adorned
with jewel ornaments, garlanded with forest flowers, all of S’yâma
Sundara (dark blue, very beautiful) bodies. They were four-armed,
holding on their hands, conch, mace, discus and lotus; sweet smile was
on their faces and eyes beautiful like lotus leaves. On Brahmâ asking
them for entrance to the assembly, they nodded their assent. He, then,
accompanied by the Devas, passed one by one, sixteen gates and at last
came before Nârâya<u>n</u>a. On reaching there, He saw that the assembly
was completely filled with Devar<u>s</u>is, and four-armed
Nârâya<u>n</u>like Pâri<u>s</u>adas (attendants), decked with Kaustubba
jewels. The sight of the Sabhâ (assembly) makes one think that the Moon
has just arisen, shedding effulgent rays all round. By the will of S’rî
Hari, excellent diamonds, invaluable gems and necklaces of gems and
jewels were

 

<span id="page_881">p. 881</span>

 

placed at various places. At other places rows of pearls were shedding
their splendour and brilliance like the garlands of gems and jewels. At
others, the mirrors were placed in a circle; and at various other
places, the endless wonderful artistic picture lines were drawn. Again
at other places the jewels called Padmarâgas were artistically arranged
as if the lotuses were there spreading their lustrous beauty all around.
At many other places rows of steps were made of wonderful Syamantak
jewels. All around the assembly, there were the excellent pillars, built
of Indranîlam jewels. Over those pillars, sandal leaves strung on
strings from to pillar to pillar, were suspended. Golden jars, all
brimful with water were located at various places. All around, the
garlands of Pârijâta flowers were seen. The hall was decorated with
sweet scented sandal trees, red like saffron and musk. Sweet scents were
being emitted all round. The Vidyadhâris were dancing at places. The
assembly hall measured one thousand Yojanas. Countless servants were
engaged all over on various works. Brahmâ, S’ankara, and the other Gods
saw there S’rî Hari seated in the centre on an invaluable jewel throne,
as a Moon looks surrounded by stars. There were the crown on His head,
the ear-rings on His ears; garlands made of wild flowers were on his
neck and His body was smeared all over with sandal paste and He was
holding Kelipadma (a sort of lotus) in His hand. He was seeing, with a
smiling countenance, the dancing and music before Him. He was full of
peace, the Lord of Sarasvatî. Laksmî was holding gently His lotus feet
and He was chewing the sweet scented betel offered by Her. Gangâ also
was fanning Him devotedly with a white Châmara and the others were
singing hymns to Him with their heads bent low with devotion. Brahmâ and
the other Gods all bowed down to Him; their bodies were all filled with
Pulaka (excessive joy causing hair stand on end); tears flowed from
their eyes and their

voices were choked out of emotion. The creator Brahmâ, then, with
clasped hands informed Him, with head bowed down, of the whole history
of S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a. Hearing this, the omniscient Hari, knowing the
minds of all, smiled and spoke to Brahmâ all the interesting secrets :--
O Lotus born! I know all about S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a. He was in his
previous birth My great devotee, an energetic Gopa. Now I speak to you
the ancient history of Goloka; hear. This story about Goloka is sin
destroying and highly meritorious. S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, in his previous
birth was the Gopa Sudâmâ, My chief Pâri<u>s</u>ad (attendant). He has
now become a Dânava on account of the dire curse pronounced by S’rî

Râdhâ. One day when I went from My abode, accompanied by Virajâ Gopî, to
the Râsa Ma<u>nd</u>ala, My beloved Râdhâ, hearing this news from a maid
servant, came up at once with Her whole host of Sakhîs

 

<span id="page_882">p. 882</span>

 

wrathful, to the Râsa Ma<u>nd</u>alam (ball dance in Goloka) and, not
being able to see Me, saw Virajâ turned into a river, She thought that I
had disappeared. So She went back to Her own abode with Her Sakhîs. But
when I returned to the house with Sudâmâ, Râdhâ rebuked Me very much. I
remained silent. But Sudâmâ could not bear and he rebuked Râdhâ in My
presence, a thing quite intolerable to Her dignity! On hearing this
rebuke, Râdhâ’s eyes became red with anger and She immediately ordered
Her Sakhîs to drive him away. Sudâmâ began to tremble with fear.
Immediately on Her command lakhs and lakhs of Sakhîs got up immediately
and drove that hot irresistible Sudâmâ away. Sudâmâ repeated his
chafings and roarings. On hearing these, She cursed him :-- “You better
be born in the womb of a Dânavî.” Hearing the terrible curse, Sudâmâ
bowed down to Me and went away crying; then Râdhâ, who was all-mercy,
became melted with mercy. And She prevented him repeatedly, not to go
away. Râdhâ wept and told him, “O Child! Wait. Where are you going? No
more you will have to go; return.” Thus saying She became very
distressed. The Gopas and Gopîs also began to weep. I then explained to
them, “In about half a moment Sudâmâ will come back, fulfilling the
conditions of the curse. O Sudâmâ! Come here when the curse expires.”
Then he appeased Râdhâ also. “Know that one moment (K<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>)
in Goloka is equal to one Manvantara on earth. The Yogi
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, expert in Mâyâ and very powerful will soon return
from the earth. Take this My weapon S’ûla and go early to Bhârata. S’iva
will slay the Dânava by this S’ûlâstra. The Dânava holds always on his
neck My auspicious Kavacha and will therefore become the conqueror of
the universe. No one will he able to kill him as long as be holds the
above Kavacha. So, first of all, I will go to him in the form of a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a and ask from him the Kavacha. O Creator! Thou also didst
give him the boon that his death would occur when the chastity of of his
wife would be destroyed. I will go and hold intercourse with his wife.
Then his death will occur without fail. His wife after her death will
come and become My dearest wife. Thus saying, Nârâya<u>n</u>a gave over
to Mahâdeva the S’ûlâstra. Then He went gladly to His inner
compartments. On the other hand, Brahmâ and Rudra and the other Devas
incarnated themselves in Bhârata.

 

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going of the Devas to
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha after Tulasî’s marriage with S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a in the
Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](bk09ch20)
