[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch07)  [Next](bk09ch09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VIII**

** **

**On the greatness of Kali**

 

<span id="page_833">p. 833</span>

 

1-110. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- A part of Sarasvatî descended in this
Bhârata Pu<u>n</u>ya Bhûmi (land of merits), owing to the curse of
Gangâ; and She remained in full in Vi<u>sn</u>u's region, the abode of
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. She is named Bhâratî, on account of Her coming to
Bhârata; she is called Brâhmî because she is dear to Brahmâ; and She is
called Vânî as She presides over Speech. Hari is seen everywhere, in
tanks, in wells, in running streams (i.e., in Saras). Because He resides
in Saras, therefore He is called Sarasvân. Vânî is the S'akti of that
Sarasvân; therefore She is denominated Sarasvatî. The river Sarasvatî is
a very sacred Tîrtha. She is the burning fire to the fuel of sins, of
sinners. O Nârada! Through the curse of Sarasvatî, the Devî Gangâ also
assumed the form of a river in part. She was brought down to this earth
at the request of Bhagîratha. Hence she is called Bhâgirathî. While
Gangâ was rushing down to the earth S'iva capable to bear the great rush
of Her, held Her on His head at the request of the Mother Earth.
Lak<u>s</u>mî also, through the curse of Sarasvatî came in part of parts
Bhârata as the river Padmâvatî. But She remained in full with Hari.
Lak<u>s</u>mî appeared also in Her other part as the well-known daughter
Tulasî of the king Dharmadhvaja in India. Last of all, through Bhâratî's
curse and by the command of S'rî Hari, she turned into the Tulasî tree,
purifying the whole world. Remaining for five thousand years of Kali,
all them will quit their river appearances and go back to Hari. By the

 

<span id="page_834">p. 834</span>

 

command of S’rî Hari, all the Tîrthas save Kâsî and Bindrâban will go
along with them to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. Next at the expiry of the ten
thousand years of Kali, S'âlagrâma S'ilâ (the stone piece worshipped as
Nârâya<u>n</u>a) S'iva, and S'iva S'akti and Puru<u>s</u>ottama
Jagannâtha will leave the soil of Bhârata and go to their respective
places, (i.e. the Mâhâtmyas of those will be extinct from Bhârata).
There will then cease to be the saints of S'iva S'âkta, Gâ<u>n</u>apatya
and Vai<u>sn</u>ava sects, (eighteen) Purâ<u>n</u>as, the blowing of
conch shells (auspicious signs), S'râddhas, Tarpa<u>n</u>as, and all the
rites and ceremonies dictated by the Vedas. The worship and
glorification of the Gods, the recitation of their praises, their names
will be extinct. The Vedas with their Amgas will no longer be heard of.
All these will disappear with them. The assembly of the Sâdhus, the true
Dharma, the four Vedas, the village Devas and Devîs, the Vratas (vows)
the practising of the austerities, fasting, all will disappear. All will
be addicted to the Vâmâchâra ritual (the left-hand ritual Tântrik form
of worship; sarcastically used in the sense of drinking wine and eating
flesh, etc.) They will speak falsehood and be deceitful. If anybody
worships, his worship will be void of Tulasî leaves. Almost all will be
deceitful, cruel, vain, egoistic, thievish and mischievous. Men will be
at variance with one another; women will be at variance with one
another; no fear will exist in marriage ties. Properties will be only of
those that will make them (i. e. there will cease to be any inheritance
from father to son and so forth ). Husbands will be obedient to their
wives; unchaste women will be in every house. Wives will rebuke their
husbands by incessant noisings and chidings. Wives will be the sole
mistresses of houses and husbands will stand before them as servants
with folded palms. Fathers-in-law and mothers-in-law will be their
servants. The brothers of wives, and their friends will be the managers
of the household affairs. But there will be no friendship with one's own
class fellows. The brothers and friends of the house owners (masters of
the house) will appear quite strangers as if they are new-comers.
Without the command of the house-wives, the masters of the houses will
be unable to do anything. The divisions of caste (Brâhma<u>n</u>â,
K<u>s</u>attriya, Vai<u>s</u>ya, and S'ûdra) will entirely disappear.
Far from practising Sandhyâ Bandanam and other daily practices, the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as will cease to hold the holy threads even on their
bodies. The four colour-classes will practise the doings of the
Mlechchas, read the S'âstras of the Mlechchas and forsake their own
S'âstras. The Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, K<u>s</u>attriyas, and Vais'yas will
become the slaves of S'ûdras, will become their cooks, runners and
carriers of buffaloes. Every one will be devoid of truth. Earth will not
yield any grains;

 

<span id="page_835">p. 835</span>

 

trees will not yield any fruits and women will be issueless. The cows
will not yield milk; even if there be a little milk, ghee will not come
out of it. The affection between husband and wife will die out and the
families will be devoid of truth. The King will not wield any power; the
subjects will be over burdened with taxes. The ever flowing big rivers,
the petty streams, the caves of mountains all will gradually have very
little water in them. The Four Var<u>n</u>as will be devoid of Dharma
and Pu<u>n</u>ya (merit, virtue). One in a lakh may be virtuous.
Afterwards that too will cease. Men, women, boys,  all will be ugly and
deformed. They will utter bad words and vile sounds. Some villages and
towns will be completely deserted by men and will look terrible; at some
others few cottages with few inhabitants will be seen. Villages and
towns will be jungles and jungles will become filled with men. The
inhabitants of the forests will become heavily taxed and disconsolate.
The beds of rivers and lakes will become dry owing to want of rains and
will be cultivated. The Kulînas of high families will become very low.
The whole earth will be filled with liars, untruthful cheats and
hypocrites. The lands, though cultivated well, will yield grains in
name. Those who are well known as the millionaires, they will become
poor and those who are devoted to the Devas will be atheists. The towns
folk will have no trace of mercy; rather they will hate and envy their
neighbours and turn out murderers of men. In the Kali age, males and
females will be everywhere, of a dwarfish stature, diseased, shortlived,
and of very little youthful virility. The hairs will turn out grey no
sooner the people reach their sixteenth year. And they will be very old
when they become twenty years old. The girls of eight years will have
menstruation and will become pregnant. They will deliver every year. Old
age will attack them when they become sixteen years old. Some women will
have their husbands and children living. Otherwise almost all will be
barren, childless. The four Var<u>n</u>as will sell their daughters. The
paramours of the mothers, wives, son's wives, daughters, and sisters
will be the source of support to them all. No one will be able, without
money, to collect the merits by repeating the name of Hari. Persons will
make gifts for name and fame and ultimately will take back what they had
made as gifts. If there be any gifts made by one's own self or by one's
forefathers or for a Deva purpose or for Brâhmi<u>n</u>s or for the
families of the Gurus, there will not be found wanting attempts to take
back those gifts. Some will go to daughters, some to mothers-in-law,
some to the wives of sons, some to sisters, some to mothers of co-wives,
some will go to the brother's wives. In every house, those who are unfit
to be mixed will be mixed with, excepting one's mother. In Kali Yuga

 

<span id="page_836">p. 836</span>

 

who is whose wife? And who is whose husband? There will be no certainty;
who is whose subject and what village is to whom? There will be no
surety that such a property belongs to such and such a man. All will
turn out to be liars, licentious, thieves, envious of other's wives, and
murderers of men. In the houses of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s,
K<u>s</u>attriyas, and Vais'yas, the three higher castes, the current of
sin will flow. They will live by selling lac, iron, and salts prohibited
by the S'âstras. The Brâhmi<u>n</u>s will drive buffaloes, burn the dead
bodies of the S'ûdras, eat the food of the S'ûdras and go to unchaste
women. There will be no more faith existing in the five Ri<u>s</u>i
Yajñas. Almost every Brâhmi<u>n</u> will not observe the vows of
Amâvasyâ Nis'ipâlana. The holy threads will be cast away and the Sandhyâ
Bandanam and cleanliness and good practices will cease altogether. The
unchaste women who deal in giving loans, etc., and live on interests and
the procuresses during menstruation will cook in Brâhmi<u>n</u>
families. There will be no distinction of food, no distinction of wombs,
no distinction of Âs'ramas, and no distinction of persons. All will turn
out Mlechchas. O Nârada! Thus, when the Kali will have its full play,
the whole world will be filled with Mlechchas, the trees will be one
hand high and the men will be of the size of a thumb. Then the most
powerful Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a will incarnate in His part in the
house of a Brâhmi<u>n</u> named Vi<u>sn</u>ujas'â as his son. Mounted on
a long horse, holding a long sword He will make the world free of the
Mlechchas in three nights. Then he will disappear from the face of the
Earth and She will be without any sovereign and be filled with robbers.
There will be incessant rain, for six nights and it will rain and rain
and the whole earth will be deluged; no traces of men, houses, and
trees. After this the Twelve Suns will rise simultaneously and by their
rays the whole water will be dried up and the earth will become level.
Thus the dreadful Kali will pass away when the Satya Yuga will come
back, Tapasyâ and the true religion and Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a will prevail
again. The Brâhmi<u>n</u>s will practise Tapasyâ, they will be devoted
to Dharma and the Vedas. The women will be chaste and religious in every
house. Again the wise and intelligent K<u>s</u>attriyas devoted to the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as will occupy the royal thrones and their might, devotion
to Dharma and love for good deeds will increase. The Vais'yas will again
go on with their trades and their devotion to their trade and the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s will be reestablished. The S'ûdras, too, will be again
virtuous, and serve the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s. Again the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s,
K<u>s</u>attriyas, and Vais'yas and their families will have Bhakti
towards the Devî, be initiated in Devî Mantras and all will meditate on
the Devî. Again there will be spread the knowledge of the Vedas, the
Smritis,

 

<span id="page_837">p. 837</span>

 

and the Purâ<u>n</u>as, all will go to their wives in menstruation
periods. No Adharma (unrighteousness) will exist and the Dharma will
reign in full, with all the parts (Kalâs) complete. When the Tretâ Yuga
comes, the Dharma will be three footed; when the Dvâpara Yuga will come;
the Dharma will be two-footed and when Kali will begin, the Dharma will
be one-footed, and when Kali will reign supreme, no Dharma will exist,
even in name. (O Nârada! Now I will speak of time.) The seven days of
the week, Sunday, &c., the sixteen tithis, Pratipada &c., the twelve
months Vais'âkha &c., the six seasons Summer, &c., the two fortnights
(dark and bright) and the two Aya<u>n</u>as (Northern and Southern) are
rendered in vogue. One day consists of four Praharas, one night consists
of four Praharas; a day and a night constitute one so-called day. Thirty
such days make one month. In the computation of time, five kinds of
years (Var<u>s</u>as) were already mentioned (in the 8th Skandha). As
the Satya, Tretâ, Dvâpara and Kali roll on turn by turn, so the days,
months and years also roll on in turn. One day, according to the Devas,
is equal to one year, according to men; three hundred and sixty human
Yugas equal to one Deva Yuga. Seventy-one Deva Yugas make one
Manvantara. The life period of Indra, the Lord of S'achî, is one
Manvantara. Twenty-eight Indras' lives equal to one day of
Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha (the golden wombed) Brahmâ. One hundred and eight
such years equal to the life of one Brahmâ. When this Brahmâ dies, there
is the Prâkrita Pralaya. The earth is not visible then. (The dissolution
of Prakriti takes place.) The whole Brâhma<u>nd</u>a is deluged by
water; Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes'vara and the other wise Ri<u>s</u>is
get diluted in Para Brahmâ whose substance is all truth and
consciousness. That time, the Prakriti Devî, too, gets merged in Para
Brahmâ. The fall of Brahmâ and the dissolution of Prakriti are called
the Prâkrita Pralaya. The duration of this Pralaya is one Nime<u>s</u>a
of the Para Brahmâ Mûla Prakriti united with Mâyâ. All the
Brâhma<u>nd</u>as (universes) are destroyed at this time. When this
Nime<u>s</u>a expires, the creation begins again in due order. So one
cannot count the endless numbers of times when this creation and
dissolution work are going on. So who can tell how many kalpas had past
away, or how many Kalpas will come, how many Brâhma<u>nd</u>as were
created or how many Brâhma<u>nd</u>as will be created. Who will be able
to count how many Brahmâs, how many Vi<u>sn</u>us or how many
Mahes'varas there have been. But One and Only One Para Brahmâ
Parames'vara (the Great God) is The Supreme Lord of these countless
Brâhma<u>nd</u>as. The Parames'vara of the nature of Existence,
Consciousness and Bliss is the Highest Spirit of all. All others,
Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes'vara the

 

<span id="page_838">p. 838</span>

 

Great Virâ<u>t</u>, the Smaller Virâ<u>t</u>, all are His parts. This
Brahmâ is Mûlâ Prakriti and from That has appeared S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a,
the Lord of his left half which is woman (Ardha Nârîs'vara). It is She
that divided Herself into two forms; in Her one form, She resides as the
two armed Kri<u>sn</u>a in the region of Goloka; and as the four-armed
Nârâya<u>n</u>a in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. All the things from Brahmâ, the
Highest, to the mere grass the lowest, all are originated from Prakriti.
And all the Prakriti-born things are transient. Thus the True, Eternal
Para Brahmâ, beyond the three gu<u>n</u>as, the Source of all creation,
Whose substance is All-Will is the Only Substance beyond the region of
Prakriti. He is without Upâdhis (conditions, as time, space, causation
and attributes); He is without any form; and the forms that He assumes,
they are for shewing His Grace to the devotees only. The Lotus-born
Brahmâ is able by His Power of Knowledge to create the Brâhma<u>nd</u>a.
It is by His Grace that S'iva, the Lord of the yogis is named
Mrityumjaya (the Conqueror of Death), the Destoyer of all, and the
Knower of all Tattvas. By His Tapas, S'iva has realised Para Brahmâ and
therefore has become the Lord of all, All-knowing, endowed with great
Vibhûtis (lordly powers), the seer of all, omnipresent, the protector of
all, the bestower of all prosperities. The devotion and service towards
Para Brahmâ have alone made S’rî Vi<u>sn</u>u the Lord of all; and it is
through the power of Para Brahmâ, that Mahâmâyâ Prakriti Devî has become
omnipotent and the Goddess of all. Bhagavatî Durgâ has got His Grace by
Her devotion and service to Him and has become Mûla Prakriti of the
nature of Being, Consciousness and Bliss. And so has the Devî Sâvitrî,
the Mother of the Vedas, become the presiding Deity of the Vedas and She
is worshipped by the Brâhma<u>n</u>as and the Knowers of the Vedas. That
She presides over all the branches of knowledge, is worshipped by all
the learned assemblies and by the whole Universe is the result only of
worshipping the Prakriti Devî. That Lak<u>s</u>mî has become the
bestower of all wealth and the presiding Deity of all the villages and
the mistress of all, worshipped by all and the bestower of sons to all
is also the result of worshipping Her. Thus it is through the worship of
Prakriti that Durgâ, the Destroyer of all calamities and troubles has
appeared from the left side of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a; and Râdhâ has become
the presiding Deity of His Prâ<u>n</u>a (vital airs), and She is
worshipped by all and possessed of all knowledge. It is by the worship
of S'akti that Râdhikâ has so much excelled in love, has become the
presiding Deity of the prâ<u>n</u>a of Kri<u>sn</u>a, has got love and
respect, has been placed on His breast and is exceedingly beautiful.
With the object of getting Kri<u>sn</u>a for her husband, She

 

<span id="page_839">p. 839</span>

 

practised severe austerities for one thousand Deva years on the mountain
S'atas'<u>r</u>inga in Bhârata to get the Mûla Prakriti's Grace. And
when the S'akti Mûla Prakriti became graciously pleased towards Her,
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a seeing Râdhikâ increasing in beauty like the Crescent
Moon took Her to His breast and out of tenderness wept and granted Her
highest boons so very rare to others and said :-- O Beautiful One! You
better remain always in My breast and devoted to Me amongs all my wives;
let you be superior to them all in good fortune, respect, love and
glory. From today you are my greatest best wife. I will love you as the
best amongst them all. O Dear! Always I will be submissive to you and
fulfil what you say. Thus saying, S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a selected her as his
wife without any co-wives and made Her dear to His Heart. The other
Devîs besides the five Prakritis, already mentioned, also derived
superiorities by serving Mûla Prakriti. O Muni! What shall I say,
everyone reaps the fruits as he practises Tapasyâ. Bhagavati Durgâ
practised on the Himâlyâs tapasyâ for one thousand Deva years and
meditated on the lotus-feet of Mûla Prakriti and so has come to be
worshipped by all. The Devî Sarasvatî practised Tapasyâ for one lakh
Deva years and is come to be respected by all. The Devî Lak<u>s</u>mî
practised Tapasyâ at Pu<u>s</u>kara for one hundred Divine Yugas and, by
the Grace of Mûla Prakriti has become the bestower of wealth to all. The
Devî Savitrî worshipped S’akti for sixty thousand divine years in the
Malaya mountain and is respected and worshipped by all. O Bibhu! Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahes'vara worshipped S'akti for one hundred
Manvantaras and so have become the Preservers, etc., of this world. S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a practised for ten Manvantaras terrible austerities and
therefore obtained his position in the region of Goloka and is remaining
there today in greatest bliss. Dharma Deva worshipped S’akti with
devotion for ten Manvantaras and has become the lives of all, worshipped
by all, and the receptacle of all. O Muni! Thus all, whether the Devîs,
Devas, Munis, Kings, Brâhma<u>n</u>as, all have got their respect in
this world by the worship of S’akti. O Devar<u>s</u>i! I have thus
described to you all that I heard from the mouth of my Guru, in
accordance with the rules of the Vedas. What more do you want to hear?

 

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Greatness of Kali
in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am Srîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](bk09ch09)
