[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch21)  [Next](bk09ch23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXII**

 

**On the fight between the Devas and S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a**

 

<span id="page_892">p. 892</span>

 

1-75. S’rî Nârâya<u>n</u>a spoke :-- Then the King of the Dânavas, very
powerful, bowed down to Mahâdeva and ascended on the chariot with his
ministers. Mahâdeva gave orders to His army to be ready at once. So
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a did. Terrible fight then ensued between Mahendra and
Vri<u>s</u>aparvâ, Bhâskara and Viprachitti, Nis’âkara and Dambha,
between Kâla and Kâles’vara, between Fire and Gokar<u>n</u>a, Kuvera and
Kâlakeya, between Vis’vakarmâ and Mâyâ, between Mrityu and Bhayamkar,
between Yama and Samhâra, between Varu<u>n</u>a and Vikamka, between
Budha and Dhritapri<u>st</u>ha, between S’ani and Raktâk<u>s</u>a,
Jayanta and Ratnasâra, between the Vasus and Varchasas, between the two
As’vin Kumâras and Dîptimân, between Nalakûbara and Dhûmra, between
Dharma and Dhurandhara, between Mangala and U<u>s</u>âk<u>s</u>a, Bhânu
and S’ovâkara, between Kandarpa and Pî<u>t</u>hara, between the eleven
Âdityas and Godhâmukha, Chûr<u>n</u>a and Kha<u>d</u>gadhvaja,
Kañchîmukha and Pi<u>nd</u>a, Dhûmra and Nandî, between Vis’va and
Palâs’a, between the eleven Rudras and the eleven Bhayamkaras, between
Ugracha<u>nd</u>â and the other Mahâmârîs and Nandîs’vara and the other
Dânavas. The battlefield, then, assumed a grim aspect, as if the time of
Dissolution had come. Bhagavân Mahâdeva sat under the Va<u>t</u>a
(peepul) tree with Kârtikeya and Bhadrakâlî. S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, decked
with his jewel ornaments, sat on the jewel throne, surrounded by
ko<u>t</u>is and ko<u>t</u>is of Dânavas. The S’ankara’s army got
defeated at the hands of the Dânavas. The Devas, with cuts and wounds on

 

<span id="page_893">p. 893</span>

 

their bodies, fled from the battlefield, terrified. Kârtikeya gave words
“Don't fear” to the Devas and excited them. Only Skanda resisted the
Dânava forces. In one moment he slew one hundred Ak<u>s</u>auhi<u>n</u>î
Dânava forces. The lotus eyed Kâlî also engaged in killing the Asuras.
She became very angry and no sooner did She slay the Asura forces, than
She began to drink their blood. She easily slew with Her one hand and at
every time put into Her mouth ten lakhs, and hundred lakhs and
Ko<u>t</u>is and Ko<u>t</u>is of elephants. Thousands and thousands of
headless bodies (Kavandhas) came to be witnessed in the field. The
bodies of the Dânavas were all cut and wounded by the arrows of
Kârtikeya. They were all terrified and fled away. Only
Vri<u>s</u>aparvâ, Viprachitti, Dambha, and Vikamka<u>n</u>ah remained
fighting with Skanda with an heroic valour. Mahâmârî, too, did not shew
his back and he fought out vigorously. By and by they all became very
much confused and distressed; but they did not turn their backs. Seeing
this terrible fight of Skanda, the Devas began to shower flowers. The
killing of the Dânavas looked like a Prakritik Dissolution.
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, then, began to shoot arrows from his chariot.

 

The shooting of arrows by the king seemed as if rains were being poured
in by the clouds. Everything became pitch dark. Fires only were seen
emitting their golden tongues. The Devas, Nandîs’vara and others, fled
away, terrified. Only Kârtikeya remained in the battlefield. Then
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a began to throw terribly showers and showers of
mountains, snakes, stones, and trees. So much so, that Kârtikeya was
covered by them as the Sun becomes obscured by fog. The Demon King cut
off the weighty quiver and the pedestal of Skanda and broke His chariot.
By the divine weapons of the Dânava, the peacock (the vehicle) of
Kârtikeya became exhausted. Kârtikeya threw one S’akti (weapon) on the
breast of the Dânava; but before it fell, the Dânava cut off that,
lustrous like the Sun and, in return, darted his S’akti. By that stroke,
Kârtikeya became stunned for a moment; but he immediately regained his
consciousness. He then took up the quiver that Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u
gave him before and many other weapons; and ascending on another
chariot, built of jewels, began to fight out violently and valiantly.
Getting angry, he resisted all those showers of snakes, mountains and
trees by his divine weapons. He resisted fire by his watery (Pâryannya)
weapon. Then He cut off easily S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a’s chariot, bow,
armour, charioteer, and his bright crown and he threw on his breast one
blazing S’akti of white colour. The Dânavendra fell unconscious; but, at
the next moment, he regained his consciousness quickly, mounted on
another chariot and took a fresh quiver. The Dânava was the foremost in
his magic powers. He, by his power of Mâyâ, made a shower of arrows so
much so that

 

<span id="page_894">p. 894</span>

 

Kârtikeya became completely covered by that multitude of arrows. Then
the Dânava took one invincible S’akti, lustrous like one hundred Suns.
It seemed that flames of fire were licking high as if the Dissolution
Time had come aright. Inflamed by anger, the Dânava threw that S’akti on
Kârtikeya. It seemed, then, that a burning mass of fire fell on him. The
powerful Kârtikeya became senseless. Bhadrakâlî immediately took Him on
Her lap and carried him before S’iva. S’iva easily restored him to his
life by his knowledge-power and gave him the indomitable strength. He
then got up in full vigour. Bhadrakâlî went to the field to see the
Kârtikeya’s forces. Nandîs’vara and other heroes, the Devas, Gandharbas,
Yak<u>s</u>as, Râk<u>s</u>asas and Kinnaras followed Her. Hundreds of
war drums were sounded and hundreds of persons carried Madhu (wine).
Going to the battle-ground, She gave a war-cry. The Dânava forces got
fainted by that cry. Bhadrakâlî shouted aloud inauspicious peals after
peals of laughter. Then She drank Madhu and danced in the battlefield.
Ugra Dam<u>st</u>râ, Ugracha<u>nd</u>â, Ko<u>t</u>avî, the Yoginîs,
Dâkinîs, and the Devas all drank Madhu (wine). Seeing Kâlî in the
battlefield, S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a came up again and imparted the spirit
of Fearlessness to the Daityas, trembling with fear. Bhadrakâlî
projected, then, the Fire weapon, flaming like the Great Dissolution
Fire; but the king quickly put out that by the Watery weapon. Kâlî then
projected the very violent and wonderful Varu<u>n</u>âstra. The Dânava
cut off that easily with Gandharbâstra. Kâlî then threw the flame-like
Mahes’varâstra. The king made it futile by the Vai<u>sn</u>avâstra. Then
the Devî purifying the Nârâya<u>n</u>âstra with the mantra, threw it on
the king. At this the king instantly alighted from his chariot and bowed
down to it. The Nârâya<u>n</u>âstra rose high up like the Dissolution
Fire. S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a fell prostrate on the ground with devotion.
The Devî threw, then, the Brahmâstra, purifying it with Mantra. But it
was rendered futile by the Dânava’s Brahmâstra. The Devî again shot the
divine weapons purifying them with mantras; but they also were nullified
by the divine weapons of the Dânava. Then Bhadrakâlî threw one S’akti
extending to one Yojana. The Daitya cut it to pieces by his divine
weapon. The Devî, then, being very much enraged, became ready to throw
Pâs’upata Âstra, when the Incorporeal Voice was heard from the Heavens,
prohibiting Her, and saying, “O Devî! The high-souled Dânava would not
be killed by the Pâs’upata weapon. For Brahmâ granted him this boon that
until the Vi<u>sn</u>u’s Kavacha will remain on his neck and until his
wife’s chastity be not violated, old age and death will not be able to
touch him.” Hearing this Celestial Voice, the Devî at once desisted. But
She, out of hunger, devoured hundreds and lakhs of Dânavas. The terrible
Devî Kâlî, then, went with great speed to devour S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a but
the Dânava resisted Her by his sharp

 

<span id="page_895">p. 895</span>

 

divine weapons. The Devî then threw on him a powerful axe, lustrous like
a summer Sun; but the Dânava cut it to pieces by his divine weapon. The
Devî seeing this, became very angry and proceeded to devour him; but the
Dânava King, the Lord of all Siddhis, expanded his body. At this, Kâlî
became violently angry and assuming a terrific appearance, went quickly
and with the blow of one fist, broke his chariot and dropped down the
charioteer. Then she hurled on the Asura one S’ûla weapon, blazing like
a Pralaya Fire. S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a easily held that by his left hand.
The Devî became angry and struck the Dânava with Her fist; the Daitya’s
head reeled, and, rolling, he fell unconscious for a moment. Next moment
regaining his consciousness he got up. But he did not fight hand to hand
with the Devî. Rather he bowed down to Her. The weapons that the Devî
threw afterwards were partly cut down by the Dânava and partly taken up
by him and absorbed in him and thus rendered futile. Then Bhadrakâlî
caught bold of the Dânava and whirling him round and round threw him
aloft. Then the powerful S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a fell down on the ground
from high with great force; he immediately

got up and bowed down to Her. He then gladly ascended on his beautiful
chariot, built of excellent jewels. He did not feel any fatigue with the
war and went on fighting. Then the Devî Bhadrakâlî, feeling hungry began
to drink the blood of the Dânavas and ate the fat and flesh. She came
before Mahâdeva and described to Him the whole history of the warfare
from beginning to end. Hearing the killing of the Dânavas, Mahâdeva
began to laugh. She went on saying, “The Dânavas that get out of my
mouth while I was chewing them, are the only ones that are living. This
number will be about one lakh. And when I took up the Pâs’upata weapon
to kill the Dânava, the Incorporeal Celestial Voice spoke :-- He is
invulnerable by you. But the very powerful Dânava did no more fling any
weapon on Me. He simply cut to pieces those that I threw on him.”

 

Here ends the Twenty-Second Chapter in the Ninth Book on the fight
between the Devas and S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî
Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](bk09ch23)
