[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch50)  [Next](bk10ch02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter I**

** **

**On the story of Svâyambhuva Manu**

 

<span id="page_1022">p. 1022</span>

 

1-6. Nârada said :-- O Nârâya<u>n</u>a! O Thou, the Supporter of this
whole world! The Preserver of all! Thou hast described the glorious
characters of the Devî, that take away all the sins. Kindly describe now
to me the several forms that the Devî assumed in every Manvantara in
this world as well as Her Divine Greatness. O Thou, full of mercy!
Describe also how and by whom She was worshipped and praised; how She,
so kind to the devotees, having been thus pleased, fulfilled their
desires. I am very eager to hear these, the very best and blissful
characters of the Devî. S’rî Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Hear, O
Mahar<u>s</u>i! The glories and greatness of the Devî Bhagavatî leading
to the devotion of the devotees, capable of giving all sorts of wealth
and destroying all sins. From the navel lotus of Vi<u>sn</u>u, the
holder of the Chakra (discus), was born Brahmâ, the Creator of this
universe, the great Energetic One, and the Grand Sire of all the worlds.

 

7-14. The four faced Brahmâ, on being born, produced from His mind
Svâyambhuva Manu and his wife S’atarûpâ, the embodiment of all virtues.
For this very reason, Svâyambbuva Manu has been known as the mind-born
son of Brahmâ. Svâyambhuva Manu got from Brahmâ the task to create and
multiply; he made an earthen image of the Devî Bhagavatî, the Bestower
of all fortunes, on the beach of the sanctifying K<u>s</u>îra Samudra
(ocean of milk) and he engaged himself in worshipping Her and began to
repeat the principal mystic mantra of Vâgbhava (the Deity of Speech).
Thus engaged in worship, Svâyambhuva Manu conquered by and by his breath
and food and observed Yama, Niyama and other vows and became lean and
thin. For one hundred years he remained standing always on one leg and
became successful in controlling his six        passions lust, anger,
etc. He meditated on the feet of that Âdyâ S'akti (the Primordial
S'akti) so much that he became inert like a vegetable or mineral matter.
By his Tapas the Devî, the World Mother appeared before him and said :--
“O King! Ask divine boons from Me.” Hearing these joyous words, the King
wanted his long cherished and heart-felt boon, so very rare to the
Devas.

 

15-22. Manu said :-- O Large eyed Devî! Victory to Thee, residing in the
hearts of all! O Thou honoured, worshipped! O Thou! the Upholdress of
the world! O Thou, the Auspicious of all auspicious!

 

<span id="page_1023">p. 1023</span>

 

By Thy Gracious Look, it is that the Lotus born has been able to create
the worlds; Vi<u>sn</u>u is perserving and Rudra Deva is destroying in a
minute. By Thy command it is that Indra, the Lord of S'achî, has got the
charge of controlling the three Lokas; and Yama, the Lord of the
departed, is awarding fruits and punishing according, to their merits or
demerits, the deceased ones. O Mother! By Thy Grace, Varu<u>n</u>a, the
holder of the noose, has become the lord of all aquatic creatures and is
preserving them; and Kuvera, the lord of the Yak<u>s</u>as, has become
the lord of wealth. Agni (fire), Nai<u>rr</u>it, Vâyu (wind), Îs'âna and
Ananta Deva are Thy parts and have grown by Thy power. Then, O Devî! If
Thou desirest to grant me my desired boon, then, O Thou! the Auspicious
One! Let all the great obstacles to my work of procreating in this
universe and increasing my dominions die away. And if anybody worships
this great Vâgbhava Mantra or anybody hears with devotion this history
or makes others hear this, they all shall be crowned with success and
enjoyment and Mukti be easy to them.

 

23-24. Specially they would get the power to remember their past lives,
acquire eloquence in speaking, all round beauty, success in obtaining
knowledge, success in their deeds and especially in the increase of
their posterity and children. O Bhagavatî! This is what I want most.

 

Here ends the First Chapter of the Tenth Book on the story of
Svâyambhuva Manu in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](bk10ch02)
