[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk10ch01)  [Next](bk10ch03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter II**

** **

**On the conversation between Nârada and the Bindhya Mountain**

 

<span id="page_1023">p. 1023</span>

 

1-6. The Devî said :-- “O King! O Mighty armed One! All these I grant
unto you. Whatever you have asked for, I give them to you. I am very
much pleased with your hard Tapasyâ and with your Japam of the Vâgbhava
Mantra. Know Me that My power is infallible in killing the Lords of the
Daityas. O Child! Let your kingdom be free from enemies and let your
prosperity be increased. Let your devotion be fixed on Me and in the end
you will verily get Nirvâ<u>n</u>a Mukti.” O Nârada! Thus granting the
boon to the highsouled Manu the Great Devî disappeared before him and
went to the Bindhya Range. O Devar<u>s</u>i! This Bindhya mountain
increased in height so much so that it was well nigh on the way to
prevent the course of the Sun when it was arrested by Mahâr<u>s</u>i
Agastya, born of a kumbha (water jar). The younger sister of
Vi<u>sn</u>u, Varades'varî, is staying here as Bindhyavâsinî. O Best of
the Munis! This Devî is an object of worship of all.

 

<span id="page_1024">p. 1024</span>

 

7-8. Saunaka and the other Ri<u>s</u>is said :-- O Sûta! Who is that
Bindhya Mountain? And why did He intend to soar high up to the Heavens
to resist the Sun's course? And why was it that Agastya, the son of
Mitrâvaru<u>n</u>a quietened that rising mountain? Kindly describe all
these in detail.

 

9-15. O Saint! We are not as yet satisfied with hearing the Glories of
the Devî, the ambrosial nectar, that have come out of your mouth. Rather
our thirst has been increased. Sûta said :-- O Ri<u>s</u>is! There was
the Bindhya Mountain, highly honoured and reckoned as the chief of the
mountains on the earth. It was covered with big forests and big trees.
Creeping plants and shrubs flowered these and it looked very beautiful.
On it were roaming deer, wild boars, buffaloes, monkeys, hares, foxes,
tigers and bears, stout and cheerful, with full vigour and all very
merrily. The Devas, Gandharbhas, Apsarâs, and Kinnaras come here and
bathe in its rivers; all sorts of fruit trees can be seen here. On such
a beautiful Bindhya Mountain, came there one day the ever joyful
Devar<u>s</u>i Nârada on his voluntary tour round the world. Seeing the
Mahâr<u>s</u>i Nârada, the Bindhya Mountain got up and worshipped him
with pâdya and arghya and gave him a very good Âsana to sit. When the
Muni took his seat and found himself happy, the Mountain began to speak.

 

16-17. Bindhya said :-- “O Devar<u>s</u>i! Now be pleased to say whence
you are coming; your coming here is so very auspicious! My house is
sanctified today by your coming. O Deva! Your wandering is, like the
Sun, the cause of inspiring the beings with freedom from fear. So, O
Nârada! Kindly give out your intention as to your coming here which
seems rather wonderful.”

 

18-28. Nârada said :-- “O Bindhya! O Enemy of Indra! (Once the mountains
had a very great influence. Indra cut off their wings and so destroyed
their influence. Hence the mountains are enemies of Indra). I am coming
from the Sumeru Mountain. There I saw the nice abodes of Indra, Agni,
Yama, and Varu<u>n</u>a. There I saw the houses of these Dikpâlas (the
Regents of the several quarters), which abound in objects of all sorts
of enjoyments.” Thus saying, Nârada gave out a heavy sigh. Bindhya, the
king of mountains, seeing the Muni heaving a long sigh, asked him again
with great eagerness, “O Devar<u>s</u>i! Why have you heaved such a long
sigh? Kindly say.” Hearing this, Nârada said :-- “O Child! Hear the
cause why I sighed. See! The Himâlayâ Mountain is the father of Gaurî
and the father-in-law of Mahâdeva; therefore he is the most worshipped
of all the mountains. The Kailâs'a Mountain again, is the residence of
Mahâdeva; hence that is also

 

<span id="page_1025">p. 1025</span>

 

worshipped and chanted as capable of destroying all the sins. So the
Ni<u>s</u>adha, Nîla, and Gandhamâdana and other mountains are
worshipped at their own places. What more than this, that the Sumeru
Mountain, round whom the thousand-rayed Sun, the Soul of the universe,
circumambulates along with the planets and stars, thinks himself the
supreme and greatest amongst the mountains, “I am the supreme; there is
none like me in the three worlds.” Remembering this self-conceit of
Sumeru, I sighed so heavily. O Bindhya! We are asceties and though we
have no need to discuss these things, yet by way of conversation I have
told this to you. Now I go to my own abode.”

 

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Tenth Book on the conversation
between Nârada and the Bindhya Mountain in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî
Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](bk10ch03)
