[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk10ch05)  [Next](bk10ch07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VI**

** **

**On the Devas praying to the Muni Agastya**

 

<span id="page_1030">p. 1030</span>

 

1-6. Sûta said :-- O Ri<u>s</u>is! Hearing the words of the Lord of
Lak<u>s</u>mî, all the Devas became pleased and they spoke. The Devas
said :-- O Deva of the Devas! O Mahâ Vi<u>sn</u>u! O Thou, the Creator,
Preserver and the Destroyer of the Universe! O Vi<u>sn</u>u! The Bindhya
mountain has risen very high and it has stopped the Sun's course.
Therefore all the works on earth are suspended. We are not receiving our
share of Yajñas. Now where we will go, what we will do, we do not know.
S’rî Bhagavân said :-- “O Devas! There is now in Benares the Muni
Agastya of indomitable power, in devoted service of that Primordial
S'akti Bhagavatî, the Creatrix of this Universe. This Muni alone can put
a stop to this abnormal Bindhya Range. Therefore it behoves you all to
go to that fiery Dvija Agastya at Benares where the people get
Nirvâ<u>n</u>a; the Highest Place and pray to him (to kindly fulfil your
object).”

 

7-19. Sûta said: -- O Ri<u>s</u>is! Thus ordered by Vi<u>sn</u>u, the
gods felt themselves comforted and, saluting Him, went to the city of
Benares.

 

In a moment they went to the Holy City of Benares, and bathing there at
the Ma<u>n</u>ikar<u>n</u>ikâ ghâ<u>t</u>, worshipped the Devas with
devotion and offered Tarpa<u>n</u>as to the Pitris and duly made their
charities. Then they went to the excellent Âs'rama of the Muni Agastya.
The hermitage was full of quiet quadruped animals; adorned with various
trees, peacocks, herons, geese and Chakravâkas and various other birds,
tigers, wolves, deer, the wild boars, rhinoceros, young elephants, Ruru
deer and others. Though there were the ferocious animals, yet the place
was free from fear and it looked exceedingly beautiful. On arriving
before the Muni, the gods fell prostrate before him and bowed down again
and again to him. They then chanted hymns to him and said :-- O Lord of
Dvijas! O Thou honoured and most worshipful! Victory to Thee. Thou art
sprung from a water jar. Thou art the destroyer of

 

<span id="page_1031">p. 1031</span>

 

Vâtâpî, the Asura. Obeisance to Thee! O Thou, full of S’rî, the son of
Mitrâvaru<u>n</u>a! Thou art the husband of Lopâmudrâ. Thou art the
store house of all knowledge. Thou art the source of all the S'âstras.
Obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise, the waters of the ocean become bright
and clear; so obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise (Canopus) the Kâs'a flower
blossoms. Thou art adorned with clots of matted hair on Thy head and
Thou always livest with Thy disciples. S’rî Râma Chandra is one of Thy
chief disciples. O great Muni! Thou art entitled to praise from all the
Devas! O Best! The Store-house of all qualities! O great Muni! We now
bow down to Thee and Thy wife Lopâmudrâ! O Lord! O very Energetic! We
all are very much tormented by an unbearable pain inflicted on us by the
Bindhya Range and we therefore take refuge of Thee. Be gracious unto us.
Thus praised by the gods, the highly religious Muni Agastya, the twice
born, smiled and graciously said :--

 

20-27. O Devas! You are the lords of the three worlds, superior to all,
highsouled, and the preserver of the Lokas. If you wish, you can favour,
disfavour, do anything. Especially He who is the Lord of heavens, whose
weapon is the thunderbolt, and the eight Siddhis are ever at his service
is your Indra, the Lord of the Devas. What is there that he cannot do?
Then there is Agni, Who burns everything and always carries oblations to
the gods and the Pitris, Who is the mouth piece of the Devas. Is there
anything impracticable with him! O Devas! Then again Yama is there
amongst you, the Lord of the Râk<u>s</u>asas, the Witness of all
actions, and always quick in giving punishment to the offenders, that
terrible looking Yama Râja. What is there that he cannot accomplish?

 

Still, O Devas! if there be anything required by you that awaits my
co-operation, give out at once and I will do it undoubtedly. Hearing
these words of the Muni, the Devas became very glad and joyfully began
to say what they wanted. O Mahâr<u>s</u>i! The Bindhya mountain has
risen very high and thwarted the Sun's course in the Heavens. A cry of
universal distress and consternation has arisen and the three worlds are
now verging to the ruins. O Muni! Now what we want is this that Thou, by
Thy power of Tapas, curbest the rise of this Bindhya Mountain. O
Agastya! Certainly, by Thy fire and austerities, that mountain will be
brought down and humiliated. This is what we want.

 

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the Devas' praying to
the Muni Agastya for checking the abnormal rise of the Bindhya Range in
the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](bk10ch07)
