[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch12)  [Next](bk11ch14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIII**

 

**On the greatness of Bhasma**

 

<span id="page_1085">p. 1085</span>

 

1-20. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Best of Munis! What shall I describe to
you the effects of using the Bhasma! Only applying the ashes takes away
the Mahâpâtakas (great sins) as well as other minor sins of the devotee.
I speak this truly, very truly unto you. Now hear the fruits of using
simply the ashes. By using Bhasma, the knowledge of Brahmâ comes to the
Yatis; the desires of enjoyments are eradicated; the improvement

 

<span id="page_1086">p. 1086</span>

 

is felt in all the virtuous actions of the householders and the studies
of the Vedas and other S’âstras of the Brahmachâris get their increase.
The S’ûdras get merits in using Bhasmas and the sins of others are
destroyed. To besmear the body with ashes and to apply the curved
Tripu<u>nd</u>ras is the source of good to all beings. The S’ruti says
so. That this implies the performance of sacrifices by all, is also
asserted in the S’rutis. To apply ashes to the whole of the body and to
use Tripu<u>nd</u>ra is common to all the religions; it has nothing, in
principle, contradictory to others. So the S’ruti says. This
Tripu<u>nd</u>ra and the besmearing with ashes is the special mark of
the devotees of S’iva; this again is asserted in the S’ruti. This Bhasma
and the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra are the special marks by which one is
characterised; it is said so in the Vaidik S’ruti. S’iva, Vi<u>sn</u>u,
Brahmâ, Indra, Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha, and their Avataras, Varu<u>n</u>a
and the whole host of the Devas all gladly used this Tripu<u>nd</u>ra
and ashes. Durgâ, Lak<u>s</u>mî, and Sarasvatî, etc., all the wives of
the gods daily anoint their bodies with ashes and use the
Tripu<u>nd</u>ras. So even the Yak<u>s</u>as, Râk<u>s</u>asas,
Gandharbhas, Sidhas, Vidyâdharas, and the Munis have applied Bhasma and
Tripu<u>nd</u>ra. This holding on of ashes is not prohibited to anybody;
the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, K<u>s</u>attriyas, Vais’yas, S’ûdras, mixed
castes, and the vile classes all can use this Bhasma and
Tripu<u>nd</u>ra. O Nârada! In my opinion they only are the Sadhus
(saints) who use this Tripu<u>nd</u>ra and besmear their bodies with
ashes. In seducing this Lady Mukti (liberation is personified here as a
lady) one is to have this gem of S’iva Lingam, the five lettered Mantra
Namah S’ivâyâ as the loving principle, and holding on the ashes as the
charming medicine (as in seducing any ordinary woman, gems, jewels and
ornaments, love and charming medicines are necessary). O Nârada! Know
the place where the person, who has besmeared the holy with ashes and
who has used Tripu<u>nd</u>ra takes his food as where S’ankara and
S’ankarî have taken their food together. Even if anybody himself not
using the Bhasma, follows another who has used the Bhasma, he will be
soon honoured in the society even if he be a sinner. What more than
this, if anybody himself not using the ashes, praises another who uses
the Bhasma, he is freed from all his sins and gets soon honour and
respect in the society. All the studies of the Vedas come to him though
he has not studied the Vedas, all the fruits of hearing the S’rutis and
the Purâ<u>n</u>as come to him, though he has not heard them, all the
fruits of practised Dharma come to him though he has not practised any,
if he always uses this Tripu<u>nd</u>ra on his forehead and gives food
to a beggar who uses Tripu<u>nd</u>ra on his forehead. Even in courtries
as Bihar (Kîka<u>t</u>a, etc., that have got a bad name) if there be a
single man in the whole country whose body is besmeared with ashes and
who uses this Tripu<u>nd</u>ra, that is considered then as Kâs’î
(Benares

 

<span id="page_1087">p. 1087</span>

 

city). Anybody, of a bad or of a good character, be he a Yogi or a
sinner, using Bhasma, is worshipped like my son, Brahmâ. O Nârada! Even
if an hypocrite uses Bhasma, he will have a good future, which cannot be
attained even by performing hundreds of sacrifices. If anybody uses
Bhasma daily either through good companion or through neglect, he will
be entitled, like me, to the highest worship. O Nârada! Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes’vara, Pârvatî, Lak<u>s</u>mî, Sarasvatî and all the
other Devas become satisfied with simply holding on this Bhasma. The
merits that are obtained by using only the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra, cannot be
obtained by gifts, sacrifices, severe austerities, and going to sacred
places of pilgrimages. They cannot give one-sixteenth part of the result
that accrues from holding the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra. As a King recognises a
person as his own, whom he has given some object of recognition, so
Bhagavân S’ankara knows the man who uses Tripu<u>nd</u>ras as His own
person. They that hold Tripu<u>nd</u>ras with devotion can have Bholâ
Nâtha under their control; no distinction is made here between the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as and Châ<u>nd</u>âlas. Even if anybody be fallen from
the state of observing all the Âchâras or rules of conduct proper to his
Âs’rama and if he be faulty in not attending to all his duties, he will
be Mukta (freed) if he has used even once this Bhasma Tripu<u>nd</u>ra.
Never bother yourself with the caste or the family of the holder of the
Tripu<u>nd</u>ras. Only see whether the sign Tripu<u>nd</u>ra exists in
his forehead. If so, consider him entitled to respect. O Nârada! There
is no mantra higher than this S’iva Mantra; there is no Deity higher
than S’iva; there is no worship of greater merit-giving powers than the
worship of S’iva; so there is no Tîrtha superior to this Bhasma. This
Bhasma is not an ordinary thing; it is the excellent energy (semen
virile) of fire of the nature of Rudra. All sorts of troubles vanish,
all sorts of sins are destroyed by this Bhasma. The country where the
lowest castes reside with their bodies besmeared with ashes, is
inhabited always by Bhagavân S’ankara, Bhagavatî Umâ, the Pramathas (the
attendants of S’iva) and by all the Tîrthas. Bhagavân S’ankara, first of
all, held this Bhasma as an ornament to his body by purifying it first
with “Sadyo Jâta,” etc., the five mantras. Therefore if anybody uses the
Bhasma Tripu<u>nd</u>ra according to rules on his forehead, the writings
written at the time of his birth by Vidhâtâ Brahmâ will all be
cancelled, if they had been bad. There is no doubt in this.

 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the greatness
of Bhasma in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devi Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](bk11ch14)
