[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch20)  [Next](bk11ch22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXI**

 

**On Gâyatrî Puras’chara<u>n</u>am**

 

<span id="page_1120">p. 1120</span>

 

1-55. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Now I shall speak of the
Gâyatrî-puras’chara<u>n</u>am. Hear. By its performance all the desires
are obtained and all the sins are destroyed. On the tops of mountains,
on the banks of the rivers, on the roots of Bel trees, on the edges of
tanks, within the enclosures of the cows (cow-stalls), in temples, on
the root of As’vattha trees, in gardens, in the Tulasî groves, in the
Pu<u>n</u>ya K<u>s</u>etrams (holy places), before one’s Guru, or
wherever the mind feels exalted and cheerful, and gets strength, the
Puras’chara<u>n</u>am if performed, lead to a speedy success. Before
commencing the Puras’chara<u>n</u>am of a mantra (the
Puras’chara<u>n</u>am means repetition of the name of a deity or of a
mantra attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.,) first
Prâyas’chitta (penance) is done in the shape of repeating one million
times the Gâyatrî with the Vyârhitis. In any Vaidic Karma or in making
Puras’chara<u>n</u>am of the mantra of the Devatâs Nrisi<u>n</u>ha,
Sûrya, Varâha, etc., the first thing done is to repeat the Gâyatrî.
Without the japam of Gâyatrî, no action is attended with success. The
reason is this :-- Every Brâhma<u>n</u> is a S’âkta (a follower of
S’akti); he cannot be a Vai<u>sn</u>ava or S’aiva; for he is the
worshipper of the Prime Force Vedamâtâ Gâyatrî. Therefore obtain first
the Grace of one’s own Î<u>st</u>a Devatâ Gâyatrî by Her Japam. Then
worship the other Deities.

 

Thus one should purify one’s jâpya mantra (the mantra that is to be
repeated) by first repeating one million times the Gâyatrî; then one is
to commence Puras’chara<u>n</u>am. Again before purifying the mantra,
one is to purify one’s Âtman (Self). In this purification of one’s Âtman
three lakh times, in case of inability, one lakh times Gâyatrî is to be
repeated without one’s Âtman’s purification, the Japam, Homa and other
actions all become useless. This is specially noted in the Vedas. By
Tapas e.g., Japam, Chândrâya<u>n</u>a and Vrata, (asceticism) mortify
your body. By offering Tarpa<u>n</u>am (peace-offerings) to the Fathers
and the Devas, one can get self purification. If you want to get the
Heavens and if you want to become great, practise Tapasyâ. There is no
other way. Tapasyâ is the intent calling of the Mother, That Call which
penetrates through and through the

 

<span id="page_1121">p. 1121</span>

 

Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a. The K<u>s</u>attriyas should cross difficulties and
dangers by force of arms; the Vais’yas, by wealth; the S’ûdras, by
serving the twice born; and the Brâhma<u>n</u>as should cross
difficulties and dangers, by Tapasyâ, Homa, Japam, etc. So the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as should always be cheerful and in prompt readiness to do
Tapasyâ. Of all sorts of tapasyâs, mortifying the body by observing vows
and fastings is the best. So say the Ri<u>s</u>is. (This mortification
of the body gives self-reliance and self intuition more surely and
speedily than all the other studies and other practices.) The
Brâhma<u>n</u>as should purify themselves by following duly Krichhra
Chândrâya<u>n</u>a vratas, etc., O Nârada! Now I am speaking of the
purification of food. Hear. The following four occupations of the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as are the best :-- Ayâchita, (without begging or asking
for anything), Unchha, (the gathering in of handfuls of the corn left by
the reapers), S’ukla (the maintenance derived by a Brâhma<u>n</u>a from
other Brâhma<u>n</u>as; a pure mode of life). And Bhik<u>s</u>û
(begging). Whether according to the Tantras or according to the Vedas,
the food obtained by the above four means is pure. What is earned by
Bhik<u>s</u>â (begging) is divided into four parts :-- one part is given
to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as; the second part is given to the cows; the third
part is given to the guests, the fourth part is to be taken by him and
his wife. Whatever is fixed for taking (swallowing) mouthfuls of food,
that is to be taken on a tray or a platter. First throw a little
cow-urine over that and count duly the number of mouthfuls. The
mouthfuls are to be of the size of an egg; the house-holders are to take
eight such mouthfuls and the Vânaprasthîs are to take four such
mouthfuls. The Brahmachârins can sprinkle their food with cow-urine nine
times, six times, or three times as they like; while sprinkling, the
fingers are to remain intact. The Gâyatrî is to be repeated also. The
food offered by a thief, Châ<u>nd</u>âla, K<u>s</u>attriya or Vais’ya is
very inferior. The food of a S’ûdra, or the companion with a S’ûdra or
taking food in the same line with a S’ûdra leads one to suffer in the
terrible hells as long as there are the Sun and Moon. The
Puras’chara<u>n</u>am of Gâyatrî is repeating this twenty four lakh
times (i.e., as many lakh times as there are syllables in the Gâyatrî).
But, according to Vis’vâmitra, repeating thirty two lakh times is the
Puras’chara<u>n</u>am of Gâyatrî. As the body becomes useless when the
soul leaves the body, so the mantra without Puras’chara<u>n</u>am is
useless. The Puras’chara<u>n</u>am is prohibited in the months of
Jyai<u>st</u>ha, Â<u>s</u>â<u>d</u>ha, Pau<u>s</u>a and Mala (dirty)
months. Also on Tuesday, Saturday; in the Vyatîpâta and Vaidhriti Yogas;
also in A<u>st</u>amî (eighth), Navamî (ninth), <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî
(sixth), Chaturthî (fourth) Trayodas’î (thirteenth), Chaturdasî
(fourteenth) and Amâvâsyâ (New Moon), Tithis (lunar days); in the
evening twilight and in the night; while

 

<span id="page_1122">p. 1122</span>

 

the star Bhara<u>n</u>î, Krittikâ, Ârdrâ, As’le<u>s</u>â,
Jye<u>st</u>hâ, Dhani<u>st</u>hâ, S’rava<u>n</u>â, or the Janma
nak<u>s</u>atra (Birth time star) is with the Moon; while the signs
Me<u>s</u>a, Karka<u>t</u>a, Tulâ, Kumbha, and Makara are the Lagnas
(signs in the ascendant). When the moon and the start are auspicious,
especially in the bright fortnight, the Puras’chara<u>n</u>am performed,
gives the Mantra Siddhi. First of all repeat Svasti vâchan and perform
duly the Nândi mukha S’raddha and give food and clothing to the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as. Take the permission of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as and begin
the Puras’chara<u>n</u>am. Where the S’iva Lingam exists, facing west,
or in any S’iva temple, commence repeating the mantra. The other S’iva
K<u>s</u>ettrams are :-- Kâs’î, Kedâra, Mahâ Kâla, S’rî K<u>s</u>ettra,
and Tryamvakam. These five are the Great K<u>s</u>ettrams, known widely
on this earth, for the fructification and the siddhis of the Mantras. At
all other places than these, the Karma Chakra is to be drawn according
to the principles of the Tantra. And then they will be fit for
Puras’chara<u>n</u>am. The number of times that the
Puras’chara<u>n</u>am (the repeating of the mantra) is done on the first
day, the same number is to be continued every day until completion; not
greater nor less than that and also no intermission or stoppage should
occur in the interval.

 

The repeating of the Mantra is to be commenced in the morning and should
be done up to midday. While doing this, the mind is to be kept free from
other subjects, and it is to be kept pure; one is to meditate on one’s
own Deity and on the meaning of the mantra and one should be
particularly careful that no inaccuracies nor omissions should occur in
the Gâyatrî, Chhandas and in the repetition of the Mantra. One tenth of
the total number of Puras’chara<u>n</u>ams that are repeated is to be
used for the Homa purpose. The Charu is to be prepared with ghee, til,
the Bel leaves, flowers, jaya grain, honey and sugar; all mixed, are to
be offered as oblations to the fire in the Homa. Then the success in the
Mantra comes (i.e., mantra siddhi is obtained or the Mantra becomes
manifested). After the Puras’chara<u>n</u>am one should do properly the
daily and occasional duties and worship the Gâyatrî that brings in
dharma, wealth, objects of desire and liberation. There is nothing
superior an object of worship to this Gâyatrî, whether in this world or
in the next. The devotee, engaged in the Puras’chara<u>n</u>am, should
eat moderately, observe silence, bathe thrice in the three Sandhyâ
times, should be engaged in worshipping one’s Deity, should not he
unmindful and should not do any other work. He is to remain, while in
water, to repeat the Gâyatrî three lakhs of times. In case the devotee
repeats the

 

<span id="page_1123">p. 1123</span>

 

mantra for achieving success in any other desired work (kâmya karma),
then he should willingly stick to it until the desired success is
attained. Now is being told how to get success in ordinary Kâmya karmas.
When the sun is rising, repeat the Puraschara<u>n</u>am mantra daily
thousand times. Then one’s life will be lengthened, no disease will
occur, and wealth and prosperity will be obtained. If it be done this
way, success is surely attained within three months, six months or at
the end of one year. If the Homa (offering oblations to the fire) be
offered one lakh times with lotuses besmeared with ghee (clarified
butter), Mok<u>s</u>a (liberation) is attained. If, before the
Mantra-Siddhi, or the success in realising the Mantra, is attained, one
performs Japam or Homam for Kâmya Siddhi (to get certain desires) or
mok<u>s</u>a, then all his actions become useless. If anybody performs
twenty-five lakh Homas by curd and milk, be gets success (Siddhi) in
this very birth. So all the Mahar<u>s</u>is say. By this the same result
is attained that is got by the aforesaid means, i.e., by the
eight-limbed Yoga, whereby the Yogis become perfect.

 

He will attain Siddhi if he be devoted to his Guru and keep himself
under restraint for six months only (i.e., practise Samyama) as regards
taking food, etc., whether he be incapable or his mind be attached to
other sensual objects. One should drink Pañcha gavya (cow-urine,
cow-dung, milk, curd, ghee) one day, fast one day, take
Brâhma<u>n</u>a’s food one day and be mindful in repeating the Gâyatrî.
First bathe in the Ganges or in other sacred places and while in water
repeat one hundred Gâyatrîs. If one drinks water on which one hundred
Gâyatrîs are repeated, one is freed from all one’s sins. He gets the
fruit of performing the Krichhra vrata, the Chândrâya<u>n</u>a vrata and
others. Be he a K<u>s</u>attriya King, or a Brâhma<u>n</u>a, if he is to
remain in his own house, hold Âs’rama and be engaged in performing
Tapasyâ then he will be certainly freed of all his sins. Be he a house
holder or a Brahmachârî or Vânaprasthî, he should perform sacrifices,
etc., according to his Adhikâra (or his rights) and he will get fruits
according to his desires. The Sâgnik man (who keeps the Holy Fire) and
other persons of good conduct and of learning and of good education
should perform actions as prescribed in the Vedas and Smritis with a
desire to attain Mok<u>s</u>a. Thus one should eat fruits and vegetables
and and water or take eight mouthfuls of Bhik<u>s</u>ânna (the food got
by begging). If the Puras’chara<u>n</u>am be performed this way, then
the Mantra Siddhi is obtained. O Nârada ! If the Puras’chara<u>n</u>am
be done with the mantra thus, his poverty is removed entirely. What more
shall I say than this that if anybody hears this simply, his merits get
increased and he attains great success.

 

<span id="page_1124">p. 1124</span>

 

Here ends the Twenty First Chapter of the Eleventh Book on Gâyatrî
Puras’chara<u>n</u>am in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devi Bhâgavatam
of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](bk11ch22)
