[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch15)  [Next](bk11ch17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVI**

 

**On the description of Sandhyâ Upâsânâ**

 

<span id="page_1098">p. 1098</span>

 

1-24. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Now I am speaking of the very holy
Sandhyopâsanâ method of Sandhyâ worship of Gâyatrî, the Presiding Deity
of the morning, midday and evening, and of the twice-born. Listen. The
greatness of using Bhasma has been described in detail. No further need
be stated on the subject. I shall talk, first of all, of the morning
Sandhyâ. The morning Sandhyâ is to be done early in the morning while
the stars are visible. When the Sun is in the meridian, the midday
Sandhyâ is to be performed; and while the Sun is visibly going down, the

 

<span id="page_1099">p. 1099</span>

 

evening Sandhyâ is to be recited over. Now again, the distinctions are
made in the above three Sandhyâs :-- The morning Sandhyâ with stars seen
is the best; with stars disappeared, middling; and with the Sun risen
above the horizon, inferior. So the evening Sandhyâ, again, is of three
kinds :-- best, middling, and inferior. When the Sun is visibly
disappearing, the evening Sandhyâ is the best; when the Sun has gone
down the horizon, it is middling and when the stars are visible, it is
inferior. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as are the root of the Tree, the Sandhyâ
Vandanam; the Vedas are the branches; the religious actions are the
leaves. Therefore its root should be carefully preserved. If the root be
cut, no branches or leaves of the tree will remain. That Brâhma<u>n</u>a
who knows not his Sandhyâ or who does not perform the Sandhyâs is a
living S’ûdra. That Brâhma<u>n</u>a after his death verily becomes a
dog. Therefore the Sandhyâs must be observed every day. Otherwise no
right comes at all to do any action. At the sunrise and the sunset the
time for Sandhyâ is two Da<u>nd</u>as (48 minutes) and if Sandhyâ be not
done or rather neglected in the interval, the Prâyas’chitta (penance) is
to he paid duly (performed duly). If the proper time for Sandhyâ
expires, one more offering of Arghya is to be made in addition to the
three Arghayas daily made or the Gâyatrî is to be repeated one hundred
and eight times before the Sandhyâ is commenced. In whichever time any
action ought to be done, worship, first of all, the Sandhyâ Devî, the
Presiding Deity of that time and do the actions proper to that time
afterwards. The Sandhyâ performed in dwelling houses is ordinary; the
Sandhyâ done in enclosures of cows is middling and on the banks of the
rivers is good and the Sandhyâ performed before the Devî’s temple or the
Devî’s seat is very excellent. The Sandhyopâsanâ ought to be done before
the Devî, because that is the worship of the very Devî. The three
Sandhyâs done before the Devî give infinitely excellent fruits. There is
no other work of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as better than this Sandhyâ. One can
rather avoid worshipping S’iva or Vi<u>sn</u>u; because that is not
daily done as obligatory; but the Sandhyopâsanâ ought to be done daily.
The Gâyatrî of the Great Devî is the Essence of all the mantras in the
Vedas. In the Veda S’âstras, the worship of Gâyatrî is most definitely
pronounced. Brahmâ and the other Devas meditate in the Sandhyâ times on
this Devî Gâyatrî and make a japam of that. The Vedas always make japams
of Her. For this reason the Gâyatrî has been mentioned as the object of
worship by the Vedas. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as are called S’âktas inasmuch
as they worship the Primal S’akti (Force) Gâyatrî, the Mother of the
Vedas. They are not S’aivas nor Vai<u>sn</u>avas.

 

<span id="page_1100">p. 1100</span>

 

Firstly make the ordinary Âchaman three times, and, while inhaling,
drink a little of the water of Âchaman, repeating “Om Kes’avâya Svâhâ,
Om Nârâya<u>n</u>âya Svâhâ, Om Mâdhavâya Svâhâ.” Then wash your two
hands, repeating “Om Gobindâya Nama<u>h</u>, Om Vi<u>sn</u>ave
Nama<u>h</u>.” Then by the root of the thumb rub the lips repeating “Om
Madhû sûdanâya Nama<u>h</u>, Om Trivikramâya Nama<u>h</u>.” So rub the
mouth, repeating “Om Vâmamâya Nama<u>h</u>, Om S’rîdharâya
Nama<u>h</u>.” Then sprinkle water on the left hand, saying “Om
Hrisîkes’âya Nama<u>h</u>.” Sprinkle water on the legs, saying “Om
Padmanâbhâya Nama<u>h</u>.” Sprinkle water on the head, saying “Om
Dâmodarâya Nama<u>h</u>.” Touch the mouth with the three fingers of the
right hand, saying “Om Samkar<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>âya Nama<u>h</u>.” Touch
the nostrils with the thumb and forefinger saying “Om Vâsudevâya
Nama<u>h</u>, Om Pradyumnâya Nama<u>h</u>.” Touch the eyes with the
thumb and ring-finger, saying “Om Aniruddhâya Nama<u>h</u>, Om
Puru<u>s</u>ottamâya Nama<u>h</u>.” Touch the ears with the thumb and
ringfinger saying “Om Adhok<u>s</u>ajâya Nama<u>h</u>, Om Nârasimhâya
Nama<u>h</u>.” Touch the navel with the thumb and little finger saying
“Om Achyutâya Nama<u>h</u>.” Touch the breast with the palm, saying “Om
Janârdanâya Nama<u>h</u>.” Touch the head saying “Om Upendrâya
Nama<u>h</u>.” Touch the roots of the two arms saying “Om Haraye
Nama<u>h</u>, Om Kri<u>sn</u>âya Nama<u>h</u>.”

 

25-50. While sipping the Âchaman water on the right hand, touch the
right hand with your left hand; otherwise; the water does not become
pure. While doing Âchaman, make the palm and the fingers all united and
close, of the form of a Gokar<u>n</u>a (the ear of a cow) and spreading
the thumb and the little finger, drink the water of the measure of a
pea. If a greater or less quantity be sipped, then that would amount to
drinking liquor. Then thinking of the Pra<u>n</u>ava, make the
Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma, and repeat mentally the Gâyatrî with her head and the
Turîya pâda, i.e., Âpojyoti<u>h</u> rasomritam Brahmâ  Bhurbhuvah
svarom. Inhale the air by the left nostril (Pûrak), close both the
nostrils (Kumbhak) and exhale the air, by the right nostril (Rechak).
Thus Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma is effected. While doing Pûrak, Kumbhak and Rechak
repeat the Gâyatrî every time; hold the right nostril with the right
thumb and hold the left nostril with the ringfinger and little finger
(i.e., don’t use forefinger and middle finger).

 

The Yogis who have controlled their minds say that Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma is
effected by the three processes Pûraka, Kûmbhaka and Rechaka. The
external air is inhaled in Pûraka; air is not exhaled nor inhaled (it is
retained inside) in Kûmbhaka; and air is exhaled in Rechaka. While

 

<span id="page_1101">p. 1101</span>

 

doing Pûraka, meditate on the navel, the four-armed high-souled
Vi<u>sn</u>u, of the blue colour (Syâma) like the blue lotus. While
doing Kûmbhaka, meditate in the heart lotus the four-faced grandsire
Brahmâ Prajâpati, the Creator seated on the lotus and while doing
Rechaka meditate, on the fore-head, on the white sin-destroying
S’ankara, pure as crystal. In Pûraka, the union with Vi<u>sn</u>u is
obtained; in Kûmbhaka, the knowledge of Brahmâ is attained and in
Rechaka, the highest position of Îs’vara (S’iva) is attained. This is
the method of Âchaman according to the Purâ<u>n</u>as. Now I am speaking
of the all sin destroying Vaidik Âchaman. Listen. Reciting the Gâyatrî
mantra “Om Bhurbhuvah,” sip a little water; this is the Vaidik Âchaman
after repeating the seven great Vyâhritis Om Bhu<u>h</u>; Om
Bhuva<u>h</u>, Om Sva<u>h,</u> Om Maha<u>h</u>, Om Jana<u>h</u>, Om
Tapa<u>h</u>, Om Satyam, repeat Gâyatrî and the head of the Gâyatrî
Âpojyoti Rasomritam Brahmâ  Bhurbhuva<u>h</u> svarom and practise
Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma three times. Hereby all sins are destroyed and all
virtues spring. Now another sort of Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma Mudrâ is described
:-- The Vânaprasthîs and Grihasthas would do Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma with five
fingers, holding the tip of the nose; the Brahmâchâris and Yatis would
do Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma with the thumbs, little finger, and ring finger
(avoiding middle and fore). Now I am speaking of the
Âghama<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a Mârjana mantra. Listen. The Mantra of this
Mârjana is “Âpohi<u>st</u>hâ Mayobhuvah, etc.” There are three mantras
in this. There are three Pâdas in every mantra, prefix Om to every pâda
(thus nine times Om is to be prefixed); at the end of every pâda
sprinkle water on the head with the sacrificial thread and the Kus’a
grass. Or at the end of every mantra do so. By the above Mârjana
(cleaning) the sins of one hundred years are instantly destroyed. Then
making Âchaman (taking a sip of water to rinse the mouth before
worship), repeat the three Mantras “Om Sûryas’cha mâ manyus’cha, etc.”
By this act, the mental sins are destroyed. As mârjana is done with
Pra<u>n</u>ava, Vyârhitis, and Gâyatrî, so make Mârjana by the three
mantras ‘‘Âpohi<u>st</u>hâ, etc.” Make your right palm of the shape of a
cow’s ear; take water in it and carry it before your nose and think thus
:-- “There is a terrible sinful person in my left abdomen, his colour is
dark black and he is horrible looking.” Recite, then, the mantras “Om
ritamcha satyamchâbhîdhyât, etc.” and “Drupâdâdiva Mumuchâna, etc.” and
bring that Sinful Person through your right nostril to the water in the
palm. Don’t look at that water; throw it away on a bit of stone to your
left. And think that you are now sinless. Next, rising from the seat,
keep your two feet horizontal and with the fingers save forefinger and
thumb, take a palmful of water and with your face towards the Sun,
recite the Gâyatrî three times

 

<span id="page_1102">p. 1102</span>

 

and offer water to the Sun three times. Thus, O Muni! The method of
offering the Arghyas has been mentioned to you.

 

51-80. Then circumambulate, repeating the Sûrya Mantra. The one thing to
be noted in offering Arghyas is this :-- Offer once in the midday, and
three times in the morning and three times in the evening. While
offering the Arghya in the morning, bend yourself a little low; in
offering the arghya in the midday, stand up; and while offering the
arghya in the evening, it can be done while sitting. Now I will tell you
why the Arghya is offered to the Sun. Hear. Thirty Ko<u>t</u>i
Râk<u>s</u>asas known as the Mandehas, always roam on the path of the
Sun (the mental Sun also). They are great heroes, treacherous and
ferocious. They always try to devour the Sun, while they assume terrible
forms. For this reason the Devas and the Ri<u>s</u>is combined offer the
water with their folded hands to the Sun, while they perform the great
Sandhyâ Upâsanâ. The water thus offered, becomes transformed into the
thunderbolt and burns the heads of the cruel demons (and throws them on
the island Mandehâru<u>n</u>a) Therefore the Brâhma<u>n</u>as daily do
their Sandhyopâsana. Infinite merits accrue from this Sandhyâ Upâsanâ. O
Nârada! Now I am speaking to you of the Mantras pertaining to the
Arghya. No sooner they are pronounced the full effects of performing the
Sandhyâs are obtained. I am That Sun; I am That Light; I am That Âtman
(Self); I am S’iva; I am the Light of Âtman; I am clear and
transparently white; I am of the nature of all energy; and I am of the
nature of Râsa (the sweetness, all the sweet sentiments). O Devî! O
Gâyatrî! O Thou! Who art of the nature of Brahmâ! Let Thee come and
preside in my heart to grant me success in this Japa Karma. O Devî! O
Gâyatrî! Entering into my heart, go out again with this water. But Thou
wouldst have to come again. Sit thus on a pure seat and with a single
intent repeat the Gâyatrî, the Mother of the Vedas. O Muni! In this
Sandhyopâsanâ, the Khhecharî Mudrâ ought to be done after practising the
Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma. Hear now the meaning of the Khhechâri Mudrâ. When the
soul of a being leaves the objects of senses, it roams in the Âkâs’a,
i.e., it becomes aimless when the tongue also goes to the Âkâs’a and
roams there; and then the sight is fixed between the eyebrows; this is
called the Khhechâri Mudrâ. There is no Âsana (seat) equal to Siddhâsana
and there is no Vâyu (air) equal to the Khumbaka Vâya (suspension of air
in the body).

 

O Nârada! There is no Mudrâ equal to the Khhechâri Mudrâ. One is to
pronounce Pra<u>n</u>ava in Pluta (protracted) accents like the sound of
a bell and, suspending his breath, sit quiet motionless in Sthirâsana
without any Ahamkâra (egoism). O Nârada! I am now talking of

 

<span id="page_1103">p. 1103</span>

 

Siddhâsana and its characteristic qualities. Hear. Keep one heel below
the root of the genital and the other heel below the scrotum; keep the
whole body and breast straight and motionless; withdraw the senses from
their objects and look at the point, the pituitary body, between the
eyebrows. This posture is called the Siddhâsan and is pleasant to the
yogis. After taking this seat, invoke the Gâyatrî. “O Mother of the
Vedas! O Gâyatrî! Thou art the Devî granting boons to the Bhaktas. Thou
art of the nature of Brahmâ. Be gracious unto Me. O Devî! Whoever
worships Thee in the day gets his day sins destroyed and in the night,
night sins destroyed. O Thou! Who art all the letters of the alphabet! O
Devî! O Sandhye! O Thou who art of the nature of Vidyâ! O Sarasvatî! O
Ajaye! O Thou immortal! Free from disease and decay. O Mother! Who art
all the Devas! I bow down to Thee.” Invoke the Devî again by the mantra
“Ojosi, etc ,” and then pray :-- “O Mother! Let my japam and other acts
in Thy worship be fulfilled with success by Thy Grace.” Next for the
freedom of the curse of Gâyatrî, do the things properly. Brahmâ gave a
curse to Gâyatrî; Vis’vâmitra gave a curse to Her and Vas’i<u>st</u>ha
also cursed Her. These are the three curses; they are removed in due
order by recollecting Brahmâ, Vis’vâmitra and Vas’i<u>st</u>ha. Before
doing Nyâsa, one ought to collect oneself and remember the Highest Self;
think in the lotus of the heart that Puru<u>s</u>a (Person) who is
Truth; who is all this Universe, who is the Highest Self and who is All
knowledge and who cannot be comprehended by words. Now I am speaking of
the Amganyâsa of Sandhyâ; Hear. First utter Om and then utter the
mantra.

 

Touch the two legs, saying “Om Bhu<u>h</u>pâdâbhyâm nama<u>h</u>”

Touch the knees, saying “Om Bhuva Jânubhyâm nama<u>h</u>”

Touch the hip, saying “Om Sva<u>h</u> Ka<u>t</u>ibhyâm nama<u>h</u>”

Touch the navel, saying “Om Maharnâbhyai nama<u>h</u>”

Touch the heart, saying “Om Jana<u>h</u> Hridayâya nama<u>h</u>”

Touch the throat, saying “Om Tapa<u>h</u> Ka<u>nt</u>hâya nama<u>h</u>”

Touch the forehead, saying “Om Satyam Lalâ<u>t</u>âya nama<u>h</u>”

Thus perform the Vyârhiti nyâsa.

 

Next perform the Karâmganyâsa thus :-- Om Tat savitu<u>h</u>
ramgu<u>st</u>hâbhyâm nama<u>h</u> (referring to the thumb); Om Varenyam
Tarjanîbhyâm nama<u>h</u> (referring to the forefinger); Om bhargo
devasya madhyamâ bhyâm nama<u>h</u> (referring to the middle finger); Om
Dhîmahi anâmikâbhyâm nama<u>h</u> (referring to the ringfinger); Om
dhîyo yona<u>h</u>, Kanisthâbyâm nama<u>h</u> (referring to the little
finger); Om prachodayât kara tal pristhâbhyâm nama<u>h</u> (referring to
the upper part and lower part of the palm and all over the body).

 

81-106. Now I am speaking of the Amganyâsa. Hear. Om tat savitur Brahmâ
tmane hridayâya nama<u>h</u> (referring to the heart.)

 

<span id="page_1104">p. 1104</span>

 

Om Varenyam Vi<u>sn</u>vâ tmane S’irase nama<u>h</u> (referring to the
head); Om bhargo devasya Rudrâtmane S’ikhâyai nama<u>h</u> (referring to
the crown of the head);  Om dhîmahi S’aktyâtmane Kavachâya nama<u>h</u>
(referring to the Kavacha); Om dhîyoyona<u>h</u> Kâlâtmane netratrayâya
nama<u>h</u> (referring to the three eyes); Om prachodayât sarvâtmane
astrâya nama<u>h</u> (referring to the Astra or armour, protecting the
body). Now I am speaking of the Var<u>n</u>anyâsa. O Great Muni! Hear.
This Var<u>n</u>anyâsa is performed by the letters in the Gâyatrî
mantra. If anybody does this, he becomes freed of sins.

 

“Om Tat nama<u>h</u>” on the two toes; (touching them).

“Om Sa nama<u>h</u>” on the two heels; (touching them).

“Om Vi nama<u>h</u>” on the legs;

“Om Tu nama<u>h</u>” on the two knees;

“Om Va nama<u>h</u>” on the two thighs;

“Om re nama<u>h</u>” on the anus;

“Om <u>n</u>i nama<u>h</u>” on the generative organ;

“Om ya nama<u>h</u>” on the hip;

“Om bha nama<u>h</u>” on the navel;

“Om Rgo nama<u>h</u> on the heart;

“Om De nama<u>h</u>” on the breasts;

“Om va nama<u>h</u>” on the heart;

“Om sya nama<u>h</u>” on the throat;

“Om dhî nama<u>h</u>” on the mouth;

“Om ma nama<u>h</u>” on the palate;

“Om hi nama<u>h</u>” on the tip of the nose;

“Om dhi nama<u>h</u>” on the two eyes;

“Om yo nama<u>h</u>” on the space between the eye-brows;

“Om yo nama<u>h</u>” on the forehead;

“Om na<u>h</u> nama<u>h</u>” to the east;

“Om pra nama<u>h</u>” to the south;

“Om cho nama<u>h</u>” on the west;

“Om da nama<u>h</u>” on the north;

“Om yâ nama<u>h</u>” on the head;

“Om ta nama<u>h</u>” on the whole body from head to foot.

 

Some Jâpakas (those who do the Japam) do not approve of the above nyâsa.
Thus the Nyâsa is to be done. Then meditate on the Gâyatrî or the
World-Mother. The beauty of the body of the Gâyatrî Devî is like that of
the full blown Javâ flower. She is seated on the big red lotus on the
back of the Ha<u>n</u>sa (Flamingo); She is holding the red coloured
garland on Her neck and anointed with red coloured unguent. She has four
faces;

 

<span id="page_1105">p. 1105</span>

 

every face has two eyes. On her four hands are a wreath of flowers, a
sacrificial ladle, a bead, and a Kama<u>nd</u>alu. She is blazing with
all sorts of ornaments. From the Devî Gâyatrî has originated first the
Rig veda. Brahmâ worships the virgin Gâyatrî; on the idea of S’rî
Parames’varî Gâyatrî has four feet. The Rig Veda is one; the Yajurveda
is the second, the Sâmaveda is the third and the Atharva veda is the
fourth foot. The Gâyatrî has eight bellies; the east side is the one;
the south is the second; the west is the third; the north is the fourth;
the zenith is the fifth; the nadir is the sixth; the intermediate space
is the seventh and all the corners are the eighth belly. Gâyatrî has
seven S’iras (heads); Vyâkara<u>n</u>am (Grammar) is one; S’ik<u>s</u>â
is the second (that Amga of the Veda, the science which teaches the
proper pronunciation of words and laws of euphony); Kalpa is the third
(the Vedânga which lays down the ritual and prescribes rules for
ceremonial and sacrificial acts); Nirukta is the fourth (the Vedânga
that contains glossarial explanation of obscure words, especially those
occurring in the Vedas); Jyotish or astronomy is the fifth; Itahâsa
(history) and Purâ<u>n</u>as is the sixth head; and Upani<u>s</u>adas is
the seventh head. Ag<u>n</u>i (fire) is the mouth of Gâyatrî; Rudra is
the S’ikhâ (the chief part); Her gotra (lineage) is Sâmkhyâya<u>n</u>a;
Vi<u>sn</u>u is the heart of Gâyatrî and Brahmâ is the armour of
Gâyatrî. Think of this Mahes’varî Gâyatrî in the middle of the Solar
Orb. Meditating on the Gâyatrî Devî as above, the devotee should shew
the following twenty-four Mudrâs (signs by the fingers, etc., in
religious worship) for the satisfaction of the Devî :-- (1) Sanmukh; (2)
Sampû<u>t</u>; (3) Vitata (4) Vistrita; (5) Dvîmukha; (6) Trimukha; (7)
Chaturmukha; (8) Panchamukha; (9) <u>S</u>a<u>n</u>mukha; (10)
Adhomukha; (11) Vyâpaka; (12) Anjali; (13) S’aka<u>t</u>a (14)
Yamapâs’a; (15) fingers intertwined end to end; (16) Vilamba (17)
Mu<u>st</u>ika; (18) Matsya; (19) Kûrma; (20) Varâha; (21) Simhâkrânta;
(22) Mahâkrânta; (23) Mudgara; (24) Pallava. Next make japam once only
of one hundred syllabled Gâyatrî. Thus twenty-four syllabled Sâvitrî,
“Jâtavedase sunavâma, etc.,” forty-four syllabled mantra; and the thirty
two syllabled mantra, “Tryamvakam Jajâmahe, etc.” These three mantras
united make up one hundred lettered Gâyatrî. (The full context of the
last Mantra is this :-- Om Haum Om yum sa<u>h</u> - Trayamvakam yajâmahe
Sugandhim Pu<u>st</u>i Vardhanam. Urbhârukamiva bandhanân mrityo mûksiya
ma mritât Bhur Bhhuvah. Svarom Yum Sva<u>h</u> Bhurbhuvah Svarom Haum.)
Next make japam of Bhurbhuvah Sva<u>h</u>, twenty four lettered Gâyatrî
with Om. O Nârada! The Brâhma<u>n</u>as are to perform daily the Sandhyo
pâsânâ repeating Gâyatrî, completely adopting the rules above prescribed
and then he will be able to enjoy completely pleasures, happiness and
bliss.

 

<span id="page_1106">p. 1106</span>

 

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the description
of Sandhyâ Upâsânâ in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgvatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](bk11ch17)
