[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch16)  [Next](bk11ch18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVII**

 

**On the description of Sandhyâ and other daily practices**

 

<span id="page_1106">p. 1106</span>

 

1-5. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- If one divides or separates the pâdas
while reciting or making Japam of the Gâyatrî, one is freed from the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>icide, the sin of Brahmahatyâ. But if one does so without
breaking the pâdas, i.e., repeats at one breath, then one incurs the sin
of Brahmahatyâ. Those Brâhma<u>n</u>as who do the Japam of the Gâyatrî
without giving due pause to the pâdas, suffer pains in hells with their
heads downwards for one hundred Kalpas. O Gâyatrî! Thou art of one foot,
of two feet, of three feet and of four feet. Thou art without foot,
because Thou art not obtained. Salutation to Thy Fourth Foot beautiful
and which is above the Trilokî (Râjas). This cannot obtain that.
Firstly, Gâyatrî is of three kinds :-- “Sampu<u>t</u>â,”  “Ekomkârâ,”
and “Sa<u>d</u>omkârâ.” There is also the Gâyatrî, with five
Pra<u>n</u>avas, according to the Dharma S’âstras and Purâ<u>n</u>as.
There is something to be noted while muttering or making the japam of
the Gâyatrî :-- Note how many lettered Gâyatrî you are going to repeat
(make japam). When you have repeated one-eighth of that, repeat (make
japam) the Turîya pâda of Gâyatrî (i.e., the fourth Pâda, the mantram
parorajase Sâvadomâ prâpat) etc., (see the daily practices, page 107)
once and then complete repeating the Gâyatrî. If the Brâhma<u>n</u>a
makes the Japam (the silent muttering) in the above way he gets himself
united with Brahmâ. Other modes of making the Japam do not bear any
fruit. Om Gâyatryasye kapadî dvîpapî Tripadî chatus pâdasi nahi padyase
namaste Tûryâya dars’atâyapadâya paro Rajase Sâbado mâ prâpat. Gâyatrî
is one-footed in the form of Trilokî, two-footed, the Trayî Vidyâ from
thy second foot; tripadî (all Prâ<u>n</u>as are thy third foot,
chatu<u>s</u>padi, as the Puru<u>s</u>a apadi without any foot,
Parorajase above the Râjas, the dust; asau-that; adah this not prâpat
may obtain. The Yogis who are Ûrdharetâs (hold Brahmâ charyam,
continence) are to make Japam of the Sampu<u>t</u>â Gâyatrî (i.e., with
Om). Gâyatrî with one pra<u>n</u>ava and as well the Gâyatrî with six
pra<u>n</u>avas. The householder Brahmachârî or those who want
mok<u>s</u>a are to make Japam of Gâyatrî with Om prefixed.

 

6\. Those householders who affix Om to the Gâyatrî do not get the
increase of their families.

 

<span id="page_1107">p. 1107</span>

 

7-8. The Turîya pâda (foot) of Gâyatrî is the mantra “Parorajase
Sâvodomâ prâpat.” (Brihad. up. v.14.7). Salutation to Thy beautiful
Fourth Foot which is above the Trilokî (Râjas). This cannot obtain that.
The presiding deity of this mantra is Brahmâ. I am now speaking of the
full Dhyânam (meditation) of this Brahmâ so that the full fruit of the
Japam (recitation) may be obtained. There is a full blown lotus in the
heart; its form is like the Moon, Sun, and the Spark of Fire; i.e., of
the nature of pra<u>n</u>ava and nothing else. This is the seat of the
inconceivable Brahmâ. Think thus. Now on that seat is seated well the
steady constant subtle Light, the essence of Akâs’a, the everlasting
existence, intelligence and bliss, the Brahmâ. May He increase my
happiness (see page 107 the daily practice of the Hindus by R. B. Sris
Chandra Basu, on the Invocation of the Gâyatrî).

 

Note :-- Aum! Gâyatryasyekapadî dvîpadî, tripadî, chatu<u>s</u>padasi,
nahi padyase namaste turyâya dars’ atâya padâya parorajase, sâvado
mâprâpat O Gâyatrî! Thou art of one foot (in the farm of Trilokî), of
two feet (the Trayî vidyâ from Thy second foot) of three feet all
Prâ<u>n</u>a, etc., are Thy third foot and of four feet (as the
Puru<u>s</u>a). Thou art without foot because Thou art not obtained.
Salutation to Thy beautiful fourth foot which is above the Trilokî
(Râjas). This cannot obtain that.

 

9\. Now I am speaking of the Mudrâ of the Turîyâ Gâyatrî :-- (1)
Tris’ûla, (2) Yoni, (3) Surabhi, (4) Ak<u>s</u>amâlâ, (5) Linga, (6)
Padma and (7) Mahâmudrâ. These seven Mudrâs are to be shewn.

 

10-14. What is Sandhyâ, that is Gâyatrî; there is no difference
whatsoever between the two. The two are one and the same. Both are of
the nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as
would daily worship Her and bow down before Her with greatest devotion
and reverence. After the Dhyânam, first worship Her with five upachâras
or offerings. Thus :--

 

Om lam prithivyâtmane gandham, arpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.  Om Ham
âkâs’âtmane pu<u>s</u>pam arpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.  Om ram
Vahnyâtmane dîpam arpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.  Aum vam amritâtmane
naivedyam arpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>. Om yam ram lam vam ham
pu<u>s</u>pânjalim arpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>. Thus worshipping with
five upachâras, you must shew Mudrâs to the Devî.

 

15-16. Then meditate on the Form of the Gâyatrî mentally and slowly
repeat the Gâyatrî. Do not shake head, neck and while making japam, do
not show your teeth. According to due rules repeat the Gâyatrî one
hundred and eight times, or twenty-eight times. When unable, repeat ten
times; not less than that.

 

<span id="page_1108">p. 1108</span>

 

17-20. Then raise the Gâyatrî placed before on the heart (seat) by the
mantra “Gâyatrasyai kapadî Dvîpadî, etc., and then bid farewell to Her
after bowing down to Her and repeating the mantra “Omuttame S’ikhare
Devî bhûmyâm parvata mûrdhani Brâhma<u>n</u>a ebhyobhya anujñâtâ Gachcha
Devî yathâsukham” on the highest top of the mountain summit in earth
(i.e., on the Meru mountain) dwells the goddess Gâyatrî. Being pleased
with Thy worshippers go back, O Devî! to Thy abode as it pleaseth Thee.”
(See page 110, The Daily Practices of the Hindus.)

 

The wise men never mutter nor recite the Gâyatrî mantra within the
water. For the Mahar<u>s</u>is say that the Gâyatrî is fire-faced
(agnimukhî). After the farewell shew again the following mudrâs :--
Surabhi Jñân, Sûrpa, Kûrma, Yoni, Padma, Linga and Nirvâna Mudrâs.

 

Then address thus :-- “O Devî! O Thou who speakest pleasant to Kas’yapa!
O Gâyatrî! Whatever syllables I have missed to utter in making Japam,
whatever vowels and consonants are incorrectly pronounced, I ask Thy
pardon for all my above faults.” O Nârada! Next one ought to give peace
offerings to the Gâyatrî Devî.

 

21-33. The Chchhanda of Gâyatrî Tarpa<u>n</u>am (peace offerings to
Gâyatrî) is Gâyatrî; the Ri<u>s</u>i is Vis’vâmitra; Savitâ is the
Devatâ; its application (Niyoga) is in the peace offerings.

 

“Om Bhû<u>h</u>rigvedapuru<u>s</u>am tarpayâmi.”

“Om Bhuva<u>h</u> Yajurvedapuru<u>s</u>am tarpayâmi.”

“Om Svah Sâmaveda puru<u>s</u>am tarpayâmi.”

“Om Maha<u>h</u> Atharvaveda puru<u>s</u>am tarpayâmi.”

“Om Jana<u>h</u> Itihâsapurâ<u>n</u>a puru<u>s</u>am tarpayâmi.”

“Om Tapa<u>h</u> Sarvâgama puru<u>s</u>am tarpayâmi.”

“Om Satyam Satyaloka puru<u>s</u>am tarpayâmi.”

“Om Bhûh bhûrloka puru<u>s</u>am tarpayâmi.”

“Om Bhuva<u>h</u> bhuvoloka puru<u>s</u>am tarpayâmi.”

“Om Sva<u>h</u> svarloka puru<u>s</u>am tarpayâmi.”

“Om Bhûh rekapadâm Gâyatrîm tarpayâmi.”

“Om Bhuvo dvîtîyapadâm Gâyatrîm tarpayâmi.”

“Om Svastripadâm Gâyatrim tarpayâmi.”

“Om Bhûrbhûvah Svas’chatuspadâm Gâyatrîm tarpayâmi.”

 

Pronouncing these, offer the Tarpa<u>n</u>ams. Next add the word
Tarpayâmi to each of the following words “Û<u>s</u>asîm, Gâyatrîm,
Sâvitrîm, Sarasvatim Vedamâtaram, Prithvîm, Ajâm, Kaus’îkîm, Sâmkritîm,
Savajitîm, etc.,” and offer Tarpa<u>n</u>ams. After the Tarpa<u>n</u>am
is over, offer the peace-chantings, (S’ântivâri) repeating the following
mantras.

 

<span id="page_1109">p. 1109</span>

 

“Om Jâta vedase sunavâma romam, etc.”

“Om Mânastoka, etc.”

“Om Tryamvakam Yajâmahe, etc.”

“Om Tachchhamyoh, etc.”

 

Then touch all the parts of your bodies, repeating the two mantra, “Om
atodeva, etc.” And reciting the mantram “Svonâ Prithivî,” bow down to
the earth, after repeating one’s name, Gotra, etc.

 

34-45. O Nârada! Thus the rules of the morning Sandhyâ are prescribed.
Doing works so far, bid farewell to the above-mentioned Gâyatrî. Next
finishing the Agnihotra Homa sacrifice, worship the five Devatâs, S’ivâ,
S’iva, Ganes’a, Sûrya and Vi<u>sn</u>u. Worship by the Puru<u>s</u>a
Sûkta mantra, or by Hrîm mantra, or by Vyahriti mantra or by S’rischate
Lak<u>s</u>mîs’cha, etc., place Bhavanî in the centre; Vi<u>sn</u>u in
the north east corner, S’iva in the south-east corner; Ganes’a in the
south-west corner, and the Sun in the north-west corner; and then
worship them. While offering worship with the sixteen offerings, worship
by repeating sixteen mantras. As there is no other act more merit-giving
than the worship of the Devî, so the Devî should first of all be
worshipped. Then worship in due order the five Devatâs placed in five
positions. As the worship of the Devî is the chief object, so in the
three Sandhyâs, the worship of the Sandhyâ Devî is approved of by the
S’rutis. Never worship Vi<u>sn</u>u with rice; Ganes’a with Tulasî
leaves; the Devî Durgâ with Durba grass and S’iva with Ketakî flower.
The under-mentioned flowers are pleasing to the Devî :-- Mallikâ, Jâti,
Ku<u>t</u>aja, Panasa, Palâsa, Vakula, Lodha, Karavîra,
S’i<u>n</u>s’apa, Aparâjitâ, Bandhûka, Vaka, Madanta, Sindhuvâra,
Palâs’a, Durbhâ, S’allakî, Mâdhavî, Arka, Mandâra, Ketakî,
Kar<u>n</u>ikâra, Kadamba, Lotus, Champaka, Yûthikâ, <u>T</u>agara, etc.

 

46-47. Offer incenses Guggul, Dhûpa and the light of the Til oil and
finish the worship. Then repeat the principal (male) mantra (make
Japam). Thus finishing the work, study the Vedas in the second quarter
of the next day; and in the third quarter of that day feed father,
mother and other dependent relatives, with money earned by one’s own
self according to the traditions of one’s family.

 

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the
description of Sandhyâ and other daily practices in the
Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](bk11ch18)
