[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ch1)  [Next](ezr) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: 2 Chronicles

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And Solomon the son of David was
strengthened in his kingdom, and the LORD his God was with him, and
magnified him exceedingly.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Then Solomon spoke to all Israel, to the
captains of thousands and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every
governor in all Israel, the chief of the fathers.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> So Solomon, and all the congregation with
him, went to the high place that was at Gibeon: for there was the
tabernacle of the congregation of God, which Moses the servant of the
LORD had made in the wilderness.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> But the ark of God David had brought up
from Kirjath-jearim to the place which David had prepared for it: for he
had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Moreover the brazen altar, that Bezaleel
the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle
of the LORD: and Solomon and the congregation sought to it.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And Solomon went up thither to the brazen
altar before the LORD, which was at the tabernacle of the congregation,
and offered a thousand burnt-offerings upon it.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> In that night God appeared to Solomon, and
said to him, Ask what I shall give thee.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And Solomon said to God, Thou hast shown
great mercy to David my father, and hast made me to reign in his stead.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Now, O LORD God, let thy promise to David
my father be established: for thou hast made me king over a people like
the dust of the earth in multitude.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I
may go out and come in before this people: for who can judge this thy
great people?

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And God said to Solomon, Because this was
in thy heart, and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honor, nor the
life of thy enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked
wisdom and knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, over
whom I have made thee king:

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Wisdom and knowledge are granted to thee;
and I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honor, such as none of the
kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall there any after
thee have the like.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Then Solomon came from his journey to the
high place that was at Gibeon to Jerusalem, from before the tabernacle
of the congregation, and reigned over Israel.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Solomon gathered chariots and
horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve
thousand horsemen, which he placed in the chariot cities, and with the
king at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And the king made silver and gold at
Jerusalem as plenteous as stones, and cedar trees made he as the
sycamore trees that are in the vale for abundance.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And Solomon had horses brought out of
Egypt, and linen yarn: the king's merchants received the linen yarn at a
price.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And they fetched up, and brought out of
Egypt a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a
hundred and fifty: and so they brought out horses for all the kings of
the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, by their means.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And Solomon determined to build a house for
the name of the LORD, and a house for his kingdom.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Solomon numbered out seventy thousand
men to bear burdens, and eighty thousand to hew in the mountain, and
three thousand and six hundred to oversee them.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre,
saying, As thou didst deal with David my father, and didst send him
cedars to build him a house to dwell in it, even so deal with me.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Behold, I build a house to the name of the
LORD my God, to dedicate it to him, and to burn before him sweet
incense, and for the continual show-bread, and for the burnt-offerings
morning and evening, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the
solemn feasts of the LORD our God. This is an ordinance for ever to
Israel.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And the house which I build is great: for
great is our God above all gods.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But who is able to build him a house,
seeing the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain him? who am I
then that I should build him a house, save only to burn sacrifice before
him?

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Send me now therefore a man skillful to
work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in iron, and in purple,
and crimson, and blue, and that hath skill to grave with the skillful
men that are with me in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom David my father
provided.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Send me also cedar trees, fir trees, and
algum trees out of Lebanon: for I know that thy servants have skill to
cut timber in Lebanon; and behold, my servants shall be with thy
servants,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Even to prepare me timber in abundance: for
the house which I am about to build shall be wonderfully great.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And behold, I will give to thy servants,
the hewers that cut timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat,
and twenty thousand measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of
wine, and twenty thousand baths of oil.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in
writing, which he sent to Solomon, Because the LORD hath loved his
people, he hath made thee king over them.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Huram said moreover, Blessed be the LORD
God of Israel, that made heaven and earth, who hath given to David the
king a wise son, endued with prudence and understanding, that may build
a house for the LORD, and a house for his kingdom.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And now I have sent a skillful man,
endued with understanding, of Huram my father's,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The son of a woman of the daughters of
Dan, and his father was a man of Tyre, skillful to work in gold, and in
silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in blue,
and in fine linen, and in crimson; also to engrave any manner of
engraving, and to find out every device which shall be put to him, with
thy skillful men, and with the skillful men of my lord David thy father.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Now therefore the wheat, and the barley,
the oil, and the wine which my lord hath spoken of, let him send to his
servants;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as
much as thou shalt need: and we will bring it to thee in floats by sea
to Joppa; and thou mayest convey it to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And Solomon numbered all the strangers
that were in the land of Israel, after the numbering with which David
his father had numbered them; and they were found a hundred and fifty
thousand and three thousand and six hundred.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And he set seventy thousand of them to be
bearers of burdens, and eighty thousand to be hewers in the mountain,
and three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people to work.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then Solomon began to build the house of
the LORD at Jerusalem in mount Moriah, where the LORD appeared to David
his father, in the place that David had prepared in the threshing-floor
of Ornan the Jebusite.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And he began to build in the second day of
the second month, in the fourth year of his reign.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Now these are the things in which Solomon
was instructed for the building of the house of God. The length by
cubits after the first measure was sixty cubits, and the breadth twenty
cubits.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And the porch that was in the front of the
house, the length of it was according to the breadth of the house,
twenty cubits, and the hight was a hundred and twenty: and he overlaid
it within with pure gold.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And the greater house he cieled with fir
tree, which he overlaid with fine gold, and set on it palm trees and
chains.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And he garnished the house with precious
stones for beauty: and the gold was gold of Parvaim.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> He overlaid also the house, the beams, the
posts, and the walls of it, and the doors of it, with gold; and engraved
cherubim on the walls.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And he made the most holy house, the length
of which was according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and
the breadth of it twenty cubits: and he overlaid it with fine gold,
amounting to six hundred talents.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And the weight of the nails was fifty
shekels of gold. And he overlaid the upper chambers with gold.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And in the most holy house he made two
cherubim of image work, and overlaid them with gold.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And the wings of the cherubim were twenty
cubits long: one wing of the one cherub was five cubits, reaching to the
wall of the house: and the other wing was likewise five cubits, reaching
to the wing of the other cherub.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And one wing of the other cherub was five
cubits, reaching to the wall of the house: and the other wing was five
cubits also, joining to the wing of the other cherub.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The wings of these cherubim spread
themselves forth twenty cubits: and they stood on their feet, and their
faces were inward.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And he made the vail of blue, and purple,
and crimson, and fine linen, and wrought cherubim upon it.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Also he made before the house two pillars
of thirty and five cubits high, and the capital that was on the top of
each of them was five cubits.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And he made chains, as in the oracle, and
put them on the heads of the pillars; and made a hundred pomegranates,
and put them on the chains.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And he erected the pillars before the
temple, one on the right hand, and the other on the left; and called the
name of that on the right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left
Boaz.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Moreover he made an altar of brass, twenty
cubits the length of it, and twenty cubits the breadth of it, and ten
cubits the hight of it.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Also he made a molten sea of ten cubits
from brim to brim, round in compass, and five cubits the hight of it;
and a line of thirty cubits encompassed it.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And under it was the similitude of oxen,
which encompassed it: ten in a cubit, encompassing the sea. Two rows of
oxen were cast, when it was cast.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking
towards the north, and three looking towards the west, and three looking
towards the south, and three looking towards the east: and the sea was
set above upon them, and all their hinder parts were inward.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And the thickness of it was a hand-breadth,
and the brim of it like the work of the brim of a cup, with flowers of
lilies; and it received and held three thousand baths.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> He made also ten lavers, and put five on
the right hand, and five on the left, to wash in them: such things as
they offered for the burnt-offering they washed in them; but the sea was
for the priests to wash in.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And he made ten candlesticks of gold
according to their form, and set them in the temple, five on the right
hand, and five on the left.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> He made also ten tables, and placed them in
the temple, five on the right side, and five on the left. And he made a
hundred basins of gold.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Furthermore he made the court of the
priests, and the great court, and doors for the court, and overlaid the
doors of them with brass.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And he set the sea on the right side of
the east end, over against the south.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And Huram made the pots, and the shovels,
and the basins. And Huram finished the work that he was to make for king
Solomon for the house of God;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> To wit, the two pillars, and the pommels,
and the capitals which were on the top of the two pillars, and the two
wreaths to cover the two pommels of the capitals which were on the top
of the pillars;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And four hundred pomegranates on the two
wreaths; two rows of pomegranates on each wreath, to cover the two
pommels of the capitals which were upon the pillars.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> He made also bases, and lavers he made
upon the bases;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> One sea, and twelve oxen under it.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> The pots also, and the shovels, and the
flesh-hooks, and all their instruments, did Huram his father make to
king Solomon for the house of the LORD of bright brass.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> In the plain of Jordan did the king cast
them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredathah.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Thus Solomon made all these vessels in
great abundance: for the weight of the brass could not be ascertained.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And Solomon made all the vessels that
were for the house of God, the golden altar also, and the tables on
which the show-bread was set;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Moreover the candlesticks with their
lamps, that they should burn after the manner before the oracle, of pure
gold;

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And the flowers, and the lamps, and the
tongs, made he of gold, and that perfect gold;

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And the snuffers, and the basins, and the
spoons, and the censers, of pure gold: and the entry of the house, the
inner doors of it for the most holy place, and the doors of the house of
the temple, were of gold.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Thus all the work that Solomon made for the
house of the LORD was finished: and Solomon brought in all the things
that David his father had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and
all the instruments, he put among the treasures of the house of God.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Then Solomon assembled the elders of
Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the
children of Israel, to Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of
the LORD from the city of David, which is Zion.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Wherefore all the men of Israel assembled
themselves to the king in the feast which was in the seventh month.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And all the elders of Israel came; and the
Levites took up the ark.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And they brought up the ark, and the
tabernacle of the congregation, and all the holy vessels that were in
the tabernacle, these did the priests and the Levites bring up.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Also king Solomon, and all the congregation
of Israel that were assembled to him before the ark, sacrificed sheep
and oxen, which could not be told nor numbered for multitude.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And the priests brought in the ark of the
covenant of the LORD to its place, to the oracle of the house, into the
most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim:

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> For the cherubim spread forth their wings
over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark, and the
staffs of it above.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And they drew out the staffs of the ark,
that the ends of the staffs were seen from the ark before the oracle;
but they were not seen without. And there it is to this day.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> There was nothing in the ark save the two
tables which Moses put in it at Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant
with the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And it came to pass, when the priests had
come out of the holy place: (for all the priests that were present were
sanctified, and did not then wait by course:

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Also the Levites who were the singers,
all of them of Asaph, of Heman, of Jeduthun, with their sons and their
brethren; being arrayed in white linen, having cymbals and psalteries
and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them a hundred
and twenty priests sounding with trumpets:)

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> It came even to pass, as the trumpeters
and singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and
thanking the LORD; and when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets
and cymbals and instruments of music, and praised the LORD, saying, For
he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever: that then the house was
filled with a cloud, even the house of the LORD;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> So that the priests could not stand to
minister by reason of the cloud: for the glory of the LORD had filled
the house of God.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Then said Solomon, The LORD hath said that
he would dwell in the thick darkness.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> But I have built a house of habitation for
thee, and a place for thy dwelling for ever.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And the king turned his face, and blessed
the whole congregation of Israel: and all the congregation of Israel
stood.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of
Israel, who hath with his hands fulfilled that which he spoke with his
mouth to my father David, saying,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Since the day that I brought forth my
people from the land of Egypt I chose no city among all the tribes of
Israel to build a house in, that my name might be there; neither chose I
any man to be a ruler over my people Israel:

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But I have chosen Jerusalem, that my name
might be there; and have chosen David to be over my people Israel.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Now it was in the heart of David my father
to build a house for the name of the LORD God of Israel:

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But the LORD said to David my father,
Forasmuch as it was in thy heart to build a house for my name, thou
didst well in that it was in thy heart;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Notwithstanding thou shalt not build the
house; but thy son who shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build
the house for my name.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> The LORD therefore hath performed his
word that he hath spoken; for I am raised up in the room of David my
father, and am set on the throne of Israel, as the LORD promised, and
have built the house for the name of the LORD God of Israel.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And in it have I put the ark, in which is
the covenant of the LORD, that he made with the children of Israel.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And he stood before the altar of the LORD
in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his
hands:

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> (For Solomon had made a brazen scaffold,
of five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits high, and
had set it in the midst of the court: and upon it he stood, and kneeled
upon his knees before all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth
his hands towards heaven,)

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And said, O LORD God of Israel, there is
no God like thee in the heaven, nor on the earth; who keepest covenant,
and showest mercy to thy servants, that walk before thee with all their
hearts:

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Thou who hast kept with thy servant David
my father that which thou hast promised him; and hast spoken with thy
mouth, and hast fulfilled it with thy hand, as it is this day.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Now therefore, O LORD God of Israel, keep
with thy servant David my father that which thou hast promised him,
saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit upon the
throne of Israel; provided thy children take heed to their way to walk
in my law, as thou hast walked before me.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Now then, O LORD God of Israel, let thy
word be verified, which thou hast spoken to thy servant David.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> But will God in very deed dwell with men
on the earth? behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain
thee; how much less this house which I have built!

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Have respect therefore to the prayer of
thy servant, and to his supplication, O LORD my God, to hearken to the
cry and the prayer which thy servant prayeth before thee:

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> That thy eyes may be open upon this house
day and night, upon the place of which thou hast said, that thou wouldst
put thy name there; to hearken to the prayer which thy servant prayeth
towards this place.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Hearken therefore to the supplications of
thy servant, and of thy people Israel, which they shall make towards
this place: hear thou from thy dwelling-place, even from heaven; and
when thou hearest, forgive.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> If a man shall sin against his neighbor,
and an oath be laid upon him to make him swear, and the oath shall come
before thy altar in this house;

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Then hear thou from heaven, and do, and
judge thy servants, by requiting the wicked, by recompensing his way
upon his own head; and by justifying the righteous, by giving him
according to his righteousness.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And if thy people Israel shall be put to
the worse before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee; and
shall return and confess thy name, and pray and make supplication before
thee in this house;

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Then hear thou from the heavens, and
forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again to the land
which thou gavest to them and to their fathers.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> When the heaven is shut, and there is no
rain, because they have sinned against thee; yet if they pray towards
this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou
dost afflict them;

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Then hear thou from heaven, and forgive
the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, when thou hast taught
them the good way in which they should walk; and send rain upon thy
land, which thou hast given to thy people for an inheritance.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> If there shall be dearth in the land, if
there be pestilence, if there be blasting, or mildew, locusts, or
caterpillars; if their enemies shall besiege them in the cities of their
land; whatever calamity, or whatever sickness there be:

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> Then whatever prayer, or whatever
supplication shall be made by any man, or by all the people of Israel,
when every one shall know his own calamity, and his own grief, and shall
spread forth his hands in this house:

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Then hear thou from heaven thy
dwelling-place, and forgive, and render to every man according to all
his ways, whose heart thou knowest (for thou only knowest the hearts of
the children of men:)

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> That they may fear thee, to walk in thy
ways, so long as they live in the land which thou gavest to our fathers.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> Moreover concerning the stranger, who is
not of thy people Israel, but hath come from a distant country for thy
great name's sake, and thy mighty hand, and thy out-stretched arm; if
they come and pray in this house;

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> Then hear thou from the heavens, even
from thy dwelling-place, and do according to all that the stranger
calleth to thee for; that all people of the earth may know thy name, and
fear thee, as do thy people Israel, and may know that this house which I
have built is called by thy name.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> If thy people go out to war against their
enemies by the way that thou shalt send them, and they pray to thee
towards this city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have
built for thy name;

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> Then hear thou from the heavens their
prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> If they sin against thee, (for there is
no man who sinneth not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them
over before their enemies, and they carry them away captives to a land
far off or near;

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> Yet if they bethink themselves in the
land whither they are carried captive, and turn and pray to thee in the
land of their captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done amiss, and
have dealt wickedly;

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> If they return to thee with all their
heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity, whither
they have carried them captives, and pray towards their land which thou
gavest to their fathers, and towards the city which thou hast chosen,
and towards the house which I have built for thy name:

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> Then hear thou from the heavens, even
from thy dwelling-place, their prayer and their supplications, and
maintain their cause, and forgive thy people who have sinned against
thee.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> Now, my God, let, I beseech thee, thy
eyes be open, and let thy ears be attentive to the prayer that is made
in this place.

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> Now therefore arise, O LORD God, into thy
resting-place, thou, and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, O
LORD God, be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in
goodness.

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> O LORD God, turn not away the face of thy
anointed: remember the mercies of David thy servant.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Now when Solomon had made an end of
praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt-offering
and the sacrifices; and the glory of the LORD filled the house.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And the priests could not enter into the
house of the LORD, because the glory of the LORD had filled the LORD'S
house.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And when all the children of Israel saw how
the fire came down, and the glory of the LORD upon the house, they bowed
themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and
worshiped, and praised the LORD, saying, For he is good; for his mercy
endureth for ever.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then the king and all the people offered
sacrifices before the LORD.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of
twenty and two thousand oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep:
so the king and all the people dedicated the house of God.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And the priests waited on their offices:
the Levites also with instruments of music of the LORD, which David the
king had made to praise the LORD, because his mercy endureth for ever,
when David praised by their ministry; and the priests sounded trumpets
before them, and all Israel stood.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Moreover Solomon hallowed the middle of the
court that was before the house of the LORD: for there he offered
burnt-offerings, and the fat of the peace-offerings, because the brazen
altar which Solomon had made was not able to receive the
burnt-offerings, and the meat-offerings, and the fat.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Also at the same time Solomon kept the
feast seven days, and all Israel with him, a very great congregation,
from the entrance of Hamath to the river of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And on the eighth day they made a solemn
assembly: for they kept the dedication of the altar seven days, and the
feast seven days.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And on the three and twentieth day of the
seventh month he sent the people away to their tents, glad and merry in
heart for the goodness that the LORD had shown to David, and to Solomon,
and to Israel his people.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Thus Solomon finished the house of the
LORD, and the king's house: and all that came into Solomon's heart to
make in the house of the LORD, and in his own house, he prosperously
effected.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And the LORD appeared to Solomon by
night, and said to him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this
place to myself for a house of sacrifice.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> If I shut up heaven that there be no
rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the land, or if I send
pestilence among my people;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> If my people, who are called by my name,
shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin,
and will heal their land.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Now my eyes shall be open, and my ears
attentive to the prayer that is made in this place.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> For now have I chosen and sanctified this
house, that my name may be there for ever: and my eyes and my heart
shall be there perpetually.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And as for thee, if thou wilt walk before
me, as David thy father walked, and do according to all that I have
commanded thee, and shalt observe my statutes and my judgments;

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Then will I establish the throne of thy
kingdom, according as I have covenanted with David thy father, saying,
There shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in Israel.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> But if ye turn away, and forsake my
statutes and my commandments, which I have set before you, and shall go
and serve other gods, and worship them;

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Then will I pluck them up by the roots
out of my land which I have given them; and this house, which I have
sanctified for my name, will I cast out of my sight, and will make it to
be a proverb and a by-word among all nations.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And this house, which is high, shall be
an astonishment to every one that passeth by it; so that he shall say,
Why hath the LORD done thus to this land, and to this house?

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And it shall be answered, Because they
forsook the LORD God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land
of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, and worshiped them, and served
them: therefore hath he brought all this evil upon them.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And it came to pass at the end of twenty
years, wherein Solomon had built the house of the LORD, and his own
house,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> That the cities which Huram had restored to
Solomon, Solomon built them, and caused the children of Israel to dwell
there.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And Solomon went to Hamath-zobah, and
prevailed against it.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And he built Tadmor in the wilderness, and
all the store cities, which he built in Hamath.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Also he built Beth-horon the upper, and
Beth-horon the nether, fortified cities, with walls, gates, and bars;

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And Baalath, and all the store cities that
Solomon had, and all the chariot cities, and the cities of the horsemen,
and all that Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and
throughout all the land of his dominion.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> As for all the people that were left of the
Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the
Jebusites, who were not of Israel,

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> But of their children, who were left after
them in the land, whom the children of Israel consumed not, them did
Solomon make to pay tribute until this day.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But of the children of Israel did Solomon
make no servants for his work; but they were men of war, and chief of
his captains, and captains of his chariots and horsemen.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And these were the chief of king
Solomon's officers, even two hundred and fifty, that bore rule over the
people.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And Solomon brought up the daughter of
Pharaoh from the city of David to the house that he had built for her:
for he said, My wife shall not dwell in the house of David king of
Israel, because the places are holy, to which the ark of the LORD hath
come.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Then Solomon offered burnt-offerings to
the LORD on the altar of the LORD, which he had built before the porch,

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Even after a certain rate every day,
offering according to the commandment of Moses, on the sabbaths, and on
the new moons, and on the solemn feasts, three times in the year, even
in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the
feast of tabernacles.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he appointed, according to the order
of David his father, the courses of the priests to their service, and
the Levites to their charges, to praise and minister before the priests,
as the duty of every day required: the porters also by their courses at
every gate: for so had David the man of God commanded.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And they departed not from the
commandment of the king to the priests and Levites concerning any
matter, or concerning the treasures.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Now all the work of Solomon was prepared
to the day of the foundation of the house of the LORD, and until it was
finished. So the house of the LORD was perfected.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then went Solomon to Ezion-geber, and to
Eloth, at the sea side in the land of Edom.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And Huram sent to him by the hands of his
servants, ships, and servants that had knowledge of the sea; and they
went with the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and took thence four hundred
and fifty talents of gold, and brought them to king Solomon.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And when the queen of Sheba heard of the
fame of Solomon, she came to prove Solomon with hard questions at
Jerusalem, with a very great company, and camels that bore spices, and
gold in abundance, and precious stones: and when she had come to
Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And Solomon told her all her questions: and
there was nothing hid from Solomon which he told her not.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And when the queen of Sheba had seen the
wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And the provisions of his table, and the
sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their
apparel; his cup-bearers also, and their apparel; and his ascent by
which he went up into the house of the LORD; there was no more spirit in
her.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And she said to the king, It was a true
report which I heard in my own land of thy acts, and of thy wisdom:

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Yet, I believed not their words, until I
came, and my eyes had seen it: and behold, the one half of the greatness
of thy wisdom was not told to me: for thou exceedest the fame that I
heard.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy
servants, who stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Blessed be the LORD thy God, who delighted
in thee to set thee on his throne, to be king for the LORD thy God:
because thy God loved Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore he
made thee king over them, to do judgment and justice.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And she gave the king a hundred and twenty
talents of gold, and of spices great abundance, and precious stones:
neither was there any such spice as the queen of Sheba gave to king
Solomon.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And the servants also of Huram, and the
servants of Solomon, who brought gold from Ophir, brought algum trees
and precious stones.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the king made of the algum trees
terraces to the house of the LORD, and to the king's palace, and harps
and psalteries for singers: and there were none such seen before in the
land of Judah.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And king Solomon gave to the queen of
Sheba all her desire, whatever she asked, besides that which she had
brought to the king. So she turned, and went away to her own land, she
and her servants.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Now the weight of gold that came to
Solomon in one year was six hundred and sixty and six talents of gold;

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Besides that which chapmen and merchants
brought. And all the kings of Arabia and governors of the country
brought gold and silver to Solomon.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And king Solomon made two hundred targets
of beaten gold: six hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one target.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And three hundred shields made he of
beaten gold: three hundred shekels of gold went to one shield. And the
king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Moreover, the king made a great throne of
ivory, and overlaid it with pure gold.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And there were six steps to the throne,
with a footstool of gold, which were fastened to the throne, and stays
on each side of the sitting-place, and two lions standing by the stays:

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And twelve lions stood there on the one
side and on the other upon the six steps. There was not the like made in
any kingdom.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And all the drinking vessels of king
Solomon were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of
Lebanon were of pure gold: none were of silver; it was not any thing
accounted of in the days of Solomon.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> For the king's ships went to Tarshish
with the servants of Huram: once every three years came the ships of
Tarshish bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And king Solomon surpassed all the kings
of the earth in riches and wisdom.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And all the kings of the earth sought the
presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, that God had put in his heart.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And they brought every man his present,
vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, harness, and
spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And Solomon had four thousand stalls for
horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen; whom he bestowed in
the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And he reigned over all the kings from
the river even to the land of the Philistines, and to the border of
Egypt.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And the king made silver in Jerusalem as
stones, and cedar trees he made as the sycamore trees that are in the
low plains in abundance.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And they brought to Solomon horses from
Egypt, and from all lands.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Now the rest of the acts of Solomon,
first and last, are they not written in the book of Nathan the prophet,
and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iddo
the seer against Jeroboam the son of Nebat?

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all
Israel forty years.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> And Solomon slept with his fathers, and
he was buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son
reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for to
Shechem had all Israel come to make him king.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, who was in Egypt, whither he had fled from the presence of
Solomon the king, heard it, that Jeroboam returned from Egypt.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And they sent and called him. So Jeroboam
and all Israel came and spoke to Rehoboam, saying,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Thy father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore ease thou somewhat the grievous servitude of thy father, and
his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we will serve thee.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And he said to them, Come again to me
after three days. And the people departed.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And king Rehoboam took counsel with the
old men that had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived,
saying, What counsel give ye me to return answer to this people?

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And they spoke to him, saying, If thou
wilt be kind to this people, and please them, and speak good words to
them, they will be thy servants for ever.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But he forsook the counsel which the old
men gave him, and took counsel with the young men that were brought up
with him, that stood before him.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And he said to them, What advice give ye,
that we may return answer to this people, who have spoken to me, saying,
Ease somewhat the yoke that thy father put upon us?

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And the young men that were brought up
with him, spoke to him, saying, Thus shalt thou answer the people that
spoke to thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it
somewhat lighter for us; thus shalt thou say to them, My little finger
shall be thicker than my father's loins.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> For whereas my father put a heavy yoke
upon you, I will put more to your yoke: my father chastised you with
whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> So Jeroboam and all the people came to
Rehoboam on the third day, as the king directed, saying, Come again to
me on the third day.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And the king answered them roughly; and
king Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the old men,

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And answered them after the advice of
the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to
it; my father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with
scorpions.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> So the king hearkened not to the
people: for the cause was of God, that the LORD might perform his word,
which he spoke by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son
of Nebat.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And when all Israel saw that the king
would not hearken to them, the people answered the king, saying, What
portion have we in David? and we have no inheritance in the son of
Jesse: every man to your tents, O Israel: and now, David, see to thy own
house. So all Israel went to their tents.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But as for the children of Israel that
dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram that
was over the tribute; and the children of Israel stoned him with stones,
that he died. But king Rehoboam made speed to get into his chariot, to
flee to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And Israel rebelled against the house
of David to this day.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And when Rehoboam had come to Jerusalem,
he gathered of the house of Judah and Benjamin a hundred and eighty
thousand chosen men who were warriors, to fight against Israel, that he
might bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> But the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah
the man of God, saying,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Speak to Rehoboam the son of Solomon,
king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying,

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Thus saith the LORD, Ye shall not go up,
nor fight against your brethren: return every man to his house: for this
thing is done by me. And they obeyed the words of the LORD, and returned
from going against Jeroboam.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and
built cities for defense in Judah.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> He built even Beth-lehem, and Etam, and
Tekoa,

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And Beth-zur, and Shocho, and Adullam,

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph,

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah,

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And Zorah, and Ajalon, and Hebron,
which are in Judah and in Benjamin, fortified cities.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And he fortified the strong holds, and
put captains in them, and store of provisions, and of oil and wine.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And in every several city he put
shields and spears, and made them exceeding strong, having Judah and
Benjamin on his side.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And the priests and the Levites that
were in all Israel resorted to him from all their borders.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> For the Levites left their suburbs and
their possession, and came to Judah and Jerusalem: for Jeroboam and his
sons had cast them off from executing the priest's office to the LORD:

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And he ordained him priests for the
high places, and for the devils, and for the calves which he had made.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And after them out of all the tribes of
Israel, such as set their hearts to seek the LORD God of Israel came to
Jerusalem, to sacrifice to the LORD God of their fathers.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> So they strengthened the kingdom of
Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of Solomon strong, three years: for
three years they walked in the way of David and Solomon.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And Rehoboam took to himself Mahalath
the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David for a wife, and Abihail the
daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Who bore him children, Jeush, and
Shamariah, and Zaham.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And after her he took Maachah the
daughter of Absalom; who bore him Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and
Shelomith.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And Rehoboam loved Maachah the daughter
of Absalom above all his wives and his concubines: (for he took eighteen
wives, and sixty concubines; and begat twenty and eight sons, and sixty
daughters.)

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And Rehoboam made Abijah the son of
Maachah the chief, to be ruler among his brethren: for he thought to
make him king.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And he dealt wisely, and dispersed of
all his children throughout all the countries of Judah and Benjamin, to
every fortified city: and he gave them provisions in abundance. And he
desired many wives.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And it came to pass, when Rehoboam had
established the kingdom, and had strengthened himself, he forsook the
law of the LORD, and all Israel with him.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And it came to pass, that in the fifth
year of king Rehoboam, Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem,
because they had transgressed against the LORD,

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> With twelve hundred chariots, and sixty
thousand horsemen: and the people were without number that came with him
out of Egypt; the Lubims, the Sukkiims, and the Cushites.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And he took the fortified cities which
pertained to Judah, and came to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Then came Shemaiah the prophet to
Rehoboam, and to the princes of Judah, that were assembled at Jerusalem
because of Shishak, and said to them, Thus saith the LORD, Ye have
forsaken me, and therefore have I also left you in the hand of Shishak.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Upon which the princes of Israel, and the
king humbled themselves; and they said, The LORD is righteous.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And when the LORD saw that they humbled
themselves, the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah, saying, They have
humbled themselves; therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant
them some deliverance; and my wrath shall not be poured out upon
Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Nevertheless they shall be his servants;
that they may know my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the
countries.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> So Shishak king of Egypt came up against
Jerusalem, and took away the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the
treasures of the king's house; he took all: he carried away also the
shields of gold which Solomon had made.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Instead of which, king Rehoboam made
shields of brass, and committed them to the hands of the chief of the
guard, that kept the entrance of the king's house.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And when the king entered into the
house of the LORD, the guard came and conveyed them, and brought them
again into the guard-chamber.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And when he humbled himself, the wrath
of the LORD turned from him, that he would not destroy him altogether:
and also in Judah things went well.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> So king Rehoboam strengthened himself
in Jerusalem, and reigned: for Rehoboam was one and forty years old when
he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city
which the LORD had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his
name there. And his mother's name was Naamah an Ammonitess.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And he did evil, because he prepared
not his heart to seek the LORD.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and
last, are they not written in the book of Shemaiah the prophet, and of
Iddo the seer, concerning genealogies? And there were wars between
Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And Rehoboam slept with his fathers,
and was buried in the city of David: and Abijah his son reigned in his
stead.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now in the eighteenth year of king
Jeroboam began Abijah to reign over Judah.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His
mother's name also was Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And
there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And Abijah set the battle in array with
an army of valiant men of war, even four hundred thousand chosen men:
Jeroboam also set the battle in array against him with eight hundred
thousand chosen men, being mighty men of valor.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And Abijah stood upon mount Zemaraim,
which is in mount Ephraim, and said, Hear me, thou Jeroboam, and all
Israel;

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Ought ye not to know that the LORD God of
Israel gave the kingdom over Israel to David for ever, even to him and
to his sons by a covenant of salt?

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat the servant
of Solomon the son of David, hath risen up, and hath rebelled against
his lord.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And there are gathered to him vain men,
the children of Belial, and they have strengthened themselves against
Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tender-hearted,
and could not withstand them.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And now ye think to withstand the kingdom
of the LORD in the hand of the sons of David; and ye are a great
multitude, and there are with you golden calves, which Jeroboam made you
for gods.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Have ye not cast out the priests of the
LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made for you priests
after the manner of the nations of other lands? so that whoever cometh
to consecrate himself with a young bullock and seven rams, the same may
be a priest of them that are no gods.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> But as for us, the LORD is our God, and
we have not forsaken him; and the priests, who minister to the LORD, are
the sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business:

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And they burn to the LORD every morning
and every evening burnt-sacrifices and sweet incense: the show-bread
also they set in order upon the pure table; and the candlestick of gold
with its lamps to burn every evening: for we keep the charge of the LORD
our God; but ye have forsaken him.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And behold, God himself is with us for
our captain, and his priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against
you. O children of Israel, fight ye not against the LORD God of your
fathers; for ye will not prosper.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> But Jeroboam caused an ambush to come
about behind them: so they were before Judah, and the ambush was behind
them.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And when Judah looked back, behold, the
battle was before and behind: and they cried to the LORD, and the
priests sounded with the trumpets.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Then the men of Judah gave a shout: and
as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam
and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And the children of Israel fled before
Judah: and God delivered them into their hand.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And Abijah and his people slew them
with a great slaughter: so there fell down slain of Israel five hundred
thousand chosen men.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Thus the children of Israel were
brought under at that time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because
they relied upon the LORD God of their fathers.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And Abijah pursued Jeroboam, and took
cities from him, Beth-el with its towns, and Jeshanah with its towns,
and Ephron with its towns.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Neither did Jeroboam recover strength
again in the days of Abijah: and the LORD struck him, and he died.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> But Abijah became mighty, and married
fourteen wives, and begat twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and
his ways, and his sayings, are written in the story of the prophet Iddo.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> So Abijah slept with his fathers, and
they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his
stead. In his days the land was quiet ten years.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And Asa did that which was good and right
in the eyes of the LORD his God:

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> For he took away the altars of the
strange gods, and the high places, and broke down the images, and cut
down the groves:

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And commanded Judah to seek the LORD God
of their fathers, and to do the law and the commandment.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Also he took away out of all the cities
of Judah the high places and the images: and the kingdom was quiet
before him.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And he built fortified cities in Judah:
for the land had rest, and he had no war in those years; because the
LORD had given him rest.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Therefore he said to Judah, Let us build
these cities, and make about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars,
while the land is yet before us; because we have sought the LORD our
God, we have sought him, and he hath given us rest on every side. So
they built, and prospered.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And Asa had an army of men that bore
targets and spears, out of Judah three hundred thousand; and out of
Benjamin, that bore shields and drew bows, two hundred and eighty
thousand: all these were mighty men of valor.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And there came out against them Zerah the
Cushite, with a host of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots;
and came to Mareshah.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Then Asa went out against him, and they
set the battle in array in the valley of Zephathath at Mareshah.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And Asa cried to the LORD his God, and
said, LORD, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with
them that have no power: help us, O LORD our God; for we rest on thee,
and in thy name we go against this multitude. O LORD, thou art our God;
let not man prevail against thee.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So the LORD smote the Cushites before
Asa, and before Judah; and the Cushites fled.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And Asa and the people that were with
him pursued them to Gerar: and the Cushites were overthrown, that they
could not recover themselves; for they were destroyed before the LORD,
and before his host; and they carried away very much spoil.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And they smote all the cities about
Gerar; for the fear of the LORD came upon them: and they plundered all
the cities; for there was exceeding much spoil in them.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> They smote also the tents of cattle,
and carried away sheep and camels in abundance, and returned to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah
the son of Oded:

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And he went out to meet Asa, and said to
him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin; The LORD is with you,
while ye are with him; and if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but
if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Now for a long season Israel hath been
without the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without law.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> But when they in their trouble returned
to the LORD God of Israel, and sought him, he was found by them.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And in those times there was no peace to
him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were
upon all the inhabitants of the countries.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And nation was destroyed by nation, and
city by city: for God troubled them with all adversity.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Be ye strong therefore, and let not your
hands be weak; for your work shall be rewarded.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And when Asa heard these words, and the
prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and put away the
abominable idols out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of
the cities which he had taken from mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar
of the LORD, that was before the porch of the LORD.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin,
and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of
Simeon: for they resorted to him out of Israel in multitudes, when they
saw that the LORD his God was with him.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> So they assembled at Jerusalem in the
third month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And they offered to the LORD at the
same time, of the spoil which they had brought, seven hundred oxen and
seven thousand sheep.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And they entered into a covenant to
seek the LORD God of their fathers with all their heart and with all
their soul;

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> That whoever would not seek the LORD
God of Israel should be put to death, whether small or great, whether
man or woman.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And they swore to the LORD with a loud
voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And all Judah rejoiced at the oath: for
they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole
desire; and he was found by them: and the LORD gave them rest on all
sides.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And also concerning Maachah the mother
of Asa the king, he removed her from being queen, because she had made
an idol in a grove: and Asa cut down her idol, and stamped it, and burnt
it at the brook Kidron.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> But the high places were not taken away
out of Israel: nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> And he brought into the house of God
the things that his father had dedicated, and that he himself had
dedicated, silver, and gold, and vessels.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> And there was no more war until the
five and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> In the six and thirtieth year of the
reign of Asa Baasha king of Israel came against Judah, and built Ramah,
to the intent that he might let none go out or come in to Asa king of
Judah.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Then Asa brought silver and gold out of
the treasures of the house of the LORD and of the king's house, and sent
to Ben-hadad king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> There is a league between me and thee, as
there was between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent thee
silver and gold; go, break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that
he may depart from me.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And Ben-hadad hearkened to king Asa, and
sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel; and they
smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abelmaim, and all the store cities of Naphtali.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And it came to pass, when Baasha heard
it, that he left off the building of Ramah, and let his work cease.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Then Asa the king took all Judah; and
they carried away the stones of Ramah, and the timber of it, with which
Baasha was building, and he built with it Geba and Mizpah.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And at that time Hanani the seer came to
Asa king of Judah, and said to him, Because thou hast relied on the king
of Syria, and not relied on the LORD thy God, therefore hath the host of
the king of Syria escaped out of thy hand.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Were not the Cushites and the Lubims a
numerous army, with very many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou
didst rely on the LORD, he delivered them into thy hand.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> For the eyes of the LORD run to and fro
throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them
whose heart is perfect towards him. In this thou hast done foolishly:
therefore from henceforth thou shalt have wars.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Then Asa was wroth with the seer, and
put him in a prison house; for he was in a rage with him because of this
thing. And Asa oppressed some of the people the same time.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And behold, the acts of Asa, first and
last, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of
his reign was diseased in his feet, until his disease was exceedingly
severe: yet in his disease he sought not to the LORD, but to the
physicians.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And Asa slept with his fathers, and
died in the one and fortieth year of his reign.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And they buried him in his own
sepulchers which he had made for himself in the city of David, and laid
him in the bed which was filled with sweet odors and divers kinds of
spices prepared by the apothecaries' art: and they made a very great
burning for him.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his
stead, and strengthened himself against Israel.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And he placed forces in all the fortified
cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the
cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And the LORD was with Jehoshaphat,
because he walked in the first ways of his father David, and sought not
to Baalim;

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> But sought to the LORD God of his father,
and walked in his commandments, and not after the doings of Israel.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Therefore the LORD established the
kingdom in his hand: and all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents; and
he had riches and honor in abundance.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And his heart was lifted up in the ways
of the LORD: moreover he took away the high places and groves out of
Judah.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Also in the third year of his reign he
sent to his princes, even to Ben-hail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah,
and to Nethaneel, and to Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And with them he sent Levites, even
Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and
Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tob-adonijah, Levites; and
with them Elishama and Jehoram, priests.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And they taught in Judah, and had the
book of the law of the LORD with them, and went about throughout all the
cities of Judah, and taught the people.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And the fear of the LORD fell upon all
the kingdoms of the lands that were around Judah, so that they made no
war against Jehoshaphat.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Also some of the Philistines brought
Jehoshaphat presents, and tribute silver; and the Arabians brought him
flocks, seven thousand and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and
seven hundred he-goats.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And Jehoshaphat became exceedingly
great; and he built in Judah castles, and cities of store.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And he had much business in the cities
of Judah: and the men of war, mighty men of valor, were in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And these are the numbers of them
according to the house of their fathers: of Judah, the captains of
thousands; Adnah the chief, and with him mighty men of valor three
hundred thousand.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And next to him was Jehohanan the
captain, and with him two hundred and eighty thousand.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And next to him was Amasiah the son of
Zichri, who willingly offered himself to the LORD; and with him two
hundred thousand mighty men of valor.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> And of Benjamin; Eliada a mighty man of
valor, and with him armed men with bow and shield two hundred thousand.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And next to him was Jehozabad, and with
him a hundred and eighty thousand ready prepared for the war.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> These waited on the king, besides those
whom the king put in the fortified cities throughout all Judah.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in
abundance, and joined affinity with Ahab.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And after certain years he went down to
Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance,
and for the people that he had with him, and persuaded him to go up with
him to Ramoth-gilead.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And Ahab king of Israel said to
Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt thou go with me to Ramoth-gilead? And he
answered him, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people; and we will
be with thee in the war.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And Jehoshaphat said to the king of
Israel, Inquire, I pray thee, at the word of the LORD to-day.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Therefore the king of Israel collected of
prophets four hundred men, and said to them, Shall we go to
Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for
God will deliver it into the king's hand.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a
prophet of the LORD besides, that we may inquire of him?

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And the king of Israel said to
Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, by whom we may inquire of the LORD:
but I hate him; for he never prophesieth good to me, but always evil:
the same is Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the
king say so.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And the king of Israel called for one of
his officers, and said, Bring quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat
king of Judah sat each of them on his throne, clothed in their robes,
and they sat in a void place at the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and
all the prophets prophesied before them.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had
made him horns of iron, and said, Thus saith the LORD, With these thou
shalt push Syria until they shall be consumed.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And all the prophets prophesied so,
saying, Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and prosper: for the LORD will deliver
it into the hand of the king.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And the messenger that went to call
Micaiah spoke to him, saying, Behold, the words of the prophets declare
good to the king with one consent; let thy word therefore, I pray thee,
be like one of theirs, and speak thou good.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And Micaiah said, As the LORD liveth,
even what my God saith, that will I speak.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And when he had come to the king, the
king said to him, Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or
shall I forbear? And he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be
delivered into your hand.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And the king said to him, How many
times shall I adjure thee that thou say nothing but the truth to me in
the name of the LORD?

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> Then he said, I saw all Israel
scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd: and the
LORD said, These have no master; let them return therefore every man to
his house in peace.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And the king of Israel said to
Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good to me,
but evil?

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Again he said, Therefore hear the word
of the LORD; I saw the LORD sitting upon his throne, and all the host of
heaven standing on his right hand and on his left.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And the LORD said, Who shall entice
Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And
one spoke saying after this manner, and another saying after that
manner.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Then there came out a spirit, and stood
before the LORD, and said, I will entice him. And the LORD said to him,
With what?

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And he said, I will go out, and be a
lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And the LORD said, Thou
shalt entice him, and thou shalt also prevail: go out and do even so.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath
put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets, and the LORD hath
spoken evil against thee.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came
near, and smote Micaiah upon the cheek, and said, Which way went the
spirit of the LORD from me to speak to thee?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt
see on that day when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide
thyself.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Then the king of Israel said, Take ye
Micaiah, and carry him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to
Joash the king's son;

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And say, Thus saith the king, Put this
man in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with water
of affliction, until I return in peace.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And Micaiah said, If thou shalt
certainly return in peace, then hath not the LORD spoken by me. And he
said, Hearken, all ye people.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> And the king of Israel said to
Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and will go to the battle; but put
thou on thy robes. So the king of Israel disguised himself; and they
went to the battle.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Now the king of Syria had commanded the
captains of the chariots that were with him, saying, Fight ye not with
small or great, save only with the king of Israel.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> And it came to pass, when the captains
of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, It is the king of
Israel. Therefore they compassed about him to fight: but Jehoshaphat
cried out, and the LORD helped him; and God moved them to depart from
him.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> For it came to pass, that when the
captains of the chariots perceived that it was not the king of Israel,
they turned back again from pursuing him.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> And a certain man drew a bow at a
venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the harness:
therefore he said to his chariot-man, Turn thy hand, that thou mayest
carry me out of the host; for I am wounded.

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> And the battle increased that day: yet
the king of Israel supported himself in his chariot against the Syrians
until the evening: and about the time of the sun setting he died.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah
returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went
out to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, Shouldst thou help the
ungodly, and love them that hate the LORD? therefore is wrath upon thee
from before the LORD.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Nevertheless, there are good things found
in thee, in that thou hast taken away the groves out of the land, and
hast prepared thy heart to seek God.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem: and
he went out again through the people from Beer-sheba to mount Ephraim,
and brought them back to the LORD God of their fathers.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And he set judges in the land throughout
all the fortified cities of Judah, city by city,

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And said to the judges, Take heed what ye
do: for ye judge not for man, but for the LORD, who is with you in the
judgment.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Wherefore now let the fear of the LORD be
upon you; take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the LORD
our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Moreover, in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat
set of the Levites, and of the priests, and of the chief of the fathers
of Israel, for the judgment of the LORD, and for controversies, when
they returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And he charged them, saying, Thus shall
ye do in the fear of the LORD, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And whatever cause shall come to you of
your brethren that dwell in their cities, between blood and blood,
between law and commandment, statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn
them that they trespass not against the LORD, and so wrath come upon
you, and upon your brethren: this do, and ye shall not trespass.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And behold, Amariah the chief priest is
over you in all matters of the LORD; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael,
the ruler of the house of Judah, for all the king's matters: also the
Levites shall be officers before you. Deal courageously, and the LORD
will be with the good.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> It came to pass after this also, that the
children of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and with them others
besides the Ammonites, came against Jehoshaphat to battle.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Then there came some that told
Jehoshaphat, saying, There cometh a great multitude against thee from
beyond the sea on this side of Syria; and behold, they are in
Hazazon-tamar, which is En-gedi.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself
to seek the LORD, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And Judah assembled, to ask help of the
LORD: even from all the cities of Judah they came to seek the LORD.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation
of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of the LORD, before the new court,

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And said, O LORD God of our fathers, art
not thou God in heaven? and rulest thou not over all the kingdoms of the
heathen? and in thy hand is there not power and might, so that none is
able to withstand thee?

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Art not thou our God, who didst drive out
the inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel, and give it to
the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever?

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And they dwelt in it, and have built thee
a sanctuary in it for thy name, saying,

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> If, when evil cometh upon us, as the
sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this house,
and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry to thee in
our affliction, then thou wilt hear and help.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And now, behold, the children of Ammon
and Moab and mount Seir, whom thou wouldst not let Israel invade, when
they came from the land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and
destroyed them not;

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Behold, I say, how they reward us, to
come to cast us out of thy possession, which thou hast given us to
inherit.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> O our God, wilt thou not judge them?
for we have no might against this great company that cometh against us;
neither know we what to do: but our eyes are upon thee.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And all Judah stood before the LORD,
with their little ones, their wives, and their children.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Then upon Jehaziel the son of
Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a
Levite of the sons of Asaph, came the Spirit of the LORD in the midst of
the congregation;

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and
ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou king Jehoshaphat, Thus saith the
LORD to you, Be not afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great
multitude; for the battle is not yours, but God's.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> To-morrow go ye down against them:
behold, they come up by the cliff of Ziz; and ye shall find them at the
end of the brook, before the wilderness of Jeruel.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Ye shall not need to fight in this
battle: set yourselves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of the
LORD with you, O Judah and Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed;
to-morrow go out against them: for the LORD will be with you.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his
face to the ground: and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell
before the LORD, worshiping the LORD.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And the Levites, of the children of the
Kohathites, and of the children of the Korhites, stood up to praise the
LORD God of Israel with a loud voice on high.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And they rose early in the morning, and
went forth into the wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth,
Jehoshaphat stood and said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of
Jerusalem; Believe in the LORD your God, so shall ye be established;
believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And when he had consulted with the
people, he appointed singers to the LORD, and that should praise the
beauty of holiness, as they went out before the army, and to say, Praise
the LORD; for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And when they began to sing and to
praise, the LORD set ambushes against the children of Ammon, Moab, and
mount Seir, who were come against Judah; and they were smitten.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> For the children of Ammon and Moab
stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and
destroy them: and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir,
every one helped to destroy another.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> And when Judah came towards the
watch-tower in the wilderness, they looked to the multitude, and behold,
they were dead bodies fallen to the earth, and none escaped.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And when Jehoshaphat and his people
came to take away the spoil of them, they found among them in abundance
both riches with the dead bodies, and precious jewels, which they
stripped off for themselves, more than they could carry away: and they
were three days in gathering the spoil, it was so much.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And on the fourth day they assembled
themselves in the valley of Berachah; for there they blessed the LORD:
therefore the name of the same place hath been called, The valley of
Berachah, to this day.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Then they returned, every man of Judah
and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat in the front of them, to go again to
Jerusalem with joy; for the LORD had made them to rejoice over their
enemies.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> And they came to Jerusalem with
psalteries and harps and trumpets to the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> And the fear of God was on all the
kingdoms of those countries, when they had heard that the LORD fought
against the enemies of Israel.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet:
for his God gave him rest on all sides.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah: he
was thirty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the
daughter of Shilhi.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And he walked in the way of Asa his
father, and departed not from it, doing that which was right in the
sight of the LORD.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> But the high places were not taken
away: for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts to the God of
their fathers.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> Now the rest of the acts of
Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of
Jehu the son of Hanani, who is mentioned in the book of the kings of
Israel.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> And after this Jehoshaphat king of
Judah joined himself with Ahaziah king of Israel, who did very wickedly:

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> And he joined himself with him to make
ships to go to Tarshish: and they made the ships in Ezion-geber.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> Then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of
Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou hast
joined thyself with Ahaziah, the LORD hath broken thy works. And the
ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Now Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers,
and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And Jehoram his
son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And he had brethren the sons of
Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and Azariah, and
Michael, Shephatiah: all these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of
Israel.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And their father gave them great gifts of
silver, and of gold, and of precious things, with fortified cities in
Judah: but the kingdom he gave to Jehoram; because he was the
first-born.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Now when Jehoram had risen to the kingdom
of his father, he strengthened himself, and slew all his brethren with
the sword, and divers also of the princes of Israel.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Jehoram was thirty and two years old when
he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And he walked in the way of the kings of
Israel, as did the house of Ahab: for he had the daughter of Ahab for a
wife: and he wrought that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Yet the LORD would not destroy the house
of David, because of the covenant that he had made with David, and as he
promised to give a light to him and to his sons for ever.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> In his days the Edomites revolted from
under the dominion of Judah, and made themselves a king.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Then Jehoram went forth with his princes,
and all his chariots with him: and he rose by night, and smote the
Edomites who encompassed him, and the captains of the chariots.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> So the Edomites revolted from under the
hand of Judah to this day. The same time also did Libnah revolt from
under his hand; because he had forsaken the LORD God of his fathers.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Moreover, he made high places in the
mountains of Judah, and caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit
fornication, and compelled Judah to do the same.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And there came a writing to him from
Elijah the prophet, saying, Thus saith the LORD God of David thy father,
Because thou hast not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor
in the ways of Asa king of Judah,

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> But hast walked in the way of the kings
of Israel, and hast made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to
commit idolatry, like the idolatries of the house of Ahab, and also hast
slain thy brethren of thy father's house, who were better than thyself:

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Behold, with a great plague will the
LORD smite thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy
goods:

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And thou shalt have great sickness by
disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels fall out by reason of the
sickness day by day.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Moreover, the LORD stirred up against
Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and of the Arabians, that were
near the Cushites.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And they came up into Judah, and broke
into it, and carried away all the substance that was found in the king's
house, and his sons also, and his wives; so that there was not a son
left to him, save Jehoahaz the youngest of his sons.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And after all this the LORD smote him
in his bowels with an incurable disease.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And it came to pass, that in process of
time, after the end of two years, his bowels fell out by reason of his
sickness: so he died of severe diseases. And his people made no burning
for him, like the burning of his fathers.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Thirty and two years old was he when he
began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem, eight years, and departed
without being desired: yet they buried him in the city of David, but not
in the sepulchers of the kings.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made
Ahaziah his youngest son king in his stead: for the band of men that
came with the Arabians to the camp had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah
the son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Forty and two years old was Ahaziah when
he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother's
name also was Athaliah the daughter of Omri.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> He also walked in the ways of the house
of Ahab: for his mother was his counselor to do wickedly.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Wherefore he did evil in the sight of the
LORD like the house of Ahab: for they were his counselors, after the
death of his father, to his destruction.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> He walked also after their counsel, and
went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael
king of Syria at Ramoth-gilead: and the Syrians smote Joram.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And he returned to be healed in Jezreel
because of the wounds which were given him at Ramah, when he fought with
Hazael king of Syria. And Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went
down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab at Jezreel, because he was sick.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And the destruction of Ahaziah was from
God by coming to Joram: for when he had come, he went out with Jehoram
against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed to cut off
the house of Ahab.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And it came to pass, that when Jehu was
executing judgment upon the house of Ahab, and found the princes of
Judah, and the sons of the brethren of Ahaziah, that ministered to
Ahaziah, he slew them.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And he sought Ahaziah: and they caught
him, (for he was hid in Samaria,) and brought him to Jehu: and when they
had slain him, they buried him: Because, said they, he is the son of
Jehoshaphat, who sought the LORD with all his heart. So the house of
Ahaziah had no power to retain the kingdom.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> But when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah
saw that her son was dead, she arose, and destroyed all the seed royal
of the house of Judah.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the
king, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king's
sons that were slain, and put him and his nurse in a bed chamber. So
Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the
priest, (for she was the sister of Ahaziah,) hid him from Athaliah, so
that she slew him not.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And he was with them hid in the house
of God six years: and Athaliah reigned over the land.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And in the seventh year Jehoiada
strengthened himself, and took the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son
of Jeroham, and Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of
Obed, and Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri,
into covenant with him.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And they went about in Judah, and
gathered the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and the chief of
the fathers of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And all the congregation made a covenant
with the king in the house of God. And he said to them, Behold, the
king's son shall reign, as the LORD hath said of the sons of David.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> This is the thing that ye shall do: A
third part of you entering on the sabbath, of the priests, and of the
Levites, shall be porters of the doors;

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And a third part shall be at the king's
house; and a third part at the gate of the foundation: and all the
people shall be in the courts of the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> But let none come into the house of the
LORD, save the priests, and they that minister of the Levites; they
shall go in, for they are holy: but all the people shall keep the watch
of the LORD.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And the Levites shall encompass the king,
every man with his weapons in his hand; and whoever else cometh into the
house, he shall be put to death: but be ye with the king when he cometh
in, and when he goeth out.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> So the Levites and all Judah did
according to all things that Jehoiada the priest had commanded, and took
every man his men that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that
were to go out on the sabbath: for Jehoiada the priest dismissed not the
courses.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Moreover, Jehoiada the priest delivered
to the captains of hundreds, spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had
been king David's, which were in the house of God.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And he set all the people, every man
having his weapon in his hand, from the right side of the temple to the
left side of the temple, along by the altar and the temple, by the king
on all sides.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> Then they brought out the king's son,
and put upon him the crown, and gave him the testimony, and made him
king. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him, and said, God save the
king.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Now when Athaliah heard the noise of
the people running and praising the king, she came to the people into
the house of the LORD:

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And she looked, and behold, the king
stood at his pillar at the entrance, and the princes and the trumpets by
the king: and all the people of the land rejoiced, and sounded with
trumpets, also the singers with instruments of music, and such as taught
to sing praise. Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and said, Treason,
treason.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Then Jehoiada the priest brought out
the captains of hundreds that were set over the host, and said to them,
Have her forth without the ranges: and whoever followeth her, let him be
slain with the sword. For the priest said, Slay her not in the house of
the LORD.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> So they laid hands on her; and when she
had come to the entrance of the horse gate by the king's house, they
slew her there.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And Jehoiada made a covenant between
him, and between all the people, and between the king, that they should
be the LORD'S people.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Then all the people went to the house
of Baal, and broke it down, and broke his altars and his images in
pieces, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Also Jehoiada appointed the offices of
the house of the LORD by the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David
had distributed in the house of the LORD, to offer the burnt-offerings
of the LORD, as it is written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and
with singing, as it was ordained by David.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> And he set the porters at the gates of
the house of the LORD, that none who was unclean in any thing should
enter.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And he took the captains of hundreds,
and the nobles, and the governors of the people, and all the people of
the land, and brought down the king from the house of the LORD: and they
came through the high gate into the king's house, and set the king upon
the throne of the kingdom.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> And all the people of the land
rejoiced: and the city was quiet, after they had slain Athaliah with the
sword.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Joash was seven years old when he began
to reign, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother's name
also was Zibiah of Beer-sheba.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And Joash did that which was right in the
sight of the LORD all the days of Jehoiada the priest.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And Jehoiada took for him two wives; and
he begat sons and daughters.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And it came to pass after this, that
Joash was minded to repair the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And he convened the priests and the
Levites, and said to them, Go out to the cities of Judah, and gather
from all Israel money to repair the house of your God from year to year,
and see that ye hasten the matter. But the Levites hastened it not.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And the king called for Jehoiada the
chief, and said to him, Why hast thou not required of the Levites to
bring in out of Judah and out of Jerusalem the collection, according to
the commandment of Moses the servant of the LORD, and of the
congregation of Israel, for the tabernacle of witness?

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> For the sons of Athaliah that wicked
woman, had broken up the house of God; and also all the dedicated things
of the house of the LORD they bestowed upon Baalim.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And at the king's commandment they made a
chest, and set it without at the gate of the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And they made a proclamation through
Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in to the LORD the collection that Moses
the servant of God laid upon Israel in the wilderness.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And all the princes and all the people
rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the chest, until they had made
an end.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Now it came to pass, that at the time
the chest was brought to the king's office by the hand of the Levites,
and when they saw that there was much money, the king's scribe and the
high priest's officer came and emptied the chest, and took it, and
carried it to its place again. Thus they did day by day, and collected
money in abundance.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And the king and Jehoiada gave it to
such as did the work of the service of the house of the LORD, and hired
masons and carpenters to repair the house of the LORD, and also such as
wrought iron and brass to mend the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> So the workmen wrought, and the work
was perfected by them, and they set the house of God in its state, and
strengthened it.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And when they had finished it, they
brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, of which
were made vessels for the house of the LORD, even vessels to minister,
and to offer with, and spoons, and vessels of gold and silver. And they
offered burnt-offerings in the house of the LORD continually all the
days of Jehoiada.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> But Jehoiada grew old, and was full of
days when he died; a hundred and thirty years old was he when he died.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And they buried him in the city of
David among the kings, because he had done good in Israel, both towards
God, and towards his house.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Now after the death of Jehoiada came
the princes of Judah, and made obeisance to the king. Then the king
hearkened to them.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And they left the house of the LORD God
of their fathers, and served groves and idols: and wrath came upon Judah
and Jerusalem for this their trespass.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Yet he sent prophets to them, to bring
them again to the LORD; and they testified against them: but they would
not give ear.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> And the Spirit of God came upon
Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest, who stood above the people,
and said to them, Thus saith God, Why transgress ye the commandments of
the LORD, that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken the LORD, he
hath also forsaken you.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And they conspired against him, and
stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king in the court of
the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> Thus Joash the king remembered not the
kindness which Jehoiada his father had done to him, but slew his son.
And when he died, he said, The LORD look upon it, and require it.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And it came to pass at the end of the
year, that the army of Syria came up against him: and they came to Judah
and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the princes of the people from among
the people, and sent all the spoil of them to the king of Damascus.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> For the army of the Syrians came with a
small company of men, and the LORD delivered a very great host into
their hand, because they had forsaken the LORD God of their fathers. So
they executed judgment against Joash.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And when they had departed from him,
(for they left him in great diseases,) his own servants conspired
against him for the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and slew
him on his bed, and he died: and they buried him in the city of David,
but they buried him not in the sepulchers of the kings.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> And these are they that conspired
against him; Zabad the son of Shimeath an Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the
son of Shimrith a Moabitess.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> Now concerning his sons, and the
greatness of the burdens laid upon him, and the repairing of the house
of God, behold, they are written in the story of the book of the kings.
And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Amaziah was twenty and five years old
when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and nine years in
Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And he did that which was right in the
sight of the LORD, but not with a perfect heart.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Now it came to pass, when the kingdom was
established to him, that he slew his servants that had killed the king
his father.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> But he slew not their children, but did
as it is written in the law of the book of Moses, where the LORD
commanded, saying, The fathers shall not die for the children, neither
shall the children die for the fathers, but every man shall die for his
own sin.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Moreover, Amaziah assembled Judah, and
made them captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, according
to the houses of their fathers, throughout all Judah and Benjamin: and
he numbered them from twenty years old and above, and found them three
hundred thousand choice men, able to go forth to war, that could handle
spear and shield.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> He hired also a hundred thousand mighty
men of valor out of Israel for a hundred talents of silver.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> But there came a man of God to him,
saying, O king, let not the army of Israel go with thee; for the LORD is
not with Israel, to wit, with all the children of Ephraim.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> But if thou wilt go, do it, be strong for
the battle: God will make thee fall before the enemy: for God hath power
to help, and to cast down.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> And Amaziah said to the man of God, But
what shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the army
of Israel? And the man of God answered, The LORD is able to give thee
much more than this.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Then Amaziah separated them, to wit,
the army that had come to him out of Ephraim, to go home again:
wherefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they
returned home in great anger.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And Amaziah strengthened himself, and
led forth his people, and went to the valley of salt, and smote of the
children of Seir ten thousand.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> And other ten thousand left alive the
children of Judah carried away captive, and brought them to the top of
the rock, and cast them down from the top of the rock, that they were
all broken in pieces.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> But the soldiers of the army whom
Amaziah sent back, that they should not go with him to battle, fell upon
the cities of Judah, from Samaria even to Beth-horon, and smote three
thousand of them, and took much spoil.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> Now it came to pass, after that Amaziah
had come from the slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of
the children of Seir, and set them up to be his gods, and bowed himself
before them, and burned incense to them.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> Wherefore the anger of the LORD was
kindled against Amaziah, and he sent to him a prophet, who said to him,
Why hast thou sought after the gods of the people, which could not
deliver their own people out of thy hand?

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> And it came to pass, as he talked with
him, that the king said to him, Art thou made of the king's council?
forbear? why shouldst thou be smitten? Then the prophet forbore, and
said, I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast
done this, and hast not hearkened to my counsel.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Then Amaziah king of Judah took advice,
and sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel,
saying, Come, let us see one another in the face.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> And Joash king of Israel sent to
Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to
the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son for a
wife: and there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trod
down the thistle.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Thou sayest, Lo, thou hast smitten the
Edomites; and thy heart lifteth thee up to boast: abide now at home; why
shouldst thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou shouldst fall, even thou,
and Judah with thee?

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> But Amaziah would not hear; for it came
from God, that he might deliver them into the hand of their enemies,
because they sought after the gods of Edom.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> So Joash the king of Israel went up;
and they saw one another in the face, both he and Amaziah king of Judah,
at Beth-shemesh, which belongeth to Judah.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And Judah was defeated before Israel,
and they fled every man to his tent.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> And Joash the king of Israel took
Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, at
Beth-shemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem, and broke down the wall of
Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred
cubits.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And he took all the gold and the
silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of God with
Obed-edom, and the treasures of the king's house, the hostages also, and
returned to Samaria.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And Amaziah the son of Joash king of
Judah, lived after the death of Joash, son of Jehoahaz king of Israel,
fifteen years.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah,
first and last, behold, are they not written in the book of the kings of
Judah and Israel?

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> Now after the time that Amaziah turned
away from following the LORD, they made a conspiracy against him in
Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish: but they sent to Lachish after him,
and slew him there.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> And they brought him upon horses, and
buried him with his fathers in the city of Judah.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah,
who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his father
Amaziah.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah,
after the king slept with his fathers.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Sixteen years old was Uzziah when he
began to reign, and he reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem. His
mother's name also was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And he did that which was right in the
sight of the LORD, according to all that his father Amaziah did.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> And he sought God in the days of
Zechariah, who had understanding in the visions of God: and, as long as
he sought the LORD, God made him to prosper.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And he went forth and warred against the
Philistines, and broke down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh,
and the wall of Ashdod, and built cities about Ashdod, and among the
Philistines.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And God helped him against the
Philistines, and against the Arabians that dwelt in Gur-baal, and the
Mehunims.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah:
and his name spread abroad even to the entrance of Egypt: for he
strengthened himself exceedingly.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> Moreover, Uzziah built towers in
Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at the valley gate, and at the turning
of the wall, and fortified them.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Also he built towers in the desert, and
digged many wells: for he had many cattle, both in the low country, and
in the plains: husbandmen also, and vine-dressers in the mountains, and
in Carmel: for he loved husbandry.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Moreover, Uzziah had an army of
fighting men, that went out to war, by bands, according to the number of
their account by the hand of Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the ruler,
under the hand of Hananiah, one of the king's captains.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> The whole number of the chief of the
fathers of the mighty men of valor were two thousand and six hundred.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And under their hand was an army, three
hundred thousand and seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with
mighty power, to help the king against the enemy.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And Uzziah prepared for them throughout
all the army, shields, and spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and
bows, and slings to cast stones.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And he made in Jerusalem engines,
invented by skillful men, to be on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to
shoot arrows and great stones. And his name spread far abroad; for he
was helped in a wonderful manner, till he was strong.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> But when he was strong, his heart was
lifted up to his destruction: for he transgressed against the LORD his
God, and went into the temple of the LORD to burn incense upon the altar
of incense.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And Azariah the priest went in after
him, and with him eighty priests of the LORD, that were valiant men:

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> And they withstood Uzziah the king, and
said to him, It appertaineth not to thee, Uzziah, to burn incense to the
LORD, but to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn
incense: go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; neither will
it be for thy honor from the LORD God.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Then Uzziah was wroth, and had a censer
in his hand to burn incense: and while he was wroth with the priests,
the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house
of the LORD, from beside the incense altar.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> And Azariah the chief priest, and all
the priests looked upon him, and behold, he was leprous in his forehead,
and they thrust him out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out,
because the LORD had smitten him.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And Uzziah the king was a leper to the
day of his death, and dwelt in a separate house, being a leper; for he
was cut off from the house of the LORD: and Jotham his son was over the
king's house, judging the people of the land.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah,
first and last, were written by Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amos.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> So Uzziah slept with his fathers, and
they buried him with his fathers in the field of the burial which
belonged to the kings; for they said, He is a leper: and Jotham his son
reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Jotham was twenty and five years old when
he began to reign and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His
mother's name also was Jerushah, the daughter of Zadok.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And he did that which was right in the
sight of the LORD, according to all that his father Uzziah did: yet, he
entered not into the temple of the LORD. And the people did yet
corruptly.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> He built the high gate of the house of
the LORD, and on the wall of Ophel he built much.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Moreover, he built cities in the
mountains of Judah, and in the forests he built castles and towers.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> He fought also with the king of the
Ammonites, and prevailed against them. And the children of Ammon gave
him the same year a hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand measures
of wheat, and ten thousand of barley. So much did the children of Ammon
pay to him, both the second year, and the third.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> So Jotham became mighty, because he
prepared his ways before the LORD his God.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and
all his wars, and his ways, see, they are written in the book of the
kings of Israel and Judah.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> He was five and twenty years old when he
began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And Jotham slept with his fathers, and
they buried him in the city of David: and Ahaz his son reigned in his
stead.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Ahaz was twenty years old when he began
to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem: but he did not that
which was right in the sight of the LORD, like David his father:

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> For he walked in the ways of the kings of
Israel, and made also molten images for Baalim.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Moreover, he burnt incense in the valley
of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire, after the
abominations of the heathen whom the LORD had cast out before the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> He sacrificed also and burnt incense in
the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Wherefore the LORD his God delivered him
into the hand of the king of Syria; and they smote him, and carried away
a great multitude of them captives, and brought them to Damascus. And he
was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who smote him
with a great slaughter.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> For Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in
Judah a hundred and twenty thousand in one day, who were all valiant
men; because they had forsaken the LORD God of their fathers.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, slew
Maaseiah the king's son, and Azrikam the governor of the house, and
Elkanah that was next to the king.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And the children of Israel carried away
captive of their brethren two hundred thousand, women, sons, and
daughters, and also took away much spoil from them, and brought the
spoil to Samaria.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> But a prophet of the LORD was there,
whose name was Oded: and he went out before the army that came to
Samaria, and said to them, Behold, because the LORD God of your fathers
was wroth with Judah, he hath delivered them into your hand, and ye have
slain them in a rage that reacheth to heaven.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> And now ye purpose to keep under the
children of Judah and Jerusalem for bond-men and bond-women to you: but
are there not with you, even with you, sins against the LORD your God?

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Now hear me therefore, and deliver the
captives again, which ye have taken captive of your brethren: for the
fierce wrath of the LORD is upon you.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Then certain of the heads of the
children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of
Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of
Hadlai, stood up against them that came from the war.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And said to them, Ye shall not bring in
the captives hither: for whereas we have offended against the LORD
already, ye intend to add more to our sins and to our trespass: for our
trespass is great, and there is fierce wrath against Israel.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> So the armed men left the captives and
the spoil before the princes and all the congregation.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And the men who were expressed by name
arose, and took the captives, and with the spoil clothed all that were
naked among them, and arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat
and to drink, and anointed them, and carried all the feeble of them upon
asses, and brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their
brethren: then they returned to Samaria.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> At that time king Ahaz sent to the
kings of Assyria to help him.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> For again the Edomites had come and
smitten Judah, and carried away captives.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> The Philistines also had invaded the
cities of the low country, and of the south of Judah, and had taken
Beth-shemesh, and Ajalon, and Gederoth, and Shocho with its villages,
and Timnah with its villages, Gimzo also and its villages: and they
dwelt there.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> For the LORD brought Judah low because
of Ahaz king of Israel: for he made Judah naked, and greatly
transgressed against the LORD.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> And Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria
came to him, and distressed him, but strengthened him not.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> For Ahaz took away a portion from the
house of the LORD, and from the house of the king, and of the princes,
and gave it to the king of Assyria: but he helped him not.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> And in the time of his distress he
trespassed yet more against the LORD: this is that king Ahaz.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> For he sacrificed to the gods of
Damascus, which smote him: and he said, Because the gods of the kings of
Syria help them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help
me. But they were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And Ahaz collected the vessels of the
house of God, and cut in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and
shut up the doors of the house of the LORD, and he made for himself
altars in every corner of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> And in every several city of Judah he
made high places to burn incense to other gods, and provoked to anger
the LORD God of his fathers.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> Now the rest of his acts and of all his
ways, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings
of Judah and Israel.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and
they buried him in the city, even in Jerusalem: but they brought him not
into the sepulchers of the kings of Israel: and Hezekiah his son reigned
in his stead.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Hezekiah began to reign when he was five
and twenty years old, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem.
And his mother's name was Abijah the daughter of Zechariah.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And he did that which was right in the
sight of the LORD, according to all that David his father had done.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> He, in the first year of his reign, in
the first month, opened the doors of the house of the LORD, and repaired
them.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And he brought in the priests and the
Levites, and assembled them in the east street,

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And said to them, Hear me, ye Levites,
sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the house of the LORD God of your
fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> For our fathers have trespassed, and done
that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD our God, and have forsaken
him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the LORD,
and turned their backs.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> Also they have shut up the doors of the
porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered
burnt-offerings in the holy place to the God of Israel.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Wherefore the wrath of the LORD hath been
upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he hath delivered them to trouble, to
astonishment, and to hissing, as ye see with your eyes.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> For lo, our fathers have fallen by the
sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for
this.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Now it is in my heart to make a
covenant with the LORD God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn
away from us.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> My sons, be not now negligent: for the
LORD hath chosen you to stand before him, to serve him, and that ye
should minister to him, and burn incense.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son
of Amasai, and Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites:
and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of
Jehalelel: and of the Gershonites; Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the
son of Joah:

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And of the sons of Elizaphan; Shimri,
and Jeiel: and of the sons of Asaph; Zechariah, and Mattaniah:

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> And of the sons of Heman; Jehiel, and
Shimei: and of the sons of Jeduthun; Shemaiah, and Uzziel.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> And they assembled their brethren, and
sanctified themselves, and came, according to the commandment of the
king, by the words of the LORD, to cleanse the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> And the priests went into the inner
part of the house of the LORD, to cleanse it, and brought out all the
uncleanness that they found in the temple of the LORD into the court of
the house of the LORD. And the Levites took it, to carry it out abroad
into the brook Kidron.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Now they began on the first day of the
first month to sanctify, and on the eighth day of the month they came to
the porch of the LORD: so they sanctified the house of the LORD in eight
days; and on the sixteenth day of the first month they made an end.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Then they went in to Hezekiah the king,
and said, We have cleansed all the house of the LORD, and the altar of
burnt-offering, with all its vessels, and the show-bread table, with all
its vessels.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> Moreover all the vessels, which king
Ahaz in his reign cast away in his transgression, have we prepared and
sanctified, and behold, they are before the altar of the LORD.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Then Hezekiah the king rose early, and
convened the rulers of the city, and went up to the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> And they brought seven bullocks, and
seven rams, and seven lambs, and seven he-goats, for a sin-offering for
the kingdom, and for the sanctuary, and for Judah. And he commanded the
priests the sons of Aaron to offer them on the altar of the LORD.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> So they killed the bullocks, and the
priests received the blood, and sprinkled it on the altar: likewise,
when they had killed the rams, they sprinkled the blood upon the altar:
they killed also the lambs, and they sprinkled the blood upon the altar.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And they brought forth the he-goats for
the sin-offering before the king and the congregation; and they laid
their hands upon them:

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> And the priests killed them, and they
made reconciliation with their blood upon the altar, to make an
atonement for all Israel: for the king commanded that the burnt-offering
and the sin-offering should be made for all Israel.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> And he set the Levites in the house of
the LORD with cymbals, with psalteries, and with harps, according to the
commandment of David, and of Gad the king's seer, and Nathan the
prophet: for so was the commandment of the LORD by his prophets.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> And the Levites stood with the
instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> And Hezekiah commanded to offer the
burnt-offering upon the altar. And when the burnt-offering began, the
song of the LORD began also with the trumpets, and with the instruments
ordained by David king of Israel.

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> And all the congregation worshiped, and
the singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded: and all this continued
until the burnt-offering was finished.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> And when they had made an end of
offering, the king and all that were present with him bowed themselves,
and worshiped.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> Moreover, Hezekiah the king and the
princes commanded the Levites to sing praise to the LORD, with the words
of David, and of Asaph the seer. And they sang praises with gladness,
and they bowed their heads and worshiped.

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> Then Hezekiah answered and said, Now ye
have consecrated yourselves to the LORD, come near and bring sacrifices
and thank-offerings into the house of the LORD. And the congregation
brought in sacrifices and thank-offerings; and, as many as were of a
free heart, burnt-offerings.

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> And the number of the burnt-offerings,
which the congregation brought, was seventy bullocks, a hundred rams:
and two hundred lambs: all these were for a burnt-offering to the LORD.

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> And the consecrated things were six
hundred oxen and three thousand sheep.

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> But the priests were too few, so that
they could not flay all the burnt-offerings: wherefore their brethren
the Levites helped them, till the work was ended, and until the other
priests had sanctified themselves: for the Levites were more upright in
heart to sanctify themselves than the priests.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> And also the burnt-offerings were in
abundance, with the fat of the peace-offerings, and the drink-offerings
for every burnt-offering. So the service of the house of the LORD was
set in order.

<span id="an_29:36">29:36</span> And Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the
people, that God had prepared the people: for the thing was done
suddenly.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and
Judah, and wrote letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should
come to the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, to keep the passover to the
LORD God of Israel.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> For the king had taken counsel, and his
princes, and all the congregation in Jerusalem, to keep the passover in
the second month.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For they could not keep it at that time,
because the priests had not sanctified themselves sufficiently, neither
had the people assembled themselves at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And the thing pleased the king and all
the congregation.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> So they established a decree to make
proclamation throughout all Israel, from Beer-sheba even to Dan, that
they should come to keep the passover to the LORD God of Israel at
Jerusalem: for they had not done it of a long time in the manner as it
was written.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> So the posts went with the letters from
the king and his princes throughout all Israel and Judah, and according
to the commandment of the king, saying, Ye children of Israel, turn
again to the LORD God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and he will return
to the remnant of you that have escaped from the hand of the kings of
Assyria.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And be not ye like your fathers, and like
your brethren, who trespassed against the LORD God of their fathers, who
therefore gave them up to desolation, as ye see.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Now be ye not stiff-necked, as your
fathers were, but yield yourselves to the LORD, and enter into his
sanctuary, which he hath sanctified for ever: and serve the LORD your
God, that the fierceness of his wrath may turn away from you.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> For if ye turn again to the LORD, your
brethren and your children will find compassion before them that lead
them captive, so that they will return into this land: for the LORD your
God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you,
if ye return to him.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> So the posts passed from city to city
through the country of Ephraim and Manasseh even to Zebulun: but they
laughed them to scorn, and mocked them.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> Nevertheless, divers of Asher and
Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> Also in Judah the hand of God was to
give them one heart to do the commandment of the king and of the
princes, by the word of the LORD.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> And there assembled at Jerusalem many
people to keep the feast of unleavened bread in the second month, a very
great congregation.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> And they arose and took away the altars
that were in Jerusalem, and all the altars for incense they took away,
and cast them into the brook Kidron.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> Then they killed the passover on the
fourteenth day of the second month: and the priests and the Levites were
ashamed, and sanctified themselves, and brought in the burnt-offerings
into the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And they stood in their place after
their manner, according to the law of Moses the man of God: the priests
sprinkled the blood, which they received from the hand of the Levites.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> For there were many in the congregation
that were not sanctified: therefore the Levites had the charge of the
killing of the passovers for every one that was not clean, to sanctify
them to the LORD.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> For a multitude of the people, even
many of Ephraim, and Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun, had not cleansed
themselves, yet they ate the passover otherwise than it was written. But
Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The good LORD pardon every one,

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> That prepareth his heart to seek God,
the LORD God of his fathers, though he is not cleansed according to the
purification of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And the LORD hearkened to Hezekiah, and
healed the people.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> And the children of Israel that were
present at Jerusalem kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with
great gladness: and the Levites and the priests praised the LORD day by
day, singing with loud instruments to the LORD.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> And Hezekiah spoke comfortably to all
the Levites that taught the good knowledge of the LORD: and they ate
throughout the feast seven days, offering peace-offerings, and making
confession to the LORD God of their fathers.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> And the whole assembly took counsel to
keep other seven days: and they kept other seven days with gladness.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> For Hezekiah king of Judah gave to the
congregation a thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep; and the
princes gave to the congregation a thousand bullocks and ten thousand
sheep: and a great number of priests sanctified themselves.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And all the congregation of Judah, with
the priests and the Levites, and all the congregation that came out of
Israel, and the strangers that came from the land of Israel, and that
dwelt in Judah, rejoiced.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> So there was great joy in Jerusalem:
for since the time of Solomon the son of David king of Israel there was
not the like in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> Then the priests the Levites arose and
blessed the people: and their voice was heard, and their prayer ascended
to his holy dwelling-place, even to heaven.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> Now when all this was finished, all
Israel that were present went out to the cities of Judah, and broke the
images in pieces, and cut down the groves, and threw down the high
places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and
Manasseh, until they had utterly destroyed them all. Then all the
children of Israel returned every man to his possession into their own
cities.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> And Hezekiah appointed the courses of the
priests and the Levites after their courses, every man according to his
service, the priests and Levites for burnt-offerings and for
peace-offerings, to minister, and to give thanks, and to praise in the
gates of the tents of the LORD.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> He appointed also the king's portion of
his substance for the burnt-offerings, to wit, for the morning and
evening burnt-offerings, and the burnt-offerings for the sabbaths, and
for the new-moons, and for the set feasts, as it is written in the law
of the LORD.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Moreover, he commanded the people that
dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the Levites,
that they might be encouraged in the law of the LORD.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> And as soon as the commandment came
abroad, the children of Israel brought in abundance the first-fruits of
corn, wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the field;
and the tithe of all things they brought in abundantly.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> And the children of Israel and Judah,
that dwelt in the cities of Judah, they also brought in the tithe of
oxen and sheep, and the tithe of holy things which were consecrated to
the LORD their God, and laid them by heaps.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> In the third month they began to lay the
foundation of the heaps, and finished them in the seventh month.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> And when Hezekiah and the princes came
and saw the heaps, they blessed the LORD, and his people Israel.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Then Hezekiah questioned with the priests
and the Levites concerning the heaps.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> And Azariah the chief priest of the
house of Zadok answered him, and said, Since the people began to bring
the offerings into the house of the LORD, we have had enough to eat, and
have left plenty: for the LORD hath blessed his people; and that which
is left is this great abundance.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare
chambers in the house of the LORD; and they prepared them,

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And brought in the offerings and the
tithes, and the dedicated things faithfully: over which Conaniah the
Levite was ruler, and Shimei his brother was the next.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath,
and Asahel, and Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and
Mahath, and Benaiah, were overseers under the hand of Conaniah and
Shimei his brother, at the commandment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah
the ruler of the house of God.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite,
the porter towards the east, was over the free-will-offerings of God, to
distribute the oblations of the LORD, and the most holy things.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> And next him were Eden, and Miniamin,
and Jeshua, and Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the
priests, in their set office, to give to their brethren by courses, as
well to the great as to the small:

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> Besides their genealogy of males, from
three years old and upward, even to every one that entereth into the
house of the LORD, his daily portion for their service in their charges
according to their courses;

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> Both to the genealogy of the priests by
the house of their fathers, and the Levites from twenty years old and
upward, in their charges, by their courses;

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> And to the genealogy of all their
little ones, their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, through
all the congregation: for in their set office they sanctified themselves
in holiness:

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> Also of the sons of Aaron the priests,
who were in the fields of the suburbs of their cities, in every several
city, the men that were expressed by name, to give portions to all the
males among the priests, and to all that were reckoned by genealogies
among the Levites.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> And thus did Hezekiah throughout all
Judah, and performed that which was good and right and truth before the
LORD his God.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> And in every work that he began in the
service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the commandments, to
seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> After these things, and their
establishment, Sennacherib king of Assyria came, and entered into Judah,
and encamped against the fortified cities, and thought to win them for
himself.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib
had come, and that he purposed to fight against Jerusalem,

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> He took counsel with his princes and his
mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which were without the
city: and they helped him.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> So there were assembled many people, who
stopped all the fountains, and the brook that ran through the midst of
the land, saying, Why should the kings of Assyria come, and find much
water?

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> Also he strengthened himself, and built
up all the wall that was broken, and raised it up to the towers, and
another wall without, and repaired Millo in the city of David, and made
darts and shields in abundance.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And he set captains of war over the
people, and assembled them to him in the street of the gate of the city,
and encouraged them, saying,

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Be strong and courageous, be not afraid
nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that is
with him: for there are more with us than with him:

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> With him is an arm of flesh; but with us
is the LORD our God to help us, and to fight our battles. And the people
rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> After this Sennacherib king of Assyria
sent his servants to Jerusalem, (but he himself laid siege against
Lachish, and all his power with him,) to Hezekiah king of Judah, and to
all Judah that were at Jerusalem, saying,

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Thus saith Sennacherib king of Assyria,
On what do ye trust, that ye abide in the siege in Jerusalem?

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Doth not Hezekiah persuade you to give
over yourselves to die by famine and by thirst, saying, The LORD our God
will deliver us out of the hand of the king of Assyria?

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Hath not the same Hezekiah taken away
his high places and his altars, and commanded Judah and Jerusalem,
saying, Ye shall worship before one altar, and burn incense upon it?

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Know ye not what I and my fathers have
done to all the people of other lands? were the gods of the nations of
those lands any ways able to deliver their lands out of my hand?

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Who was there among all the gods of
those nations that my fathers utterly destroyed, that could deliver his
people out of my hand, that your God should be able to deliver you out
of my hand?

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> Now therefore let not Hezekiah deceive
you, nor persuade you in this manner, neither yet believe him: for no
god of any nation or kingdom hath been able to deliver his people out of
my hand, and out of the hand of my fathers: how much less shall your God
deliver you out of my hand?

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And his servants spoke yet more against
the LORD God, and against his servant Hezekiah.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> He wrote also letters to rail at the
LORD God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, As the gods of the
nations of other lands have not delivered their people out of my hand,
so shall not the God of Hezekiah deliver his people out of my hand.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Then they cried with a loud voice in
the Jews' speech to the people of Jerusalem that were on the wall, to
affright them, and to fill them with consternation; that they might take
the city.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And they spoke against the God of
Jerusalem, as against the gods of the people of the earth, the work of
the hands of man.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And for this cause Hezekiah the king,
and the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz, prayed and cried to heaven.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> And the LORD sent an angel, who cut off
all the mighty men of valor, and the leaders and captains in the camp of
the king of Assyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land.
And when he had come into the house of his god, they that came forth
from his own bowels slew him there with the sword.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> Thus the LORD saved Hezekiah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib the king of
Assyria, and from the hand of all others, and guided them on every side.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> And many brought gifts to the LORD to
Jerusalem, and presents to Hezekiah king of Judah: so that from
thenceforth he was magnified in the sight of all nations.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> In those days Hezekiah was sick and
near to death, and he prayed to the LORD: and he spoke to him, and he
gave him a sign.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> But Hezekiah rendered not again
according to the benefit done to him; for his heart was lifted up:
therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> Notwithstanding, Hezekiah humbled
himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the LORD came not upon them in the days
of Hezekiah.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> And Hezekiah had very great riches and
honor: and he made himself treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for
precious stones, and for spices, and for shields, and for all manner of
pleasant jewels:

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> Store-houses also for the increase of
corn, and wine, and oil; and stalls for all manner of beasts, and cotes
for flocks.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> Moreover, he provided for himself
cities, and possessions of flocks and herds in abundance: for God had
given him substance in great abundance.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> This same Hezekiah also stopped the
upper watercourse of Gihon, and brought it straight down to the west
side of the city of David. And Hezekiah prospered in all his works.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> But, in the business of the embassadors
of the princes of Babylon, who sent to him to inquire of the wonder that
was done in the land, God left him, to try him, that he might know all
that was in his heart.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah,
and his goodness, behold, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the
prophet, the son of Amoz, and in the book of the kings of Judah and
Israel.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> And Hezekiah slept with his fathers,
and they buried him in the chief of the sepulchers of the sons of David:
and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at his
death: and Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Manasseh was twelve years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem:

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> But did that which was evil in the sight
of the LORD, like the abominations of the heathen, whom the LORD had
cast out before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> For he built again the high places which
Hezekiah his father had broken down; and he reared up altars for Baalim,
and made groves, and worshiped all the host of heaven, and served them.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> Also he built altars in the house of the
LORD, of which the LORD had said, In Jerusalem shall my name be for
ever.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And he built altars for all the host of
heaven in the two courts of the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> And he caused his children to pass
through the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom: also he observed
times, and used enchantments, and used witchcraft, and dealt with a
familiar spirit, and with wizards: he wrought much evil in the sight of
the LORD, to provoke him to anger.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And he set a carved image, the idol which
he had made, in the house of God, of which God had said to David and to
Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen
before all the tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever:

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> Neither will I any more remove the foot
of Israel from the land which I have appointed for your fathers;
provided they will take heed to do all that I have commanded them,
according to the whole law and the statutes and the ordinances by the
hand of Moses.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> So Manasseh made Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, and to do worse than the heathen, whom
the LORD had destroyed before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And the LORD spoke to Manasseh, and to
his people: but they would not hearken.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Wherefore the LORD brought upon them
the captains of the army of the king of Assyria, who took Manasseh among
the thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And when he was in affliction, he
besought the LORD his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of
his fathers,

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> And prayed to him: and he was entreated
by him, and heard his supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem
into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the LORD he is God.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> Now after this, he built a wall without
the city of David, on the west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to the
entrance at the fish-gate, and compassed about Ophel, and raised it up a
very great highth, and put captains of war in all the fortified cities
of Judah.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And he took away the strange gods, and
the idol out of the house of the LORD, and all the altars that he had
built in the mount of the house of the LORD, and in Jerusalem, and cast
them out of the city.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> And he repaired the altar of the LORD,
and sacrificed on it peace-offerings and thank-offerings, and commanded
Judah to serve the LORD God of Israel.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> Nevertheless, the people sacrificed
still in the high places, yet to the LORD their God only.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh,
and his prayer to his God, and the words of the seers that spoke to him
in the name of the LORD God of Israel, behold, they are written in the
book of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> His prayer also, and how God was
entreated by him, and all his sin, and his trespass, and the places in
which he built high places, and set up groves and graven images, before
he was humbled: behold, they are written among the sayings of the seers.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and
they buried him in his own house: and Amon his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> Amon was two and twenty years old when
he began to reign, and reigned two years in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> But he did that which was evil in the
sight of the LORD, as did Manasseh his father: for Amon sacrificed to
all the carved images which Manasseh his father had made, and served
them;

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And humbled not himself before the
LORD, as Manasseh his father had humbled himself; but Amon trespassed
more and more.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> And his servants conspired against him,
and slew him in his own house.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> But the people of the land slew all
them that had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land
made Josiah his son king in his stead.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> Josiah was eight years old when he began
to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem one and thirty years.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> And he did that which was right in the
sight of the LORD, and walked in the ways of David his father, and
declined neither to the right hand, nor to the left.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> For in the eighth year of his reign,
while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his
father: and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem
from the high places, and the groves, and the carved images, and the
molten images.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And they broke down the altars of Baalim
in his presence; and the images, that were on high above them, he cut
down; and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images, he
broke in pieces, and made dust of them and strewed it upon the graves of
them that had sacrificed to them.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And he burnt the bones of the priests
upon their altars, and cleansed Judah and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And so did he in the cities of Manasseh,
and Ephraim, and Simeon, even to Naphtali, with their mattocks around.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And when he had broken down the altars
and the groves, and had beaten the graven images into powder, and cut
down all the idols throughout all the land of Israel, he returned to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> Now in the eighteenth year of his reign,
when he had purged the land, and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of
Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah the son of
Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of the LORD his God.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And when they came to Hilkiah the high
priest, they delivered the money that was brought into the house of God,
which the Levites that kept the doors had collected from the hand of
Manasseh and Ephraim, and from all the remnant of Israel, and from all
Judah and Benjamin; and they returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And they put it in the hand of the
workmen that had the oversight of the house of the LORD, and they gave
it to the workmen that wrought in the house of the LORD, to repair and
mend the house:

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> Even to the artificers and builders
they gave it, to buy hewn stone, and timber for couplings, and to floor
the houses which the kings of Judah had destroyed.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> And the men did the work faithfully:
and the overseers of them were Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the
sons of Merari; and Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the
Kohathites, to superintend it; and others of the Levites, all that had
skill in instruments of music.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> Also they were over the bearers of
burdens, and were overseers of all that wrought the work in any manner
of service: and of the Levites there were scribes, and officers, and
porters.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> And when they brought out the money
that was brought into the house of the LORD, Hilkiah the priest found
the book of the law of the LORD given by Moses.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> And Hilkiah answered and said to
Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of the
LORD. And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> And Shaphan carried the book to the
king, and brought the king word back again, saying, All that was
committed to thy servants, they perform.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> And they have collected the money that
was found in the house of the LORD, and have delivered it into the hand
of the overseers, and to the hand of the workmen.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Then Shaphan the scribe told the king,
saying, Hilkiah the priest hath given me a book. And Shaphan read it
before the king.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> And it came to pass, when the king had
heard the words of the law, that he rent his clothes.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> And the king commanded Hilkiah, and
Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan the
scribe, and Asaiah a servant of the king's, saying,

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Go, inquire of the LORD for me, and for
them that are left in Israel, and in Judah, concerning the words of the
book that is found: for great is the wrath of the LORD that is poured
out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word of the LORD, to
do after all that is written in this book.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> And Hilkiah, and they that the king had
appointed, went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of
Tikvath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in
Jerusalem in the college:) and they spoke to her to that effect.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> And she answered them, Thus saith the
LORD God of Israel, Tell ye the man that sent you to me.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will
bring evil upon this place, and upon its inhabitants, even all the
curses that are written in the book which they have read before the king
of Judah:

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> Because they have forsaken me, and have
burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with
all the works of their hands; therefore my wrath shall be poured out
upon this place, and shall not be quenched.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> And as for the king of Judah, who sent
you to inquire of the LORD, so shall ye say to him, Thus saith the LORD
God of Israel concerning the words which thou hast heard;

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> Because thy heart was tender, and thou
didst humble thyself before God, when thou didst hear his words against
this place, and against its inhabitants, and didst humble thyself before
me, and didst rend thy clothes, and weep before me; I have even heard
thee also, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> Behold, I will gather thee to thy
fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall
thy eyes see all the evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon
the inhabitants of the same. So they brought the king word again.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> Then the king sent and convened all the
elders of Judah and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> And the king went into the house of the
LORD, and all the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the
priests, and the Levites, and all the people, great and small: and he
read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant that was
found in the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> And the king stood in his place, and
made a covenant before the LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to keep his
commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart,
and with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant which are
written in this book.

<span id="an_34:32">34:32</span> And he caused all that were present in
Jerusalem and Benjamin, to stand to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem
did according to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers.

<span id="an_34:33">34:33</span> And Josiah took away all the
abominations out of all the countries that pertained to the children of
Israel, and made all that were present in Israel, to serve, even to
serve the LORD their God. And all his days they departed not from
following the LORD, the God of their fathers.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> Moreover, Josiah kept a passover to the
LORD in Jerusalem: and they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of
the first month.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> And he set the priests in their charges,
and encouraged them to the service of the house of the LORD,

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> And said to the Levites that taught all
Israel, who were holy to the LORD, Put the holy ark in the house which
Solomon the son of David king of Israel built; it shall not be a burden
upon your shoulders: serve now the LORD your God, and his people Israel,

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> And prepare yourselves by the houses of
your fathers after your courses, according to the writing of David king
of Israel, and according to the writing of Solomon his son.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> And stand in the holy place according to
the divisions of the families of the fathers of your brethren the
people, and after the division of the families of the Levites.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> So kill the passover, and sanctify
yourselves, and prepare your brethren, that they may do according to the
word of the LORD by the hand of Moses.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And Josiah gave to the people, of the
flock, lambs and kids, all for the passover-offerings, for all that were
present, to the number of thirty thousand, and three thousand bullocks:
these were of the king's substance.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And his princes gave willingly to the
people, to the priests, and to the Levites: Hilkiah and Zechariah and
Jehiel, rulers of the house of God, gave to the priests for the
passover-offerings two thousand and six hundred small cattle, and three
hundred oxen.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> Conaniah also, and Shemaiah, and
Nethaneel, his brethren, and Hashabiah and Jehiel and Jozabad, chief of
the Levites, gave to the Levites for passover-offerings five thousand
small cattle, and five hundred oxen.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> So the service was prepared, and the
priests stood in their place, and the Levites in their courses,
according to the king's commandment.

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> And they killed the passover, and the
priests sprinkled the blood from their hands, and the Levites flayed
them.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> And they removed the burnt-offerings,
that they might give according to the divisions of the families of the
people, to offer to the LORD, as it is written in the book of Moses. And
so did they with the oxen.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> And they roasted the passover with fire
according to the ordinance: but the other holy offerings they boiled in
pots, and in caldrons, and in pans, and divided them speedily among all
the people.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> And afterwards they made ready for
themselves, and for the priests: because the priests the sons of Aaron
were busied in offering burnt-offerings and the fat until night;
therefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and for the priests the
sons of Aaron.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> And the singers the sons of Asaph were
in their place, according to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and
Heman, and Jeduthun the king's seer; and the porters waited at every
gate; they might not depart from their service; for their brethren the
Levites prepared for them.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> So all the service of the LORD was
prepared the same day, to keep the passover, and to offer
burnt-offerings upon the altar of the LORD, according to the commandment
of king Josiah.

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> And the children of Israel that were
present kept the passover at that time, and the feast of unleavened
bread seven days.

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> And there was no passover like that
kept in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet; neither did all the
kings of Israel keep such a passover as Josiah kept, and the priests,
and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel that were present, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> In the eighteenth year of the reign of
Josiah was this passover kept.

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> After all this, when Josiah had
prepared the temple, Necho king of Egypt came up to fight against
Charchemish by Euphrates: and Josiah went out against him.

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> But he sent embassadors to him, saying,
What have I to do with thee, thou king of Judah? I come not against thee
this day, but against the house with which I have war: for God commanded
me to make haste: forbear thee from meddling with God, who is with me,
that he may not destroy thee.

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his
face from him, but disguised himself that he might fight with him, and
hearkened not to the words of Necho from the mouth of God, and came to
fight in the valley of Megiddo.

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> And the archers shot at king Josiah;
and the king said to his servants, Have me away; for I am severely
wounded.

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> His servants therefore took him out of
that chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had; and they
brought him to Jerusalem, and he died, and was buried in one of the
sepulchers of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for
Josiah.

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah: and
all the singing men and the singing women have spoken of Josiah in their
lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel: and
behold, they are written in the lamentations.

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and
his goodness, according to that which was written in the law of the
LORD,

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> And his deeds, first and last, behold,
they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz
the son of Josiah, and made him king in his father's stead in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old
when he began to reign, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> And the king of Egypt deposed him at
Jerusalem, and condemned the land in a hundred talents of silver, and a
talent of gold.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his
brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, and changed his name to
Jehoiakim. And Necho took Jehoahaz his brother, and carried him to
Egypt.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old
when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and he
did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD his God.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king
of Babylon, and bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the
vessels of the house of the LORD to Babylon, and put them in his temple
at Babylon.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim,
and his abominations which he did, and that which was found in him,
behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.
And Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> Jehoiachin was eight years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem:
and he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And when the year had expired, king
Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him to Babylon, with the goodly vessels
of the house of the LORD, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah
and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> Zedekiah was one and twenty years old
when he began to reign, and reigned eleven years in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> And he did that which was evil in the
sight of the LORD his God, and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the
prophet speaking from the mouth of the LORD.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> And he also rebelled against king
Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God: but he stiffened his
neck, and hardened his heart from turning to the LORD God of Israel.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> Moreover, all the chief of the priests,
and the people, transgressed very much after all the abominations of the
heathen; and polluted the house of the LORD which he had hallowed in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> And the LORD God of their fathers sent
to them by his messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he
had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling-place:

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> But they mocked the messengers of God,
and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the
LORD arose against his people, till there was no remedy.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> Therefore he brought upon them the king
of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the sword in the house of
their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old
man, or him that stooped for age: he gave them all into his hand.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> And all the vessels of the house of
God, great and small, and the treasures of the house of the LORD, and
the treasures of the king, and of his princes; all these he brought to
Babylon.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> And they burnt the house of God, and
broke down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all its palaces with fire,
and destroyed all its goodly vessels.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> And them that had escaped from the
sword he carried away to Babylon; where they were servants to him and
his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> To fulfill the word of the LORD by the
mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths: for as long
as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfill seventy years.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Now in the first year of Cyrus king of
Persia, that the word of the LORD spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might
be accomplished, the LORD stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia,
that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also
in writing, saying,

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, All
the kingdoms of the earth hath the LORD God of heaven given me; and he
hath charged me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah.
Who is there among you of all his people? The LORD his God be with him,
and let him go up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra](ezr)
