[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](co1)  [Next](gal) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: 2 Corinthians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the
will of God, and Timothy our brother, to the church of God which is at
Corinth, with all the saints who are in all Achaia:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace be to you and peace from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all consolation.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Who comforteth us in all our tribulation,
that we may be able to comfort them who are in any trouble by the
consolation with which we ourselves are comforted by God.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And whether we are afflicted, it is for
your consolation and salvation, which is effectual in the enduring of
the same sufferings which we also suffer: or whether we are comforted,
it is for your consolation and salvation.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And our hope of you is steadfast, knowing,
that as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so shall ye be also of the
consolation.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For we would not, brethren, have you
ignorant of our trouble which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed
out of measure, above strength, so that we despaired even of life:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> But we had the sentence of death in
ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves, but in God who raiseth
the dead:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Who delivered us from so great a death,
and doth deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Ye also helping together by prayer for
us, that for the gift bestowed upon us by the means of many persons,
thanks may be given by many on our behalf.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For our rejoicing is this, the testimony
of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our manner of life
in the world, and more abundantly toward you.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> For we write no other things to you, than
what ye read or acknowledge; and I trust ye will acknowledge even to the
end;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> As also ye have acknowledged us in part,
that we are your rejoicing, even as ye also are ours in the day of the
Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And in this confidence I purposed to come
to you before, that ye might have a second benefit;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And to pass by you into Macedonia, and to
come again from Macedonia to you, and by you to be brought on my way
towards Judea.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> When I therefore was thus minded, did I
use levity? or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the
flesh, that with me there should be yea, yea, and nay, nay?

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> But as God is true, our word towards you
was not yea and nay.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was
preached among you by us, even by me, and Silvanus, and Timothy, was not
yea and nay, but in him was yea.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For all the promises of God in him are
yea, and in him Amen, to the glory of God by us.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Now he who establisheth us with you in
Christ, and hath anointed us, is God;

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Who hath also sealed us, and given the
earnest of the spirit in our hearts.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Moreover, I call God for a witness upon
my soul, that to spare you I have not as yet come to Corinth.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Not for that we have dominion over your
faith, but are helpers of your joy: for by faith ye stand.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But I determined this with myself, that I
would not come again to you in heaviness.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For if I make you sorry, who is he then
that maketh me glad, but the same who is made sorry by me?

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And I wrote this same to you, lest, coming
I should have sorrow from them by whom I ought to rejoice; having
confidence in you all, that my joy is the joy of you all.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For out of much affliction and anguish of
heart I wrote to you with many tears; not that ye should be grieved, but
that ye might know the love which I have more abundantly to you.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But if any hath caused grief, he hath not
grieved me, but in part: that I may not overcharge you all.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Sufficient to such a man is this
punishment, which was inflicted by many.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> So that on the other hand, ye ought rather
to forgive him, and comfort him, lest perhaps such one should be
swallowed up with excessive sorrow.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Wherefore I beseech you that ye would
confirm your love towards him.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For to this end also I wrote, that I might
know the proof of you, whether ye are obedient in all things.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive
also: for if I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave it, for your sakes I
forgave it, in the person of Christ;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Lest Satan should get an advantage of us:
for we are not ignorant of his devices.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Furthermore, when I came to Troas to
preach the gospel of Christ, and a door was opened to me by the Lord,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I had no rest in my spirit, because I
found not Titus my brother; but taking my leave of them, I went from
thence into Macedonia.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Now thanks be to God, who always causeth
us to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest the savor of his knowledge
by us in every place.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For we are to God a sweet savor of
Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> To the one we are the savor of death to
death; and to the other the savor of life to life. And who is sufficient
for these things?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For we are not as many, who corrupt the
word of God: but as from sincerity, but as from God, in the sight of God
we speak in Christ.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Do we begin again to commend ourselves? or
need we, as some others, epistles of commendation to you, or letters of
commendation from you.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Ye are our epistle written in our hearts,
known and read by all men:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to
be the epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with ink, but
with the Spirit of the living God; not on tables of stone, but on
fleshly tables of the heart.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And such trust we have through Christ
toward God.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Not that we are sufficient by ourselves to
think any thing as from ourselves; but our sufficiency is from God;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Who also hath made us able ministers of the
new testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter
killeth, but the spirit giveth life.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But if the ministration of death, written
and engraven on stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel
could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his
countenance; which glory was to be done away;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> How shall not the ministration of the
Spirit be rather glorious?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For if the ministration of condemnation was
glory, much more doth the ministration of righteousness exceed in glory.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For even that which was made glorious had
no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For if that which was done away was
glorious, much more that which remaineth is glorious.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Seeing then that we have such hope, we
use great plainness of speech:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And not as Moses, who put a vail over his
face, that the children of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end
of that which is abolished:

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But their minds were blinded: for until
this day the same vail remaineth untaken away in the reading of the old
testament; which vail is done away in Christ.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But even to this day, when Moses is read,
the vail is upon their heart.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Nevertheless, when it shall turn to the
Lord, the vail shall be taken away.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Now the Lord is that Spirit: and where
the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But we all, with open face beholding as
in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Therefore, seeing we have this ministry, as
we have received mercy, we faint not;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> But have renounced the hidden things of
dishonesty; not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God
deceitfully; but, by manifestation of the truth, commending ourselves to
every man's conscience in the sight of God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> But if our gospel is hid, it is hid to them
that are lost:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> In whom the god of this world hath blinded
the minds of them who believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel
of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine to them.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For we preach not ourselves, but Christ
Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus' sake.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For God, who commanded the light to shine
out of darkness, hath shined into our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But we have this treasure in earthen
vessels, that the excellence of the power may be of God, and not from
us.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> We are troubled on every side, yet not
distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down,
but not destroyed;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Always bearing about in the body the
dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be made
manifest in our body.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> For we who live are always delivered to
death for Jesus' sake, that the life also of Jesus may be made manifest
in our mortal flesh.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> So then death worketh in us, but life in
you.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> We having the same spirit of faith,
according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we
also believe, and therefore speak;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Knowing, that he who raised the Lord
Jesus, will raise us also by Jesus, and will present us with you.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For all things are for your sakes, that
the abundant grace may, through the thanksgiving of many, redound to the
glory of God.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For which cause we faint not; but though
our outward man is wasted, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For our light affliction, which is but
for a moment, worketh out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight
of glory;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> While we look not at the things which are
seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are
seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> For we know that if our earthly house of
this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to
be clothed with our house which is from heaven:

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> If so be that being clothed we shall not be
found naked.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For we that are in this tabernacle do
groan, being burdened: not because we would be unclothed, but clothed,
that mortality might be swallowed up in life.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Now he that hath wrought us for this same
thing is God, who also hath given to us the earnest of the Spirit.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Therefore we are always confident, knowing
that, while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord:

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> (For we walk by faith, not by sight:)

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> We are confident, I say, and willing rather
to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Wherefore we labor, that, whether present
or absent, we may be accepted by him.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For we must all appear before the
judgment-seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in
his body, according to what he hath done, whether good or bad.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord,
we persuade men; but we are made manifest to God; and I trust also are
made manifest in your consciences.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> For we commend not ourselves again to
you, but give you occasion to glory on our behalf, that ye may have
somewhat to answer them who glory in appearance, and not in heart.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For whether we are beside ourselves, it
is to God: or whether we are sober, it is for your cause.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For the love of Christ constraineth us;
because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead:

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And that he died for all, that they who
live should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him who died for
them, and rose again.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Wherefore henceforth we know no man
according to the flesh: though indeed we have known Christ according to
the flesh, yet now henceforth we know him no more.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Therefore, if any man is in Christ, he is
a new creature: old things have passed away; behold, all things have
become new.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And all things are from God, who hath
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the
ministry of reconciliation;

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> To wit, that God was in Christ,
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses to them;
and hath committed to us the word of reconciliation.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Now then we are embassadors for Christ,
as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be
ye reconciled to God.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> For he hath made him to be sin for us,
who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> We then, as co-workers with him, beseech
you also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> (For he saith, I have heard thee in a time
accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee: behold, now
is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation.)

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Giving no offense in any thing, that the
ministry be not blamed:

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> But in all things approving ourselves as
the ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities,
in distresses,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> In stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults,
in labors, in watchings, in fastings;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> By pureness, by knowledge, by
long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Spirit, by love unfeigned,

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> By the word of truth, by the power of God,
by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> By honor and dishonor, by evil report and
good report: as deceivers, and yet true;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> As unknown, and yet well known; as dying,
and behold, we live; as chastened, and not killed;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as
poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all
things.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open to
you, our heart is enlarged.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are
straitened in your own bowels.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Now for a recompense in the same (I speak
as to my children,) be ye also enlarged.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Be ye not unequally yoked together with
unbelievers: for what fellowship hath righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness?

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And what concord hath Christ with Belial?
or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel?

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And what agreement hath the temple of God
with idols? for ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Wherefore come out from among them, and
be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I
will receive you;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And I will be a Father to you, and ye
shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Having therefore these promises, dearly
beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Receive us; we have wronged no man, we have
corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> I speak not this to condemn you: for I have
said before, that ye are in our hearts to die and live with you.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Great is my boldness of speech towards you,
great is my glorying concerning you: I am filled with comfort, I am
exceeding joyful in all our tribulation.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For, when we had come into Macedonia, our
flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side; without were
fightings, within were fears.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Nevertheless God, that comforteth those
that are cast down, comforted us by the coming of Titus;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And not by his coming only, but by the
consolation with which he was comforted in you, when he told us your
earnest desire, your mourning, your fervent mind towards me; so that I
rejoiced the more.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For though I made you sorry with a letter,
I do not repent, though I did repent: for I perceive that the same
epistle hath made you sorry, though it was but for a season.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry,
but that ye sorrowed to repentance: for ye were made sorry after a godly
manner, that ye might receive damage by us in nothing.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For godly sorrow worketh penitence to
salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world worketh
death.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> For behold this very thing, that ye
sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea,
what clearing of yourselves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea,
what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what avenging! In all things
ye have approved yourselves to be clear in this matter.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Wherefore, though I wrote to you, I did
it not for his cause that had done the wrong, nor for his cause that
suffered wrong, but that our care for you in the sight of God might
appear to you.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Therefore we were comforted in your
comfort: and exceedingly the more we rejoiced for the joy of Titus,
because his spirit was refreshed by you all.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For if I have boasted any thing to him
concerning you, I am not ashamed; but as we spoke all things to you in
truth, even so our boasting, which I made before Titus, is found a
truth.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And his tender affection is more abundant
towards you, whilst he remembereth the obedience of you all, how with
fear and trembling ye received him.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I rejoice therefore that I have
confidence in you in all things.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Moreover, brethren, we make known to you
the grace of God bestowed on the churches of Macedonia;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> That in a great trial of affliction, the
abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty, abounded to the riches
of their liberality.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For to their power, I bear testimony, and
even beyond their power, they were willing of themselves;

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Praying us with much entreaty, that we
would receive the gift, and take upon us the fellowship of the
ministering to the saints.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And this they did, not as we hoped, but
first gave their own selves to the Lord, and to us by the will of God:

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> So that we desired Titus, that as he had
begun, so he would also finish in you the same grace also.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Therefore, as ye abound in every thing, in
faith and utterance, and knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your
love to us, see that ye abound in this grace also.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> I speak not by commandment, but by occasion
of the forwardness of others, and to prove the sincerity of your love.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that
ye through his poverty might be rich.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And in this I give my advice: for this is
expedient for you, who have begun before, not only to do, but also to be
forward a year ago.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Now therefore finish the doing of it;
that as there was a readiness to will, so there may be a performance
also out of that which ye have.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> For if there is first a willing mind, it
is accepted according to what a man hath, and not according to what he
hath not.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> For I mean not that other men should be
eased, and you burdened:

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> But by an equality, that now at this time
your abundance may be a supply for their want, that their abundance also
may be a supply for your want: that there may be equality:

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> As it is written, He that had gathered
much had nothing over; and he that had gathered little had no want.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> But thanks be to God, who put the same
earnest care into the heart of Titus for you.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For indeed he accepted the exhortation;
but being more forward, of his own accord he went to you.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And we have sent with him the brother,
whose praise is in the gospel throughout all the churches;

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And not that only, but who was also
chosen by the churches to travel with us with this grace, which is
administered by us to the glory of the same Lord, and declaration of
your ready mind:

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Avoiding this, that no man should blame
us in this abundance which is administered by us:

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Providing for honest things, not only in
the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And we have sent with them our brother,
whom we have often proved to be diligent in many things, but now much
more diligent, upon the great confidence which I have in you.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> If any inquire concerning Titus, he is my
partner and fellow-helper concerning you: or our brethren be inquired
of, they are the messengers of the churches, and the glory of Christ.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Wherefore show ye to them, and before the
churches, the proof of your love, and of our boasting on your behalf.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> For as concerning the ministering to the
saints, it is superfluous for me to write to you:

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For I know the forwardness of your mind,
for which I boast of you to them of Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a
year ago; and your zeal hath incited very many.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Yet have I sent the brethren, lest our
boasting of you should be in vain in this behalf; that, as I said, ye
may be ready:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Lest haply if they of Macedonia come with
me, and find you unprepared, we (that we say not, ye) should be ashamed
in this same confident boasting.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort
the brethren, that they would go before to you, and make up before hand
your bounty, of which ye had notice before, that the same might be
ready, as a matter of bounty, and not of covetousness.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But this I say, He who soweth sparingly,
shall reap also sparingly; and he who soweth bountifully, shall reap
also bountifully.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Every man according as he purposeth in his
heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or by constraint: for God loveth
a cheerful giver.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And God is able to make all grace abound
towards you; that ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may
abound to every good work:

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> (As it is written, He hath dispersed; he
hath given to the poor: his righteousness remaineth for ever.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Now may he that ministereth seed to the
sower, both minister bread for your food, and multiply your seed sown,
and increase the fruits of your righteousness;)

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Being enriched in every thing to all
bountifulness, which causeth through us thanksgiving to God.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> For the administration of this service
not only supplieth the want of the saints, but is abundant also by many
thanksgivings to God;

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> While by the experiment of this
ministration they glorify God for your professed subjection to the
gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution to them, and to all
men;

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And by their prayer for you, who long
after you, for the exceeding grace of God in you.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Thanks be to God for his unspeakable
gift.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now I Paul myself beseech you, by the
meekness and gentleness of Christ, who in presence am base among you,
but being absent am bold towards you:

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> But I beseech you, that I may not be bold
when I am present with that confidence, with which I think to be bold
against some, who think of us as if we walked according to the flesh.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For though we walk in the flesh, we do
not war according to the flesh:

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> (For the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds;)

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ;

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And having in a readiness to avenge all
disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Do ye look on things after the outward
appearance? If any man trusteth to himself that he is Christ's, let him
of himself think this again, that, as he is Christ's, even so are we
Christ's.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> For though I should boast somewhat more
of our authority, which the Lord hath given us for edification, and not
for your destruction, I should not be ashamed:

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> That I may not seem as if I would terrify
you by letters.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> For his letters (say they) are weighty
and powerful; but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech
contemptible.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Let such one think this, that such as
we are in word by letters when we are absent, such will we be also in
deed when we are present.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For we dare not make ourselves of the
number, or compare ourselves with some that commend themselves: but they
measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves among
themselves, are not wise.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> But we will not boast of things without
our measure, but according to the measure of the rule which God hath
distributed to us, a measure to reach even to you.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> For we stretch not ourselves beyond our
measure, as though we reached not to you; for we are come as far as to
you also in preaching the gospel of Christ:

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Not boasting of things without our
measure, that is, of other men's labors; but having hope, when your
faith is increased, that we shall be enlarged by you, according to our
rule abundantly,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> To preach the gospel in the regions
beyond you, and not to boast in another man's line of things made ready
to our hand.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But he that glorieth, let him glory in
the Lord.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> For not he that commendeth himself is
approved, but whom the Lord commendeth.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> I earnestly wish ye could bear with me a
little in my folly: and indeed bear with me.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> For I am jealous over you with godly
jealousy: for I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you
as a chaste virgin to Christ.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> But I fear, lest by any means, as the
serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For if he that cometh preacheth another
Jesus, whom we have not preached, or if ye receive another spirit, which
ye have not received, or another gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye
might well bear with him.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> For I suppose I was not a whit behind the
very greatest apostles.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> But though I am rude in speech, yet not
in knowledge; but we have been thoroughly made manifest among you in all
things.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Have I committed an offense in abasing
myself that ye might be exalted, because I have preached to you the
gospel of God without reward?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> I robbed other churches, taking wages of
them, to do you service.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And when I was present with you, and
wanted, I was chargeable to no man: for that which was lacking to me the
brethren who came from Macedonia supplied: and in all things I have kept
myself from being burdensome to you, and so will I keep myself.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> As the truth of Christ is in me, no man
shall stop me of this boasting in the regions of Achaia.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Why? because I love you not? God
knoweth.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> But what I do, that I will do, that I
may cut off occasion from them who desire occasion; that in what they
glory, they may be found even as we.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For such are false apostles, deceitful
workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And no wonder; for Satan himself is
transformed into an angel of light.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Therefore it is no great thing if his
ministers also are transformed as the ministers of righteousness; whose
end shall be according to their works.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> I say again, Let no man think me a
fool; if otherwise, yet as a fool receive me, that I may boast myself a
little.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> That which I speak, I speak it not
according to the Lord, but as it were foolishly, in this confidence of
boasting.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Seeing that many glory after the flesh,
I will glory also.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye
yourselves are wise.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> For ye suffer, if a man bringeth you
into bondage, if a man devoureth you, if a man taketh from you, if a man
exalteth himself, if a man smiteth you on the face.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> I speak as concerning reproach, as
though we had been weak. But in whatever respect any is bold, (I speak
foolishly) I am bold also.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they
Israelites? so am I. Are they the offspring of Abraham? so am I.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak
as a fool) I am more; in labors more abundant, in stripes above measure,
in prisons more frequent, in deaths often.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> From the Jews five times I received
forty stripes save one.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Thrice was I beaten with rods, once I
was stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been
in the deep;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> In journeyings often, in perils of
waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by my own countrymen, in perils
by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in
perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren;

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> In weariness and painfulness, in
watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and
nakedness.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> Besides those things that are without,
that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the churches.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is
made to fall into sin, and I burn not?

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> If I must needs glory, I will glory of
the things which concern my infirmities.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> The God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is blessed for evermore, knoweth that I lie not.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> In Damascus the governor under Aretas
the king kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison, desirous to
apprehend me:

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And through a window in a basket I was
let down by the wall, and escaped his hands.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> It is not expedient for me doubtless to
glory. I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> I knew a man in Christ above fourteen
years ago, (whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the
body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) such one caught up to the third
heaven.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And I knew such a man, (whether in the
body, or out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;)

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> That he was caught up into paradise, and
heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Of such one will I glory: yet of myself I
will not glory, but in my infirmities.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> For though I would desire to glory, I
shall not be a fool; for I will say the truth: but now I forbear, lest
any man should think of me above that which he seeth me to be, or what
he heareth from me.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And lest I should be exalted above
measure through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me
a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should
be exalted above measure.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> For this thing I besought the Lord
thrice, that it might depart from me.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he said to me, My grace is sufficient
for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness. Most gladly
therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of
Christ may rest upon me.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Therefore I take pleasure in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in
distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> I am become a fool in glorying; ye have
compelled me: for I ought to have been commended by you: for in nothing
am I behind the very greatest apostles, though I am nothing.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Truly the signs of an apostle were
wrought among you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty
deeds.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> For what is that in which ye were
inferior to other churches, except that I myself was not burdensome to
you? forgive me this wrong.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Behold, the third time I am ready to
come to you; and I will not be burdensome to you: for I seek not yours,
but you. For the children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the
parents for the children.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And I will very gladly spend and be
spent for you; though the more abundantly I love you, the less I am
loved.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But be it so, I did not burden you:
nevertheless, being crafty, I caught you with guile.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Did I make a gain of you by any of them
whom I sent to you?

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> I desired Titus, and with him I sent a
brother. Did Titus make a gain of you? walked we not in the same spirit?
walked we not in the same steps?

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Again, think ye that we excuse
ourselves to you? we speak before God in Christ: but we do all things,
dearly beloved, for your edification.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall
not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found by you such as
ye would not: lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes,
backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults:

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And lest, when I come again, my God may
humble me among you, and I shall bewail many who have sinned already,
and have not repented of the uncleanness, and lewdness, and
lasciviousness, which they have committed.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> This is the third time I am coming to
you: By the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be
established.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> I told you before, and foretell you, as
if I were present, the second time; and being absent now I write to them
who heretofore have sinned, and to all others, that, if I come again, I
will not spare;

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking
in me, who toward you is not weak, but is mighty in you.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> For though he was crucified through
weakness, yet he liveth by the power of God. For we also are weak in
him, but we shall live with him by the power of God towards you.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Examine yourselves, whether ye are in the
faith; prove your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye are reprobates?

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> But I trust that ye will know that we are
not reprobates.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Now I pray to God that ye do no evil; not
that we should appear approved, but that ye should do that which is
honest, though we should be as reprobates.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> For we can do nothing against the truth,
but for the truth.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For we are glad, when we are weak, and ye
are strong: and this also we wish, even your perfection.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Therefore I write these things being
absent, lest being present I should use sharpness, according to the
power which the Lord hath given me to edification, and not to
destruction.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Finally, brethren, farewell. Be
perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God
of love and peace will be with you.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Greet one another with a holy kiss.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> All the saints salute you.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians](gal)
