[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](num)  [Next](jos.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Deuteronomy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> These are the words which Moses spoke to
all Israel on the east side of Jordan in the wilderness, in the plain
over against Suf, between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth,
and Dizahab.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> (There are eleven days journey from Horeb
by the way of mount Seir to Kadesh-barnea.)

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And it came to pass in the fortieth year,
in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that Moses spoke
to the children of Israel, according to all that the LORD had given him
in commandment to them;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> After he had slain Sihon the king of the
Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, who dwelt at
Astaroth in Edrei:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> On the east side of Jordan, in the land of
Moab, began Moses to declare this law, saying,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> The LORD our God spoke to us in Horeb,
saying, Ye have dwelt long enough in this mount:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Turn you, and take your journey, and go to
the mount of the Amorites, and to all the places nigh to it, in the
plain, on the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the
sea-side, to the land of the Canaanites, and to Lebanon, to the great
river, the river Euphrates.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Behold, I have set the land before you: go
in and possess the land which the LORD swore to your fathers, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, to give to them and to their seed after them.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And I spoke to you at that time, saying, I
am not able to bear you myself alone:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> The LORD your God hath multiplied you,
and behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> (The LORD God of your fathers make you a
thousand times so many more as ye are, and bless you, as he hath
promised you!)

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> How can I alone bear your encumbrance,
and your burden, and your strife?

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Take ye wise men, and understanding, and
known among your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And ye answered me, and said, The thing
which thou hast spoken is good for us to do.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> So I took the chief of your tribes, wise
men, and known, and made them heads over you, captains over thousands,
and captains over hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over
tens, and officers among your tribes.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And I charged your judges at that time,
saying, Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously
between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Ye shall not respect persons in judgment;
but ye shall hear the small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid
of the face of man; for the judgment is God's: and the cause that is too
hard for you, bring to me, and I will hear it.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And I commanded you at that time all the
things which ye should do.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And when we departed from Horeb, we went
through all that great and terrible wilderness, which ye saw by the way
of the mountain of the Amorites, as the LORD our God commanded us; and
we came to Kadesh-barnea.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And I said to you, Ye have come to the
mountain of the Amorites, which the LORD our God doth give to us.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Behold, the LORD thy God hath set the
land before thee: go up and possess it, as the LORD God of thy fathers
hath said to thee; fear not, neither be discouraged.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And ye came near to me every one of you,
and said, We will send men before us, and they shall explore the land
for us, and bring us word again by what way we must go up, and into what
cities we shall come.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And the saying pleased me well: and I
took twelve men of you, one of a tribe:

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And they turned and ascended the
mountain, and came to the valley of Eshcol, and explored it.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And they took of the fruit of the land in
their hands, and brought it down to us, and brought us word again, and
said, It is a good land which the LORD our God doth give us.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> Notwithstanding, ye would not go up, but
rebelled against the commandment of the LORD your God:

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And ye murmured in your tents, and said,
Because the LORD hated us, he hath brought us forth from the land of
Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Whither shall we go up? our brethren have
discouraged our heart, saying, The people are greater and taller than
we; the cities are great and walled up to heaven; and moreover, we have
seen the sons of the Anakims there.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Then I said to you, Dread not, neither be
afraid of them.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> The LORD your God who goeth before you;
he shall fight for you, according to all that he did for you in Egypt
before your eyes;

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And in the wilderness, where thou hast
seen how the LORD thy God bore thee, as a man doth bear his son, in all
the way that ye went, until ye came into this place.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> Yet in this thing ye did not believe the
LORD your God,

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> Who went in the way before you, to search
out for you a place to pitch your tents in, in fire by night, to show
you by what way ye should go, and in a cloud by day.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And the LORD heard the voice of your
words, and was wroth, and swore, saying,

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> Surely there shall not one of these men
of this evil generation see that good land, which I swore to give to
your fathers,

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh; he shall
see it, and to him will I give the land that he hath trod upon, and to
his children, because he hath wholly followed the LORD.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> Also the LORD was angry with me for your
sakes, saying, Thou also shalt not go in thither.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> But Joshua the son of Nun, who standeth
before thee, he shall go in thither. Encourage him: for he shall cause
Israel to inherit it.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> Moreover, your little ones, which ye said
should be a prey, and your children, which in that day had no knowledge
between good and evil, they shall go in thither, and to them will I give
it, and they shall possess it.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> But as for you, turn ye, and take your
journey into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> Then ye answered and said to me, We have
sinned against the LORD, we will go up and fight, according to all that
the LORD our God commanded us. And when ye had girded on every man his
weapons of war, ye were ready to ascend the hill.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> And the LORD said to me, Say to them, Go
not up, neither fight; for I am not among you; lest ye be smitten before
your enemies.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> So I spoke to you; and ye would not hear,
but rebelled against the commandment of the LORD, and presumptuously
ascended the hill.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> And the Amorites, who dwelt on that
mountain, came out against you, and chased you, as bees do, and
destroyed you in Seir, even to Hormah.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> And ye returned and wept before the LORD;
but the LORD would not hearken to your voice, nor give ear to you.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> So ye abode in Kadesh many days,
according to the days that ye abode there.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Then we turned, and took our journey into
the wilderness by the way of the Red sea, as the LORD spoke to me: and
we compassed mount Seir many days.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the LORD spoke to me, saying,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Ye have compassed this mountain long
enough: turn you northward.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And command thou the people, saying, Ye are
to pass through the border of your brethren the children of Esau, who
dwell in Seir; and they will be afraid of you: therefore take ye good
heed to yourselves:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Meddle not with them; for I will not give
you of their land, no, not so much as a foot-breadth; because I have
given mount Seir to Esau for a possession.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Ye shall buy food of them for money, that
ye may eat; and ye shall also buy water of them for money, that ye may
drink.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For the LORD thy God hath blessed thee in
all the works of thy hand: he knoweth thy walking through this great
wilderness: these forty years the LORD thy God hath been with thee: thou
hast lacked nothing.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And when we passed by from our brethren the
children of Esau, who dwelt in Seir, through the way of the plain from
Elath, and from Ezion-gaber, we turned and passed by the way of the
wilderness of Moab.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And the LORD said to me, Distress not the
Moabites, neither contend with them in battle: for I will not give thee
of their land for a possession; because I have given Ar to the children
of Lot for a possession.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> (The Emims dwelt in it in times past, a
people great, and many, and tall as the Anakims;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Who also were accounted giants, as the
Anakims; but the Moabites call them Emims.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The Horims also dwelt formerly in Seir,
but the children of Esau succeeded them, when they had destroyed them
from before them, and dwelt in their stead; as Israel did to the land of
his possession, which the LORD gave to them.)

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Now rise, said I, and pass over the brook
Zered: and we went over the brook Zered.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And the space in which we came from
Kadesh-barnea, until we passed the brook Zered, was thirty and eight
years; until all the generation of the men of war were wasted from among
the host, as the LORD swore to them.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For indeed the hand of the LORD was
against them, to destroy them from among the host, until they were
consumed.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> So it came to pass, when all the men of
war were consumed and dead from among the people,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> That the LORD spoke to me, saying,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Thou art to pass over through Ar, the
coast of Moab, this day:

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And when thou comest nigh over against
the children of Ammon, distress them not, nor meddle with them: for I
will not give thee of the land of the children of Ammon any possession;
because I have given it to the children of Lot for a possession.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> (That also was accounted a land of
giants: giants dwelt in it in old time; and the Ammonites call them
Zamzummims;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> A people great, and many, and tall as the
Anakims; but the LORD destroyed them before them; and they succeeded
them, and dwelt in their stead:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> As he did to the children of Esau, who
dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed the Horims from before them; and they
succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead even to this day:

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And the Avims who dwelt in Hazerim even
to Azzah, the Caphtorims, who came forth from Caphtor, destroyed them,
and dwelt in their stead.)

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Arise ye, take your journey, and pass
over the river Arnon: behold, I have given into thy hand Sihon the
Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land: begin to possess it, and contend
with him in battle.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> This day will I begin to put the dread of
thee and the fear of thee upon the nations that are under the whole
heaven, who shall hear report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in
anguish because of thee.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And I sent messengers from the wilderness
of Kedemoth to Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying,

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Let me pass through thy land: I will go
along by the highway, I will neither turn to the right hand nor to the
left.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Thou shalt sell me food for money, that I
may eat; and give me water for money, that I may drink: only I will pass
through on my feet;

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> (As the children of Esau who dwell in
Seir, and the Moabites who dwell in Ar, did to me;) until I shall pass
over Jordan into the land which the LORD our God giveth us.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let
us pass by him: for the LORD thy God hardened his spirit, and made his
heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand, as appeareth
this day.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> And the LORD said to me, Behold, I have
begun to give Sihon and his land before thee: begin to possess, that
thou mayest inherit his land.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> Then Sihon came out against us, he and
all his people, to fight at Jahaz.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> And the LORD our God delivered him before
us; and we smote him, and his sons, and all his people.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> And we took all his cities at that time,
and utterly destroyed the men, and the women, and the little ones of
every city, we left none to remain.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> Only the cattle we took for a prey to
ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we took.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> From Aroer, which is by the brink of the
river of Arnon, and from the city that is by the river, even to Gilead,
there was not one city too strong for us: the LORD our God delivered all
to us:

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> Only to the land of the children of Ammon
thou camest not, nor to any place of the river Jabbok, nor to the cities
on the mountains, nor to whatever the LORD our God forbad us.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then we turned, and went up the way to
Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan came out against us, he and all his
people, to battle at Edrei.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And the LORD said to me, Fear him not: for
I will deliver him, and all his people, and his land, into thy hand; and
thou shalt do to him as thou didst to Sihon king of the Amorites, who
dwelt at Heshbon.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> So the LORD our God delivered into our
hands Og also the king of Bashan, and all his people: and we smote him
until none was left to him remaining.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And we took all his cities at that time,
there was not a city which we took not from them, sixty cities, all the
region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> All these cities were fortified with high
walls, gates, and bars; besides unwalled towns a great number.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And we utterly destroyed them, as we did to
Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying the men, women, and children
of every city.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But all the cattle, and the spoil of the
cities, we took for a prey to ourselves.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And we took at that time out of the hand of
the two kings of the Amorites the land that was on this side of Jordan,
from the river of Arnon to mount Hermon;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> (Which Hermon the Sidonians call Sirion;
and the Amorites call it Shenir;)

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> All the cities of the plain, and all
Gilead, and all Bashan, to Salchah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of
Og in Bashan.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For only Og king of Bashan remained of
the remnant of giants; behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; is
it not in Rabbath of the children of Ammon? nine cubits was the length
of it, and four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And this land, which we possessed at that
time, from Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, and half mount Gilead,
and its cities, I gave to the Reubenites and to the Gadites.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan,
being the kingdom of Og, I gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh; all the
region of Argob, with all Bashan, which was called the land of giants.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Jair the son of Manasseh took all the
country of Argob, to the borders of Geshuri, and Maachathi; and called
them after his own name, Bashan-havoth-jair, to this day.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And I gave Gilead to Machir.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And to the Reubenites and to the Gadites
I gave from Gilead even to the river Arnon half the valley, and the
border even to the river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of
Ammon:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> The plain also, and Jordan, and the coast
of it, from Chinnereth even to the sea of the plain, even the salt-sea,
under Ashdoth-pisgah eastward.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And I commanded you at that time, saying,
The LORD your God hath given you this land to possess it; ye shall pass
over armed before your brethren the children of Israel, all that are
meet for the war.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> But your wives, and your little ones, and
your cattle, (for I know that ye have many cattle,) shall abide in your
cities which I have given you;

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Until the LORD shall have given rest to
your brethren, as well as to you, and until they also possess the land
which the LORD your God hath given them beyond Jordan: and then shall ye
return every man to his possession which I have given you.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And I commanded Joshua at that time,
saying, Thy eyes have seen all that the LORD your God hath done to these
two kings: so shall the LORD do to all the kingdoms whither thou
passest.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Ye shall not fear them: for the LORD your
God he shall fight for you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And I besought the LORD at that time,
saying,

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> O Lord GOD, thou hast begun to show thy
servant thy greatness, and thy mighty hand: for what God is there in
heaven or in earth, that can do according to thy works, and according to
thy might?

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> I pray thee, let me go over, and see the
good land that is beyond Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> But the LORD was wroth with me for your
sakes, and would not hear me: and the LORD said to me, Let it suffice
thee; speak no more to me of this matter.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Ascend to the top of Pisgah, and lift up
thy eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and
behold with thy eyes: for thou shalt not go over this Jordan.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> But charge Joshua, and encourage him, and
strengthen him: for he shall go over before this people, and he shall
cause them to inherit the land which thou shalt see.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> So we abode in the valley over against
Beth-peor.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now therefore hearken, O Israel, to the
statutes and to the judgments, which I teach you, to do them, that ye
may live, and go in and possess the land which the LORD God of your
fathers giveth you.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Ye shall not add to the word which I
command you, neither shall ye diminish aught from it, that ye may keep
the commandments of the LORD your God which I command you.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Your eyes have seen what the LORD did
because of Baal-peor: for all the men that followed Baal-peor, the LORD
thy God hath destroyed them from among you.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But ye who adhered to the LORD your God,
are alive every one of you this day.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Behold, I have taught you statutes, and
judgments, even as the LORD my God commanded me, that ye should do so in
the land whither ye go to possess it.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Keep therefore and do them; for this is
your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, which
will hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a
wise and understanding people.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For what nation is there so great, which
hath God so nigh to them, as the LORD our God is in all things that we
call upon him for?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And what nation is there so great, that
hath statutes and judgments so righteous as all this law, which I set
before you this day?

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy
soul diligently, lest thou shouldst forget the things which thy eyes
have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life:
but teach them to thy sons, and thy sons' sons:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Specially the day that thou stoodest
before the LORD thy God in Horeb, when the LORD said to me, Assemble the
people to me, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to
fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and that they
may teach their children.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And ye came near and stood under the
mountain; and the mountain burned with fire to the midst of heaven, with
darkness, clouds, and thick darkness.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And the LORD spoke to you out of the
midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no
similitude; only ye heard a voice.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he declared to you his covenant,
which he commanded you to perform, even ten commandments; and he wrote
them upon two tables of stone.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And the LORD commanded me at that time to
teach you statutes and judgments, that ye might do them in the land
whither ye go over to possess it.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Take ye therefore good heed to
yourselves; for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day that the LORD
spoke to you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire;

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make to
you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male
or female,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> The likeness of any beast that is on the
earth, the likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the air,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> The likeness of any thing that creepeth
on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the waters beneath
the earth:

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And lest thou shouldst lift up thy eyes
to heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and the stars,
even all the host of heaven, shouldst be driven to worship them, and
serve them, which the LORD thy God hath divided to all nations under the
whole heaven.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> But the LORD hath taken you, and brought
you out of the iron furnace, even from Egypt, to be to him a people of
inheritance, as ye are this day.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Furthermore the LORD was angry with me
for your sakes, and swore that I should not go over Jordan, and that I
should not enter that good land which the LORD thy God giveth thee for
an inheritance:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> But I must die in this land, I must not
go over Jordan: but ye shall go over, and possess that good land.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Take heed to yourselves, lest ye forget
the covenant of the LORD your God, which he made with you, and make you
a graven image, or the likeness of any thing which the LORD thy God hath
forbidden thee.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> For the LORD thy God is a consuming fire,
even a jealous God.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> When thou shalt beget children, and
children's children, and ye shall have remained long in the land, and
shall corrupt yourselves, and make a graven image, or the likeness of
any thing, and shall do evil in the sight of the LORD thy God, to
provoke him to anger:

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> I call heaven and earth to witness
against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from the land to
which ye go over Jordan to possess it; ye shall not prolong your days
upon it, but shall be utterly destroyed.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And the LORD shall scatter you among the
nations, and ye shall be left few in number among the heathen, whither
the LORD shall lead you.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And there ye shall serve gods, the work
of men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat,
nor smell.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> But if from thence thou shalt seek the
LORD thy God, thou shalt find him, if thou shalt seek him with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> When thou art in tribulation, and all
these things have come upon thee, even in the latter days, if thou shalt
turn to the LORD thy God, and shalt be obedient to his voice;

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> (For the LORD thy God is a merciful God;)
he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant
of thy fathers, which he swore to them.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> For ask now of the days that are past,
which were before thee, since the day that God created man upon the
earth, and ask from the one side of heaven to the other, whether there
hath been any such thing as this great thing is, or hath been heard like
it?

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> Did ever people hear the voice of God
speaking from the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live?

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Or hath God essayed to go and take him a
nation from the midst of another nation, by temptations, by signs, and
by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by an out-stretched
arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the LORD your God did
for you in Egypt before your eyes?

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> To thee it was shown, that thou mightest
know that the LORD he is God; there is none besides him.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> Out of heaven he made thee to hear his
voice, that he might instruct thee; and upon earth he showed thee his
great fire; and thou heardst his words from the midst of the fire.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And because he loved thy fathers,
therefore he chose their seed after them, and brought thee out of Egypt
in his sight with his mighty power.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> To drive out nations from before thee,
greater and mightier than thou art, to bring thee in, to give thee their
land for an inheritance, as it is this day.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> Know therefore this day, and consider it
in thy heart, that the LORD he is God in heaven above, and upon the
earth beneath: there is none else.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> Thou shalt keep therefore his statutes
and his commandments which I command thee this day, that it may be well
with thee, and with thy children after thee, and that thou mayest
prolong thy days upon the earth, which the LORD thy God giveth thee, for
ever.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> Then Moses set apart three cities on the
side of Jordan, towards the sun-rising;

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> That the slayer might flee thither, who
should kill his neighbor unawares, and when he had not hated him in
times past; and that fleeing to one of these cities he might live:

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> Namely, Bezer in the wilderness, in the
plain country, of the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, of the Gadites;
and Golan in Bashan, of the Manassites.

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> And this is the law which Moses set
before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> These are the testimonies, and the
statutes, and the judgments, which Moses spoke to the children of
Israel, after they came forth from Egypt,

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> On the east side of Jordan, in the valley
over against Beth-Peor, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who
dwelt at Heshbon, whom Moses and the children of Israel smote, after
they had come forth from Egypt:

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> And they possessed his land, and the land
of Og king of Bashan, two kings of the Amorites, who were on the side of
Jordan, towards the sun-rising;

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> From Aroer, which is by the bank of the
river Arnon, even to mount Sion, which is Hermon,

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> And all the plain on the side of Jordan
eastward, even to the sea of the plain, under the springs of Pisgah.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And Moses called all Israel, and said to
them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judgments which I speak in your
ears this day, that ye may learn them, and keep, and do them.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> The LORD our God made a covenant with us in
Horeb.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> The LORD made not this covenant with our
fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> The LORD talked with you face to face on
the mount, from the midst of the fire,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> (I stood between the LORD and you at that
time, to show you the word of the LORD: for ye were afraid by reason of
the fire, and went not up upon the mount;) saying,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> I am the LORD thy God, who brought thee out
of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Thou shalt not make for thee any graven
image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is
on the earth beneath, or that is in the waters beneath the earth:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them,
nor serve them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And showing mercy to thousands of them
that love me, and keep my commandments.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD
thy God in vain: for the LORD will not hold him guiltless that taketh
his name in vain.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Keep the sabbath-day to sanctify it, as
the LORD thy God hath commanded thee.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Six days thou shalt labor, and do all thy
work:

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> But the seventh day is the sabbath of the
LORD thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor
thy daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy ox, nor
thy ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy
gates; that thy man-servant and thy maid-servant may rest as well as
thou.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And remember that thou wast a servant in
the land of Egypt, and that the LORD thy God brought thee out thence
with a mighty hand and by an out-stretched arm: therefore the LORD thy
God commanded thee to keep the sabbath-day.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Honor thy father and thy mother, as the
LORD thy God hath commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and
that it may be well with thee, in the land which the LORD thy God giveth
thee.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Thou shalt not kill.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Neither shalt thou commit adultery.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Neither shalt thou steal.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Neither shalt thou bear false witness
against thy neighbor.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbor's
wife, neither shalt thou covet thy neighbor's house, his field, or his
man-servant, or his maid-servant, his ox, or his ass, or any thing that
is thy neighbor's.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> These words the LORD spoke to all your
assembly on the mount from the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of
the thick darkness, with a great voice: and he added no more. And he
wrote them in two tables of stone, and delivered them to me.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And it came to pass, when ye heard the
voice from the midst of the darkness, (for the mountain did burn with
fire,) that ye came near to me, even all the heads of your tribes, and
your elders;

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And ye said, Behold, the LORD our God
hath shown us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice
from the midst of the fire: we have seen this day that God doth talk
with man, and he liveth.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Now therefore why should we die? for this
great fire will consume us: if we hear the voice of the LORD our God any
more, then we shall die.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For who is there of all flesh that hath
heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire,
as we have, and lived?

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Go thou near, and hear all that the LORD
our God shall say; and speak thou to us all that the LORD our God shall
speak to thee; and we will hear it, and do it.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> And the LORD heard the voice of your
words, when ye spoke to me; and the LORD said to me, I have heard the
voice of the words of this people, which they have spoke to thee: they
have well said all that they have spoken.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> O that there were such a heart in them,
that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it
might be well with them, and with their children for ever!

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> Go, say to them, Return to your tents
again.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> But as for thee, stand thou here by me,
and I will speak to thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and the
judgments, which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the
land which I give them to possess it.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> Ye shall observe to do therefore as the
LORD your God hath commanded you: ye shall not turn aside to the right
hand or to the left.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> Ye shall walk in all the ways which the
LORD your God hath commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may be
well with you, and that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye
shall possess.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now these are the commandments, the
statutes, and the judgments which the LORD your God commanded to teach
you, that ye may do them in the land whither ye go to possess it:

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> That thou mayst fear the LORD thy God, to
keep all his statutes and his commandments which I command thee, thou,
and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of thy life: and that thy
days may be prolonged.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do
it; that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as
the LORD God of thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth
with milk and honey.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Hear, O Israel: the LORD our God is one
LORD:

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And thou shalt love the LORD thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And these words which I command thee this
day, shall be in thy heart:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And thou shalt teach them diligently to thy
children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thy house, and
when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou
risest up.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon
thy hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thy eyes.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And thou shalt write them upon the posts of
thy house, and on thy gates.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And it shall be, when the LORD thy God
shall have brought thee into the land which he swore to thy fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities,
which thou didst not build,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And houses full of all good things, which
thou didst not fill, and wells digged, which thou didst not dig,
vineyards and olive-trees, which thou didst not plant; when thou shalt
have eaten and be full;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Then beware lest thou shouldst forget the
LORD, who brought thee forth from the land of Egypt, from the house of
bondage.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Thou shalt fear the LORD thy God, and
serve him, and shalt swear by his name.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Ye shall not go after other gods, of the
gods of the people which are around you;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> (For the LORD thy God is a jealous God
among you) lest the anger of the LORD thy God should be kindled against
thee, and destroy thee from off the face of the earth.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Ye shall not tempt the LORD your God, as
ye tempted him in Massah.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Ye shall diligently keep the commandments
of the LORD your God, and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he
hath commanded thee.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And thou shalt do that which is right and
good in the sight of the LORD: that it may be well with thee, and that
thou mayest go in and possess the good land which the LORD swore to thy
fathers,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> To cast out all thy enemies from before
thee, as the LORD hath spoken.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And when thy son shall ask thee in time
to come, saying, What mean the testimonies, and the statutes, and the
judgments, which the LORD our God hath commanded you?

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Then thou shalt say to thy son, We were
Pharoah's bond-men in Egypt: and the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a
mighty hand:

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And the LORD showed signs and wonders,
great and distressing, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his
household, before our eyes:

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And he brought us out from thence, that
he might bring us in, to give us the land which he swore to our fathers.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And the LORD commanded us to do all these
statutes, to fear the LORD our God, for our good always, that he might
preserve us alive, as it is at this day.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And it shall be our righteousness, if we
observe to do all these commandments before the LORD our God, as he hath
commanded us.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> When the LORD thy God shall bring thee into
the land whither thou goest to possess it, and hath cast out many
nations before thee, the Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the
Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Perrizites, and the Hivites, and
the Jebusites, seven nations greater and mightier than thou;

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And when the LORD thy God shall deliver
them before thee, thou shalt smite them and utterly destroy them, thou
shalt make no covenant with them, nor show mercy to them:

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Neither shalt thou make marriages with
them; thy daughter thou shalt not give to his son, nor his daughter
shalt thou take to thy son.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> For they will turn away thy son from
following me, that they may serve other gods: so will the anger of the
LORD be kindled against you, and destroy thee suddenly.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall
destroy their altars, and break down their images, and cut down their
groves, and burn their graven images with fire.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For thou art a holy people to the LORD thy
God: the LORD thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people to
himself, above all people that are upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> The LORD did not set his love upon you, nor
choose you, because ye were more in number than any people; for ye were
the fewest of all people:

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> But because the LORD loved you, and because
he would keep the oath which he had sworn to your fathers, hath the LORD
brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you from the house of
bond-men, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Know therefore that the LORD thy God, he is
God, the faithful God, who keepeth covenant and mercy with them that
love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations:

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And repayeth them that hate him to their
face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him that hateth him, he
will repay him to his face.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Thou shalt therefore keep the
commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which I command thee
this day, to do them.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye
hearken to these judgments, and keep, and do them, that the LORD thy God
will keep to thee the covenant and the mercy which he swore to thy
fathers:

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And he will love thee, and bless thee,
and multiply thee: he will also bless thy children, and the fruit of thy
land, thy corn, and thy wine, and thy oil, the increase of thy kine, and
the flocks of thy sheep, in the land which he swore to thy fathers to
give thee.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Thou shalt be blessed above all people:
there shall not be male or female barren among you, or among your
cattle.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And the LORD will take away from thee all
sickness, and will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt (which thou
knowest) upon thee; but will lay them upon all them that hate thee.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And thou shalt consume all the people
which the LORD thy God shall deliver to thee; thy eye shall have no pity
upon them: neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that will be a snare
to thee.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> If thou shalt say in thy heart, These
nations are more than I, how can I dispossess them?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Thou shalt not be afraid of them: but
shalt well remember what the LORD thy God did to Pharaoh, and to all
Egypt;

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The great temptations which thy eyes saw,
and the signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the
out-stretched arm, by which the LORD thy God brought thee out: so shall
the LORD thy God do to all the people of whom thou art afraid.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Moreover, the LORD thy God will send the
hornet among them, until they that are left, and hide themselves from
thee, shall be destroyed.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Thou shalt not be affrighted at them: for
the LORD thy God is among you, a mighty God and terrible.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And the LORD thy God will drive out those
nations before thee by little and little: thou mayest not consume them
at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But the LORD thy God shall deliver them
to thee, and shall destroy them with a mighty destruction, until they
are destroyed.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And he shall deliver their kings into thy
hand, and thou shalt destroy their name from under heaven: there shall
no man be able to stand before thee, until thou shalt have destroyed
them.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> The graven images of their gods shall ye
burn with fire: thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on
them, nor take it to thee, lest thou shouldst be snared in it: for it is
an abomination to the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Neither shalt thou bring an abomination
into thy house, lest thou shouldst be a cursed thing like it: but thou
shalt utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a
cursed thing.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> All the commandments which I command thee
this day shall ye observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go
in and possess the land which the LORD swore to your fathers.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And thou shalt remember all the way which
the LORD thy God hath led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to
humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thy heart, whether
thou wouldst keep his commandments, or not.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to
hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy
fathers know; that he might make thee know that man doth not live by
bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the
LORD doth man live.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Thy raiment hath not become old upon thee,
neither hath thy foot swelled these forty years.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Thou shalt also consider in thy heart, that
as a man chasteneth his son, so the LORD thy God chasteneth thee.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments
of the LORD thy God, to walk in his ways, and to fear him.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For the LORD thy God bringeth thee into a
good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains, and depths that
spring out of valleys and hills;

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and
fig-trees, and pomegranates, a land of olive-oil, and honey;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> A land in which thou shalt eat bread
without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing in it, a land whose
stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> When thou hast eaten and art full, then
thou shalt bless the LORD thy God for the good land which he hath given
thee.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Beware that thou forget not the LORD thy
God, in not keeping his commandments, and his judgments, and his
statutes, which I command thee this day:

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Lest when thou hast eaten, and art full,
and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt in them;

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And when thy herds and thy flocks
multiply, and thy silver and thy gold are increased, and all that thou
hast is increased;

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Then thy heart shall be lifted up, and
thou shalt forget the LORD thy God (who brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, from the house of bondage;)

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Who led thee through that great and
terrible wilderness, in which were fiery serpents, and scorpions, and
drouth, where there was no water; who brought thee forth water out of
the rock of flint;

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Who fed thee in the wilderness with
manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might humble thee, and that
he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And thou shalt say in thy heart, My power
and the might of my hand hath gotten me this wealth.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> But thou shalt remember the LORD thy God:
for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish
his covenant which he swore to thy fathers, as it is this day.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And it shall be, if thou shalt at all
forget the LORD thy God, and walk after other gods, and serve them, and
worship them, I testify against you this day that ye shall surely
perish.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> As the nations which the LORD destroyeth
before your face, so shall ye perish; because ye would not be obedient
to the voice of the LORD your God.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Hear, O Israel: Thou art to pass over
Jordan this day, to go in to possess nations greater and mightier than
thyself, cities great and fortified up to heaven,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> A people great and tall, the children of
the Anakims, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard it said, Who
can stand before the children of Anak!

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Understand therefore this day, that the
LORD thy God is he who goeth over before thee; as a consuming fire he
shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down before thy face: so
shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them quickly, as the LORD hath
said to thee.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Speak not thou in thy heart, after that the
LORD thy God hath cast them out from before thee, saying, For my
righteousness the LORD hath brought me in to possess this land: but for
the wickedness of these nations the LORD doth drive them out from before
thee.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Not for thy righteousness, or for the
uprightness of thy heart dost thou go to possess their land: but for the
wickedness of these nations, the LORD thy God doth drive them out from
before thee, and that he may perform the word which the LORD swore to
thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Understand therefore, that the LORD thy God
giveth thee not this good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for
thou art a stiff-necked people.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Remember, and forget not, how thou
provokedst the LORD thy God to wrath in the wilderness: from the day
that thou didst depart from the land of Egypt, until ye came to this
place, ye have been rebellious against the LORD.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Also in Horeb ye provoked the LORD to
wrath, so that the LORD was angry with you to have destroyed you.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> When I ascended the mount, to receive the
tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant which the LORD made
with you, then I abode in the mount forty days and forty nights, I
neither ate bread, nor drank water:

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And the LORD delivered to me two tables
of stone written with the finger of God; and on them was written
according to all the words which the LORD spoke with you in the mount,
from the midst of the fire, in the day of the assembly.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And it came to pass at the end of forty
days and forty nights, that the LORD gave me the two tables of stone,
even the tables of the covenant.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And the LORD said to me, Arise, go down
quickly from hence; for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of
Egypt have corrupted themselves; they are quickly turned aside from the
way which I commanded them; they have made them a molten image.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Furthermore, the LORD spoke to me,
saying, I have seen this people, and behold, it is a stiff-necked
people:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Let me alone, that I may destroy them,
and blot out their name from under heaven: and I will make of thee a
nation mightier and greater than they.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> So I turned and came down from the mount,
and the mount burned with fire: and the two tables of the covenant were
in my two hands.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And I looked, and behold, ye had sinned
against the LORD your God, and had made you a molten calf: ye had turned
aside quickly from the way which the LORD had commanded you.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And I took the two tables, and cast them
out of my two hands, and broke them before your eyes.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And I fell down before the LORD, as at
the first, forty days and forty nights: I neither ate bread, nor drank
water, because of all your sins which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in
the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> (For I was afraid of the anger and hot
displeasure with which the LORD was wroth against you to destroy you.)
But the LORD hearkened to me at that time also.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And the LORD was very angry with Aaron to
have destroyed him: and I prayed for Aaron also at the same time.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And I took your sin, the calf which ye
had made, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it, and ground it very
small, even until it was as small as dust: and I cast the dust of it
into the brook that descended from the mount.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And at Taberah, and at Massah, and
Kibroth-hattaavah, ye provoked the LORD to wrath.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Likewise when the LORD sent you from
Kadesh-barnea, saying, Go up and possess the land which I have given
you; then ye rebelled against the commandment of the LORD your God, and
ye believed him not, nor hearkened to his voice.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Ye have been rebellious against the LORD
from the day that I knew you.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Thus I fell down before the LORD forty
days and forty nights, as I fell down at the first; because the LORD had
said he would destroy you.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> I prayed therefore to the LORD, and said,
O Lord GOD, destroy not thy people and thy inheritance, which thou hast
redeemed through thy greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of
Egypt with a mighty hand.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob; look not to the stubbornness of this people, nor to their
wickedness, nor to their sin:

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> Lest the land from which thou hast
brought us should say, Because the LORD was not able to bring them into
the land which he promised them, and because he hated them, he hath
brought them out to slay them in the wilderness.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Yet they are thy people and thy
inheritance which thou hast brought out by thy mighty power and by thy
out-stretched arm.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> At that time the LORD said to me, Hew
thee two tables of stone like the first, and come up to me upon the
mount, and make thee an ark of wood.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And I will write on the tables the words
that were in the first tables which thou didst break, and thou shalt put
them in the ark.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And I made an ark of shittim wood, and
hewed two tables of stone like the first, and ascended the mount, having
the two tables in my hand.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And he wrote on the tables according to
the first writing, the ten commandments, which the LORD spoke to you in
the mount, from the midst of the fire, in the day of the assembly: and
the LORD gave them to me.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And I turned myself and came down from
the mount, and put the tables in the ark which I had made; and there
they are, as the LORD commanded me.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And the children of Israel took their
journey from Beeroth of the children of Jakan to Mosira: there Aaron
died, and there he was buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the
priest's office in his stead.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> From thence they journeyed to Gudgodah;
and from Gudgodah to Jotbath, a land of rivers of waters.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> At that time the LORD separated the tribe
of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of the LORD, to stand before
the LORD to minister to him, and to bless in his name, to this day.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Wherefore Levi hath no part nor
inheritance with his brethren; the LORD is his inheritance, according as
the LORD thy God promised him.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And I stayed in the mount, according to
the first-time, forty days and forty nights; and the LORD hearkened to
me at that time also, and the LORD would not destroy thee.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And the LORD said to me, Arise, take
thy journey before the people, that they may go in and possess the land,
which I swore to their fathers to give to them.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And now, Israel, what doth the LORD thy
God require of thee, but to fear the LORD thy God, to walk in all his
ways, and to love him, and to serve the LORD thy God with all thy heart
and with all thy soul,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> To keep the commandments of the LORD,
and his statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good?

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Behold, the heaven and the heaven of
heavens belongeth to the LORD thy God, the earth also, with all that it
contains.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Only the LORD had a delight in thy
fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, even you above
all people, as it is this day.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Circumcise therefore the foreskin of
your heart, and be no more stiff-necked.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> For the LORD your God is God of gods,
and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible, who regardeth
not persons, nor taketh reward:

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> He executeth the judgment of the
fatherless and widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and
raiment.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye
were strangers in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Thou shalt fear the LORD thy God; him
shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> He is thy praise, and he is thy God,
that hath done for thee these great and terrible things which thy eyes
have seen.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Thy fathers went down into Egypt with
seventy persons; and now the LORD thy God hath made thee as the stars of
heaven for multitude.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Therefore thou shalt love the LORD thy
God, and keep his charge, and his statutes, and his judgments, and his
commandments, always.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And know ye this day: for I speak not
with your children who have not known, and who have not seen the
chastisement of the LORD your God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and
his out-stretched arm,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And his miracles, and his acts, which he
did in the midst of Egypt, to Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and to all his
land;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And what he did to the army of Egypt, to
their horses, and to their chariots; how he made the water of the Red
sea to overflow them as they pursued after you, and how the LORD hath
destroyed them to this day;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And what he did to you in the wilderness,
until ye came to this place;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And what he did to Dathan and Abiram, the
sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben: how the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their households, and their tents, and all the
substance that was in their possession, in the midst of all Israel:

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> But your eyes have seen all the great
acts of the LORD which he did.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Therefore shall ye keep all the
commandments which I command you this day, that ye may be strong, and go
in and possess the land, whither ye go to possess it;

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And that ye may prolong your days in the
land which the LORD swore to your fathers to give to them, and to their
seed, a land that floweth with milk and honey.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For the land, whither thou goest in to
possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where
thou didst sow thy seed, and water it with thy foot, as a garden of
herbs:

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> But the land, whither ye go to possess
it, is a land of hills and valleys, and drinketh water of the rain of
heaven:

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> A land which the LORD thy God careth
for: the eyes of the LORD thy God are always upon it, from the beginning
of the year even to the end of the year.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And it shall come to pass, if ye shall
hearken diligently to my commandments which I command you this day, to
love the LORD your God, and to serve him with all your heart and with
all your soul,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> That I will give you the rain of your
land in its due season, the former rain and the latter rain, that thou
mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine and thy oil.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And I will give grass in thy fields for
thy cattle, that thou mayest eat and be full.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Take heed to yourselves, that your
heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and
worship them;

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And then the LORD'S wrath shall be
kindled against you, and he shall shut up the heaven, that there shall
be no rain, and the land shall not yield her fruit; and lest ye perish
quickly from off the good land which the LORD giveth you.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Therefore shall ye lay up these my
words in your heart and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your
hand, that they may be as frontlets between your eyes.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And ye shall teach them to your
children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thy house, and when thou
walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And thou shalt write them upon the door
posts of thy house, and upon thy gates:

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> That your days may be multiplied, and
the days of your children, in the land which the LORD swore to your
fathers to give to them, as the days of heaven upon the earth.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> For if ye shall diligently keep all
these commandments which I command you, to do them, to love the LORD
your God, to walk in all his ways, and to cleave to him;

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Then will the LORD drive out all these
nations from before you, and ye shall possess greater nations and
mightier than yourselves.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Every place on which the soles of your
feet shall tread shall be yours: from the wilderness, and Lebanon, from
the river, the river Euphrates, even to the uttermost sea shall your
limit be.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> There shall no man be able to stand
before you: for the LORD your God shall lay the fear of you, and the
dread of you upon all the land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said
to you.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Behold, I set before you this day a
blessing and a curse:

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> A blessing, if ye obey the commandments
of the LORD your God which I command you this day;

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And a curse, if ye will not obey the
commandments of the LORD your God, but turn aside from the way which I
command you this day, to go after other gods which ye have not known.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And it shall come to pass when the LORD
thy God hath brought thee in to the land whither thou goest to possess
it, that thou shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse
upon mount Ebal.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Are they not on the other side of
Jordan, by the way where the sun goeth down in the land of the
Canaanites, who dwell in the plain over against Gilgal, beside the
plains of Moreh?

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> For ye shall pass over Jordan to go in
to possess the land which the LORD your God giveth you, and ye shall
possess it, and dwell in it.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And ye shall observe to do all the
statutes and judgments which I set before you this day.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> These are the statutes and judgments
which ye shall observe to do in the land which the LORD God of thy
fathers giveth thee to possess it, all the days that ye live upon the
earth.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Ye shall utterly destroy all the places
in which the nations which ye shall possess served their gods, upon the
high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree:

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And ye shall overthrow their altars, and
break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire; and ye shall hew
down the graven images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out
of that place.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Ye shall not do so to the LORD your God.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> But the place which the LORD your God
shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name there, even his
habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come:

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And thither ye shall bring your
burnt-offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and
heave-offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your
free-will-offerings, and the firstlings of your herds, and of your
flocks:

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And there ye shall eat before the LORD
your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand to, ye and
your households, in which the LORD thy God hath blessed thee.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Ye shall not do after all the things that
we do here this day, every man whatever is right in his own eyes.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> For ye are not as yet come to the rest
and to the inheritance which the LORD your God giveth you.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> But when ye go over Jordan, and dwell
in the land which the LORD your God giveth you to inherit, and when he
giveth you rest from all your enemies on every side, so that ye dwell in
safety:

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Then there shall be a place which the
LORD your God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there; thither
shall ye bring all that I command you; your burnt-offerings, and your
sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave-offering of your hand, and all
your choice vows which ye vow to the LORD:

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And ye shall rejoice before the LORD
your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your men-servants,
and your maid-servants, and the Levite that is within your gates;
forasmuch as he hath no part nor inheritance with you.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Take heed to thyself that thou offer
not thy burnt-offerings in every place that thou seest:

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> But in the place which the LORD shall
choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt-offerings,
and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Notwithstanding, thou mayest kill and
eat flesh in all thy gates, whatever thy soul desireth, according to the
blessing of the LORD thy God which he hath given thee: the unclean and
the clean may eat of it as of the roebuck, and as of the hart.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Only ye shall not eat the blood; ye
shall pour it upon the earth as water.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Thou mayest not eat within thy gates
the tithe of thy corn, or of thy wine, or of thy oil, or the firstlings
of thy herds or of thy flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor
thy free-will-offerings, or heave-offering of thy hand:

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> But thou must eat them before the LORD
thy God in the place which the LORD thy God shall choose, thou, and thy
son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, and
the Levite that is within thy gates: and thou shalt rejoice before the
LORD thy God in all that thou puttest thine hands to.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Take heed to thyself that thou forsake
not the Levite as long as thou livest upon the earth.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> When the LORD thy God shall enlarge thy
border, as he hath promised thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh,
because thy soul longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatever
thy soul desireth.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> If the place which the LORD thy God
hath chosen to put his name there, shall be too far from thee, then thou
shalt kill of thy herd and of thy flock, which the LORD hath given thee,
as I have commanded thee, and thou shalt eat in thy gates whatever thy
soul desireth.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Even as the roebuck and the hart is
eaten, so thou shalt eat them: the unclean and the clean shall eat of
them alike.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Only be sure that thou eat not the
blood: for the blood is the life; and thou mayest not eat the life with
the flesh.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Thou shalt not eat it: thou shalt pour
it upon the earth as water.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Thou shalt not eat it; that it may be
well with thee, and with thy children after thee, when thou shalt do
that which is right in the sight of the LORD.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> Only thy holy things which thou hast,
and thy vows, thou shalt take, and go to the place which the LORD shall
choose:

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> And thou shalt offer thy
burnt-offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon the altar of the LORD thy
God: and the blood of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar
of the LORD thy God, and thou shalt eat the flesh.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Observe and hear all these words which
I command thee, that it may be well with thee, and with thy children
after thee for ever, when thou doest that which is good and right in the
sight of the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> When the LORD thy God shall cut off the
nations from before thee, whither thou goest to possess them, and thou
succeedest them, and dwellest in their land;

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> Take heed to thyself that thou be not
snared by following them, after that they are destroyed from before
thee; and that thou inquire not after their gods, saying, How did these
nations serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Thou shalt not do so to the LORD thy
God; for every abomination to the LORD which he hateth have they done to
their gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in
the fire to their gods.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> Whatever thing I command you, observe
to do it: thou shalt not add to it, nor diminish from it.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> If there shall arise among you a prophet,
or a dreamer of dreams, and give thee a sign or a wonder.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And the sign or the wonder shall come to
pass, of which he spoke to thee, saying, Let us go after other gods,
which thou hast not known, and let us serve them;

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Thou shalt not hearken to the words of
that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the LORD your God proveth
you, to know whether ye love the LORD your God with all your heart and
with all your soul.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Ye shall walk after the LORD your God,
and fear him, and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, and ye
shall serve him, and cleave to him.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And that prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams, shall be put to death; because he hath spoken to turn you away
from the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, and
redeemed you from the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way
which the LORD thy God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou remove
the evil from the midst of thee.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or
thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, who
is as thy own soul, shall entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and
serve other gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Namely, of the gods of the people who are
around you, nigh to thee, or far off from thee, from one end of the
earth even to the other end of the earth;

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Thou shalt not consent to him, nor
hearken to him; neither shall thy eye pity him, neither shalt thou
spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> But thou shalt surely kill him; thy hand
shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of
all the people.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And thou shalt stone him with stones
that he shall die; because he hath sought to thrust thee away from the
LORD thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt from the house
of bondage.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And all Israel shall hear, and fear,
and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is, among you.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> If thou shalt hear, in one of thy
cities, which the LORD thy God hath given thee to dwell there, saying,

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Certain men, the children of Belial,
have gone out from among you, and have withdrawn the inhabitants of
their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not
known;

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Then shalt thou inquire, and make
search, and ask diligently; and behold, if it is truth, and the thing
certain, that such abomination is wrought among you;

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants
of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all
that is in it, and its cattle, with the edge of the sword.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And thou shalt gather all the spoil of
it into the midst of its street, and shalt burn with fire the city, and
all the spoil of it every whit, for the LORD thy God: and it shall be a
heap forever; it shalt not be built again.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And there shall cleave naught of the
cursed thing to thy hand: that the LORD may turn from the fierceness of
his anger, and show thee mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and
multiply thee, as he hath sworn to thy fathers;

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> When thou shalt hearken to the voice of
the LORD thy God, to keep all his commandments which I command thee this
day, to do that which is right in the eyes of the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Ye are the children of the LORD your God:
ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for
the dead.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For thou art a holy people to the LORD
thy God, and the LORD hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people to
himself, above all the nations that are upon the earth.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> These are the beasts which ye shall eat:
the ox, the sheep, and the goat,

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> The hart, and the roebuck, and the
fallow-deer, and the wild-goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the
chamois.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And every beast that parteth the hoof,
and cleaveth the cleft into two claws, and cheweth the cud among the
beasts, that ye shall eat.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Nevertheless, these ye shall not eat, of
them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the cloven hoof; the
camel, and the hare, and the coney: for they chew the cud, but divide
not the hoof; therefore they are unclean to you.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And the swine, because it divideth the
hoof, yet cheweth not the cud, is unclean to you: ye shall not eat of
their flesh, nor touch their dead carcass.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> These ye shall eat, of all that are in
the waters: all that have fins and scales shall ye eat:

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And whatever hath not fins and scales
ye may not eat; it is unclean to you.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Of all clean birds ye shall eat.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> But these are they of which ye shall
not eat: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray,

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And the glede, and the kite, and the
vultur after his kind,

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And every raven after his kind,

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And the owl, and the night-hawk, and
the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind,

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> The little owl, and the great owl, and
the swan,

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And the pelican, and the gier-eagle,
and the cormorant,

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And the stork, and the heron after her
kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And every creeping animal that flieth
is unclean to you: they shall not be eaten.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> But of all clean fowls ye may eat.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Ye shall not eat of any thing that
dieth of itself: thou shalt give it to the stranger that is in thy
gates, that he may eat it; or thou mayest sell it to an alien: for thou
art a holy people to the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a kid in
his mother's milk.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase
of thy seed, that the field bringeth forth year by year.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And thou shalt eat before the LORD thy
God, in the place which he shall choose to place his name there, the
tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thy oil, and the firstlings of
thy herds and of thy flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the LORD thy
God always.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And if the way is too long for thee, so
that thou art not able to carry it; or if the place is too far from
thee, which the LORD thy God shall choose to set his name there, when
the LORD thy God hath blessed thee:

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> Then shalt thou turn it into money, and
bind up the money in thy hand, and shalt go to the place which the LORD
thy God shall choose:

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And thou shalt bestow that money for
whatever thy soul desireth, for oxen, or for sheep, or for wine, or for
strong drink, or for whatever thy soul desireth: and thou shalt eat
there before the LORD thy God, and thou shalt rejoice, thou, and thy
household.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And the Levite that is within thy
gates, thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no part nor inheritance
with thee.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> At the end of three years thou shalt
bring forth all the tithe of thy increase the same year, and shalt lay
it up within thy gates:

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And the Levite, (because he hath no
part nor inheritance with thee) and the stranger, and the fatherless,
and the widow, who are within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and
be satisfied; that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of
thy hand which thou doest.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> At the end of every seven years thou
shalt make a release.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And this is the manner of the release:
Every creditor that lendeth aught to his neighbor shall release it; he
shall not exact it of his neighbor, or of his brother; because it is
called the LORD'S release.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Of a foreigner thou mayest exact it
again: but that which is thine with thy brother thy hand shall release:

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Save when there shall be no poor among
you; for the LORD shall greatly bless thee in the land which the LORD
thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it:

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Only if thou shalt carefully hearken to
the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe to do all these commandments
which I command thee this day.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> For the LORD thy God shall bless thee, as
he promised thee: and thou shalt lend to many nations, but thou shalt
not borrow; and thou shalt reign over many nations, but they shall not
reign over thee.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> If there shall be among you a poor man of
one of thy brethren within any of thy gates in thy land which the LORD
the God giveth thee, thou shalt not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand
from thy poor brother:

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> But thou shalt open thy hand wide to him,
and shalt surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that which he
wanteth.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Beware that there be not a thought in thy
wicked heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand;
and thy eye shall be evil against thy poor brother, and thou shalt give
him naught; and he shall cry to the LORD against thee, and it shall be
sin to thee.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Thou shalt surely give him, and thy
heart shall not be grieved when thou givest to him: because that for
this thing the LORD thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in
all that thou puttest thy hand to.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> For the poor shall never cease from the
land: therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt open thy hand wide to
thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy land.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And if thy brother, a Hebrew man, or a
Hebrew woman, shall be sold to thee, and serve thee six years; then in
the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And when thou sendest him out free from
thee, thou shalt not let him depart empty:

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Thou shalt furnish him liberally out of
thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy wine-press: of that with
which the LORD thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give to him.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast
a bond-man in the land of Egypt, and the LORD thy God redeemed thee:
therefore I command thee this thing this day.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And it shall be, if he shall say to
thee, I will not leave thee; because he loveth thee and thy house,
because he is well with thee;

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Then thou shalt take an awl, and thrust
it through his ear into the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever.
And also to thy maid-servant thou shalt do likewise.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> It shall not seem hard to thee, when
thou sendest him away free from thee; for he hath been of double the
worth of a hired servant to thee, in serving thee six years: and the
LORD thy God shall bless thee in all that thou doest.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> All the firstling males that come of
thy herd and of thy flock thou shalt sanctify to the LORD thy God: thou
shalt do no work with the firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the
firstling of thy sheep.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Thou shalt eat it before the LORD thy
God year by year in the place which the LORD shall choose, thou and thy
household.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And if there is any blemish in it, as
if it is lame, or blind, or hath any ill blemish, thou shalt not
sacrifice it to the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the
unclean and the clean person shall eat it alike, as the roebuck, and as
the hart.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Only thou shalt not eat its blood; thou
shalt pour it upon the ground as water.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Observe the month Abib, and keep the
passover to the LORD thy God: for in the month of Abib the LORD thy God
brought thee forth from Egypt by night.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the
passover to the LORD thy God, of the flock and the herd, in the place
which the LORD shall choose to place his name there.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it;
seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread with it, even the bread of
affliction; for thou camest forth from the land of Egypt in haste: that
thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth from the land of
Egypt, all the days of thy life.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And there shall be no leavened bread seen
with thee in all thy borders seven days; neither shall there any thing
of the flesh, which thou didst sacrifice the first day at evening,
remain all night until the morning.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover
within any of thy gates, which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> But at the place which the LORD thy God
shall choose to place his name in, there thou shalt sacrifice the
passover at evening, at the setting of the sun, at the time of thy
departure from Egypt.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And thou shalt roast and eat it in the
place which the LORD thy God shall choose: and thou shalt turn in the
morning, and go to thy tents.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread:
and on the seventh day shall be a solemn assembly to the LORD thy God:
in it thou shalt do no work.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Seven weeks shalt thou number to thee:
begin to number the seven weeks from the time when thou beginnest to put
the sickle to the corn.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks
to the LORD thy God with a tribute of a free-will-offering of thy hand,
which thou shalt give to the LORD thy God, according as the LORD thy God
hath blessed thee:

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And thou shalt rejoice before the LORD
thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and
thy maid-servant, and the Levite that is within thy gates, and the
stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are among you, in the
place which the LORD thy God hath chosen to place his name there.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast
a bond-man in Egypt: and thou shalt observe and do these statutes.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Thou shalt observe the feast of
tabernacles seven days, after that thou hast gathered in thy corn, and
thy wine.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast,
thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy
maid-servant, and the Levite, the stranger, and the fatherless, and the
widow, that are within thy gates:

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn
feast to the LORD thy God in the place which the LORD shall choose:
because the LORD thy God shall bless thee in all thy increase, and in
all the works of thy hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Three times in a year shall all thy
males appear before the LORD thy God in the place which he shall choose;
in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the
feast of tabernacles: and they shall not appear before the LORD empty:

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Every man shall give as he is able,
according to the blessing of the LORD thy God which he hath given thee.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Judges and officers shalt thou make
thee in all thy gates, which the LORD thy God giveth thee, throughout
thy tribes: and they shall judge the people with just judgment.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou
shalt not respect persons, neither take a gift; for a gift doth blind
the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> That which is altogether just shalt
thou follow, that thou mayest live, and inherit the land which the LORD
thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Thou shalt not plant thee a grove of
any trees near to the altar of the LORD thy God, which thou shalt make
for thee.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Neither shalt thou set thee up any
image; which the LORD thy God hateth.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Thou shalt not sacrifice to the LORD thy
God any bullock, or sheep, in which is blemish, or any evil favoredness:
for that is an abomination to the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> If there shall be found among you, within
any of thy gates which the LORD thy God giveth thee, man or woman that
hath wrought wickedness in the sight of of the LORD thy God, in
transgressing his covenant,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And hath gone and served other gods, and
worshiped them, either the sun, or moon, or any of the host of heaven,
which I have not commanded;

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And it shall be told thee, and thou hast
heard of it, and inquired diligently, and behold, it is true, and the
thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in Israel:

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Then shalt thou bring forth to thy gates
that man or that woman, who have committed that wicked thing, even that
man or that woman, and shalt stone them with stones, till they die.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> At the mouth of two witnesses, or three
witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death be put to death; but at the
mouth of one witness he shall not be put to death.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> The hands of the witnesses shall be first
upon him to put him to death, and afterward the hands of all the people.
So thou shalt remove the evil from among you.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> If there shall arise a matter too hard
for thee in judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea,
and between stroke and stroke, being matters of controversy within thy
gates: then shalt thou arise, and go up to the place which the LORD thy
God shall choose;

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And thou shalt come to the priests the
Levites, and to the judge that shall be in those days, and inquire; and
they shall show thee the sentence of judgment:

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And thou shalt do according to the
sentence, which they of that place which the LORD shall choose shall
show thee; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that they
inform thee:

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> According to the sentence of the law
which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they
shall tell thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the sentence
which they shall show thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And the man that will do
presumptuously, and will not hearken to the priest that standeth to
minister there before the LORD thy God, or to the judge, even that man
shall die: and thou shalt remove the evil from Israel.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And all the people shall hear, and
fear, and do no more presumptuously.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> When thou art come into the land which
the LORD thy God giveth thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell in
it, and shalt say, I will set a king over me, like as all the nations
that are about me;

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Thou shalt in any wise set him king
over thee whom the LORD thy God shall choose: one from among thy
brethren shalt thou set king over thee: thou mayest not set a stranger
over thee, who is not thy brother.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> But he shall not multiply horses to
himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end that he
should multiply horses: forasmuch as the LORD hath said to you, ye shall
henceforth return no more that way.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Neither shall he multiply wives to
himself, that his heart may turn not away: neither shall he greatly
accumulate to himself silver and gold.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And it shall be when he sitteth upon
the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this law in
a book out of that which is before the priests the Levites.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And it shall be with him, and he shall
read in it all the days of his life: that he may learn to fear the LORD
his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do
them:

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> That his heart may not be lifted above
his brethren, and that he may not turn aside from the commandment to the
right hand or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in
his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of Israel.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The priests the Levites, and all the
tribe of Levi, shall have no part nor inheritance with Israel: they
shall eat the offerings of the LORD made by fire, and his inheritance.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Therefore shall they have no inheritance
among their brethren: the LORD is their inheritance, as he hath said to
them.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And this shall be the priest's due from
the people, from them that offer a sacrifice, whether ox or sheep; and
they shall give to the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the
maw.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> The first-fruit also of thy corn, of thy
wine, and of thy oil, and the first of the fleece of thy sheep, shalt
thou give him.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> For the LORD thy God hath chosen him out
of all thy tribes, to stand to minister in the name of the LORD, him and
his sons for ever.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And if a Levite shall come from any of
thy gates out of all Israel, where he sojourned, and come with all the
desire of his mind to the place which the LORD shall choose;

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> Then he shall minister in the name of the
LORD his God, as all his brethren the Levites do, who stand there before
the LORD.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> They shall have like portions to eat,
beside that which cometh of the sale of his patrimony.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> When thou art come into the land which
the LORD thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the
abominations of those nations.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> There shall not be found among you any
one that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, or
that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a
witch,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Or a charmer, or a consulter with
familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> For all that do these things are an
abomination to the LORD: and because of these abominations the LORD thy
God doth drive them out from before thee.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Thou shalt be perfect with the LORD thy
God.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> For these nations, which thou shalt
possess, hearkened to observers of times, and to diviners: but as for
thee, the LORD thy God hath not suffered thee so to do.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> The LORD thy God will raise up to thee
a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like to me; to him ye
shall hearken.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> According to all that thou desiredst of
the LORD thy God in Horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not
hear again the voice of the LORD my God, neither let me see this great
fire any more, that I may not die.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And the LORD said to me, They have well
spoken of that which they have spoken.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> I will raise up to them a prophet from
among their brethren, like thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and
he shall speak to them all that I shall command him.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And it shall come to pass, that whoever
will not hearken to my words which he shall speak in my name, I will
require it of him.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> But the prophet, who shall presume to
speak a word in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or
that shall speak in the name of other gods, even that prophet shall die.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And if thou shalt say in thy heart, How
shall we know the word which the LORD hath not spoken?

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> When a prophet speaketh in the name of
the LORD, if the thing doth not follow, nor come to pass, that is the
thing which the LORD hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> When the LORD thy God hath cut off the
nations, whose land the LORD thy God giveth thee, and thou succeedest
them, and dwellest in their cities, and in their houses;

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Thou shalt separate three cities for thee
in the midst of thy land which the LORD thy God giveth thee to possess
it.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Thou shalt prepare thee a way, and divide
the limits of thy land which the LORD thy God giveth thee to inherit,
into three parts, that every slayer may flee thither.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And this is the case of the slayer, who
shall flee thither, that he may live: Whoever killeth his neighbor
ignorantly, whom he hated not in time past;

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> As when a man goeth into the wood with
his neighbor to hew wood, and his hand maketh a stroke with the ax to
cut down the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and falleth
upon his neighbor, that he dieth: he shall flee to one of these cities,
and live:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Lest the avenger of blood shall pursue
the slayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is
long, and slay him; whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he
hated him not in time past.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Wherefore I command thee, saying, Thou
shalt separate three cities for thee.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And if the LORD thy God shall enlarge thy
limits, as he hath sworn to thy fathers, and give thee all the land
which he promised to give to thy fathers;

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> If thou shalt keep all these commandments
to do them, which I command thee this day, to love the LORD thy God, and
to walk ever in his ways; then shalt thou add three cities more for
thee, besides these three:

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> That innocent blood may not be shed in
thy land, which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and so
blood be upon thee.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> But if any man shall hate his neighbor,
and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him
mortally, that he dieth, and he shall flee into one of these cities:

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Then the elders of his city shall send
and bring him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of
blood, that he may die.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Thy eye shall not pity him, but thou
shall remove the guilt of innocent blood from Israel, that it may be
well with thee.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Thou shalt not remove thy neighbor's
landmark, which they of old time have set in thy inheritance, which thou
shalt inherit in the land that the LORD thy God giveth thee to possess
it.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> One witness shall not rise up against a
man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth; at the
mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the
matter be established.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> If a false witness shall rise up
against any man to testify against him that which is wrong;

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> Then both the men between whom the
controversy is shall stand before the LORD, before the priests, and the
judges, who shall be in those days;

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And the judges shall make diligent
inquisition: and behold, if the witness is a false witness, and hath
testified falsely against his brother;

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> Then shall ye do to him, as he had
thought to do to his brother: so shalt thou remove the evil from among
you.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And those who remain shall hear, and
fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And thy eye shall not pity; but life
shall go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for
foot.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> When thou goest out to battle against thy
enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, be
not afraid of them: for the LORD thy God is with thee, who brought thee
out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And it shall be when ye are come nigh to
the battle, that the priest shall approach and speak to the people,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And shall say to them, Hear, O Israel, ye
approach this day to battle against your enemies: let not your hearts
faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified because of
them;

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> For the LORD your God is he that goeth
with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And the officers shall speak to the
people, saying, What man is there that hath built a new house, and hath
not dedicated it? let him go and return to his house, lest he should die
in the battle, and another man should dedicate it.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And what man is he that hath planted a
vineyard, and hath not yet eaten of it? let him also go and return to
his house, lest he should die in the battle, and another man should eat
of it.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And what man is there that hath betrothed
a wife, and hath not taken her? let him go and return to his house, lest
he should die in battle, and another man should take her.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And the officers shall speak further to
the people, and they shall say, What man is there that is fearful and
faint-hearted? let him go and return to his house, lest his brethren's
heart should faint as well as his heart.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And it shall be, when the officers have
made an end of speaking to the people, that they shall make captains of
the armies to lead the people.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> When thou comest nigh to a city to
fight against it, then proclaim peace to it.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And it shall be, if it shall make thee
answer of peace, and open to thee, then it shall be, that all the people
that are found therein, shall be tributaries to thee, and they shall
serve thee.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And if it will make no peace with thee,
but will make war against thee, then thou shalt besiege it:

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And when the LORD thy God hath
delivered it into thy hands, thou shalt smite every male of it with the
edge of the sword:

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> But the women, and the little ones, and
the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the spoil of it, shalt
thou take to thyself: and thou shalt eat the spoil of thy enemies, which
the LORD thy God hath given thee.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Thus shalt thou do to all the cities
which are very distant from thee, which are not of the cities of these
nations.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> But of the cities of these people which
the LORD thy God doth give thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save
alive nothing that breatheth:

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> But thou shalt utterly destroy them,
namely, the Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the
Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, as the LORD thy God hath
commanded thee:

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> That they may not teach you to do after
all their abominations which they have done to their gods; so would ye
sin against the LORD your God.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> When thou shalt besiege a city a long
time in making war against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the
trees of it by forcing an ax against them; for thou mayest eat of them:
and thou shalt not cut them down (for the tree of the field is man's
life) to employ them in the siege:

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Only the trees which thou knowest that
they are not trees for food, thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and
thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee,
until it shall be subdued.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> If one shall be found slain in the land
which the LORD thy God giveth thee to possess it, lying in the field,
and it be not known who hath slain him:

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Then thy elders and thy judges shall come
forth, and they shall measure to the cities which are around him that is
slain:

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And it shall be that the city which is
next to the slain man, even the elders of that city shall take a heifer
which hath not been wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the yoke;

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And the elders of that city shall bring
down the heifer to a rough valley, which is neither tilled nor sown, and
shall strike off the heifer's neck there in the valley;

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And the priests the sons of Levi shall
come near (for them the LORD thy God hath chosen to minister to him, and
to bless in the name of the LORD) and by their word shall every
controversy and every stroke be tried;

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And all the elders of that city that are
next to the slain man, shall wash their hands over the heifer that is
beheaded in the valley:

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And they shall answer and say, Our hands
have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Be merciful, O LORD, to thy people
Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and lay not innocent blood to the
charge of thy people Israel. And the blood shall be forgiven them.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> So shalt thou remove the guilt of
innocent blood from among you, when thou shalt do that which is right in
the sight of the LORD.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> When thou goest forth to war against
thy enemies, and the LORD thy God hath delivered them into thy hands,
and thou hast taken them captive,

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And thou seest among the captives a
beautiful woman, and hast a desire to her, that thou wouldest have her
for thy wife:

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Then thou shalt bring her home to thy
house, and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails:

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And she shall put off from her the
raiment of her captivity, and shall remain in thy house, and bewail her
father and her mother a full month: and after that, thou shalt go in to
her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And it shall be, if thou shalt have no
delight in her, then thou shalt let her go whither she will; but thou
shalt not sell her at all for money; thou shalt not make merchandise of
her, because thou hast humbled her.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> If a man shall have two wives, one
beloved, and another hated, and they have borne him children, both the
beloved and the hated; and if the first-born son be hers that was hated:

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Then it shall be, when he maketh his
sons to inherit that which he hath, that he may not prefer the son of
the beloved first-born, before the son of the hated, which is indeed the
first-born:

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> But he shall acknowledge the son of the
hated for the first-born, by giving him a double portion of all that he
hath: for he is the beginning of his strength; the right of the
first-born is his.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> If a man shall have a stubborn and
rebellious son, who will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice
of his mother, and who, when they have chastened him, will not hearken
to them:

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Then shall his father and his mother
lay hold on him, and bring him out to the elders of his city, and to the
gate of his place;

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And they shall say to the elders of his
city, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our
voice; he is a glutton, and a drunkard.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And all the men of his city shall stone
him with stones, that he may die: so shalt thou remove evil from among
you, and all Israel shall hear, and fear.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And if a man shall have committed a sin
worthy of death, and he must be put to death, and thou shalt hang him on
a tree:

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> His body shall not remain all night
upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him that day; (for he
that is hanged is accursed of God;) that thy land may not be defiled,
which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or
his sheep go astray, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any case
bring them again to thy brother.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And if thy brother shall not be nigh to
thee, or if thou shalt not know him, then thou shalt bring it to thy own
house, and it shall be with thee until thy brother shall seek after it,
and thou shalt restore it to him again.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> In like manner shalt thou do with his
ass; and so shalt thou do with his raiment; and with all lost things of
thy brother's, which he hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do
likewise: thou mayest not hide thyself.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Thou shalt not see thy brother's ass or
his ox fall down by the way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt
surely help him to lift them up again.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> A woman shall not wear that which
pertaineth to a man, neither shall a man put on a woman's garment: for
all that do so are abomination to the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> If a bird's nest shall chance to be
before thee in the way on any tree, or on the ground, whether with young
ones, or eggs, and the dam sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs,
thou shalt not take the dam with the young:

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> But thou shalt in any wise let the dam
go, and take the young to thee; that it may be well with thee, and that
thou mayest prolong thy days.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> When thou buildest a new house, then thou
shalt make a battlement for thy roof, that thou mayest not bring blood
upon thy house, if any man shall fall from thence.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with
divers seeds: lest the fruit of thy seed which thou hast sown, and the
fruit of thy vineyard, should be defiled.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an
ass together.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers
sorts, as of woolen and linen together.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> Thou shalt make thee fringes upon the
four quarters of thy vesture, with which thou coverest thyself.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> If any man shall take a wife, and go in
to her, and hate her,

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And give occasions of speech against
her, and bring an evil name upon her, and say, I took this woman, and
when I came to her, I found her not a maid:

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Then shall the father of the damsel,
and her mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel's
virginity to the elders of the city in the gate:

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And the damsel's father shall say to
the elders, I gave my daughter to this man for a wife, and he hateth
her,

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And lo, he hath given occasions of
speech against her, saying, I found not thy daughter a maid; and yet
these are the tokens of my daughter's virginity. And they shall spread
the cloth before the elders of the city.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And the elders of that city shall take
that man and chastise him;

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And they shall amerce him in a hundred
shekels of silver, and give them to the father of the damsel, because he
hath brought an evil name upon a virgin of Israel: and she shall be his
wife; he may not put her away all his days.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> But if this thing shall be true, and
the tokens of virginity be not found for the damsel:

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Then they shall bring out the damsel to
the door of her father's house, and the men of her city shall stone her
with stones that she may die: because she hath wrought folly in Israel,
to be guilty of lewdness in her father's house: so shalt thou remove
evil from among you.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> If a man shall be found lying with a
woman married to a husband, then they shall both of them die, both the
man that lay with the woman, and the woman: so shalt thou remove evil
from Israel.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If a damsel that is a virgin shall be
betrothed to a husband, and a man shall find her in the city, and lie
with her;

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Then ye shall bring them both out to
the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with stones that they may
die; the damsel, because she cried not, being in the city; and the man,
because he hath humbled his neighbor's wife: so thou shalt remove evil
from among you.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> But if a man shall find a betrothed
damsel in the field, and the man shall force her, and lie with her; then
the man only that lay with her shall die:

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> But to the damsel thou shalt do
nothing; there is in the damsel no sin worthy of death: for as when a
man riseth against his neighbor, and slayeth him, even so is this
matter:

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> For he found her in the field, and the
betrothed damsel cried, and there was none to save her.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> If a man shall find a damsel that is a
virgin, who is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and
they be found;

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Then the man that lay with her shall
give to the damsel's father fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be
his wife; because he hath humbled her, he may not put her away all his
days.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> A man shall not take his father's wife,
nor discover his father's skirt.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> He that is wounded or mutilated in his
secrets, shall not enter into the congregation of the LORD.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> A bastard shall not enter into the
congregation of the LORD; even to his tenth generation shall he not
enter into the congregation of the LORD.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter
into the congregation of the LORD; even to their tenth generation shall
they not enter into the congregation of the LORD for ever:

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Because they met you not with bread and
with water in the way, when ye came forth from Egypt; and because they
hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor of Pethor of Mesopotamia, to
curse thee.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Nevertheless, the LORD thy God would not
hearken to Balaam: but the LORD thy God turned the curse into a blessing
to thee, because the LORD thy God loved thee.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Thou shalt not seek their peace, nor
their prosperity all thy days for ever.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite, for he
is thy brother: thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian, because thou wast a
stranger in his land.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> The children that are begotten by them
shall enter into the congregation of the LORD in their third generation.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> When the host goeth forth against thy
enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> If there shall be among you any man
that is not clean by reason of uncleanness that chanceth to him by
night, then shall he go abroad out of the camp, he shall not come within
the camp:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> But it shall be, when evening cometh
on, he shall wash himself with water: and when the sun is down, he shall
come into the camp again.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Thou shalt have a place also without
the camp, whither thou shalt go forth abroad:

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And thou shalt have a paddle upon thy
weapon: and it shall be when thou wilt ease thyself abroad, thou shalt
dig with it, and shalt turn back, and cover that which cometh from thee:

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> For the LORD thy God walketh in the
midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thy enemies before
thee; therefore shall thy camp be holy: that he may see no unclean thing
in thee, and turn away from thee.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Thou shalt not deliver to his master
the servant who hath escaped from his master to thee:

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> He shall dwell with thee, even among
you in that place which he shall choose in one of thy gates where it
pleaseth him best: thou shalt not oppress him.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> There shall be no harlot of the
daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Thou shalt not bring the hire of a
harlot, or the price of a dog into the house of the LORD thy God for any
vow: for even both these are abomination to the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Thou shalt not lend upon interest to
thy brother; interest of money, interest of victuals, interest of any
thing that is lent upon interest:

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> To a stranger thou mayest lend upon
interest; but to thy brother thou shalt not lend upon interest; that the
LORD thy God may bless thee in all that thou settest thy hand to in the
land whither thou goest to possess it.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> When thou shalt vow a vow to the LORD
thy God, thou shalt not defer to pay it: for the LORD thy God will
surely require it of thee; and it would be sin in thee.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it
shall be no sin in thee.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> That which is uttered by thy lips thou
shalt keep and perform; even a free-will-offering, according as thou
hast vowed to the LORD thy God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> When thou comest into thy neighbor's
vineyard, then thou mayest satisfy thy appetite with grapes at thy own
pleasure; but thou shalt not put any in thy vessel.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> When thou comest into the standing-corn
of thy neighbor, then thou mayest pluck the ears with thy hand: but thou
shalt not move a sickle to thy neighbor's standing-corn.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> When a man hath taken a wife, and married
her, and it shall come to pass that she findeth no favor in his eyes,
because he hath found some uncleanness in her: then let him write her a
bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his
house.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And when she hath departed from his
house, she may go and be another man's wife.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And if the latter husband shall hate her,
and write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send
her out of his house; or if the latter husband shall die, who took her
to be his wife;

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> Her former husband who sent her away, may
not take her again to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for that
is abomination before the LORD: and thou shalt not cause the land to
sin, which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> When a man hath newly taken a wife, he
shall not go out to war, neither shall he be charged with any business:
but he shall be free at home one year, and shall cheer his wife which he
hath taken.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> No man shall take the nether or the upper
millstone for a pledge: for he taketh a man's life for a pledge.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> If a man shall be found stealing any of
his brethren of the children of Israel, and shall make merchandise of
him, or sell him; then that thief shall die; and thou shalt remove evil
from among you.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> Take heed in the plague of leprosy, that
thou observe diligently, and do according to all that the priests the
Levites shall teach you: as I commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Remember what the LORD thy God did to
Miriam by the way, after that ye come forth from Egypt.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> When thou dost lend thy brother any
thing, thou shalt not go into his house to take his pledge:

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to
whom thou dost lend shall bring out the pledge abroad to thee:

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And if the man is poor, thou shalt not
sleep with his pledge:

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> In any case thou shalt deliver to him
the pledge again when the sun goeth down, that he may sleep in his own
raiment, and bless thee; and it shall be righteousness to thee before
the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> Thou shalt not oppress a hired servant
that is poor and needy, whether he is of thy brethren, or of thy
strangers that are in thy land within thy gates:

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> At his day thou shalt give him his
hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it, for he is poor, and setteth
his heart upon it: lest he should cry against thee to the LORD, and it
be sin to thee.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> The fathers shall not be put to death
for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for the
fathers: every man shall be put to death for his own sin.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of
the stranger, nor of the fatherless, nor take a widow's raiment for a
pledge:

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> But thou shalt remember that thou wast
a bond-man in Egypt, and the LORD thy God redeemed thee thence:
therefore I command thee to do this thing.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> When thou cuttest down thy harvest in
thy field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again
to fetch it: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for
the widow: that the LORD thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy
hands.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> When thou beatest thy olive-tree, thou
shalt not go over the boughs again: it shall be for the stranger, for
the fatherless, and for the widow.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> When thou gatherest the grapes of thy
vineyard, thou shalt not glean it afterward: it shall be for the
stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast
a bond-man in the land of Egypt: therefore I command thee to do this
thing.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> If there shall be a controversy between
men, and they come to judgment, that the judges may judge them; then
they shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And it shall be, if the wicked man be
worthy to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to
be beaten before his face, according to his fault, by a certain number.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Forty stripes he may give him, and not
exceed: lest if he should exceed, and beat him above these with many
stripes, then thy brother should seem vile to thee.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he
treadeth out the corn.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> If brethren shall dwell together, and one
of them shall die and have no child, the wife of the dead shall not
marry without to a stranger: her husband's brother shall go in to her,
and take her to him for a wife, and perform the duty of a husband's
brother to her.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And it shall be, that the first-born
which she beareth, shall succeed in the name of his brother who is dead,
that his name may not become extinct in Israel.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And if the man shall not like to take his
brother's wife, then let his brother's wife go up to the gate to the
elders, and say, My husband's brother refuseth to raise up to his
brother a name in Israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband's
brother.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Then the elders of his city shall call
him, and speak to him: and if he shall stand to it, and say, I like not
to take her,

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Then shall his brother's wife come to him
in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, and
spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be done to that
man that will not build up his brother's house.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And his name shall be called in Israel,
The house of him that hath his shoe loosed.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> When men strive together one with
another, and the wife of the one draweth near to deliver her husband
from the hand of him that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and
taketh him by the secrets:

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Then thou shalt cut off her hand, thy
eye shall not pity her.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers
weights, a great and a small:

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> Thou shalt not have in thy house divers
measures, a great and a small:

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> But thou shalt have a perfect and just
weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have; that thy days may be
lengthened in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> For all that do such things, and all
that do unrighteously, are an abomination to the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Remember what Amalek did to thee by the
way, when ye had come forth from Egypt;

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> How he met thee by the way, and smote
the hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou
wast faint and weary; and he feared not God.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Therefore it shall be, when the LORD
thy God hath given thee rest from all thy enemies on all sides, in the
land which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess
it, that thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under
heaven; thou shalt not forget it.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And it shall be, when thou hast come in
to the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and
possessest it, and dwellest therein;

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> That thou shalt take of the first of all
the fruit of the earth, which thou shalt bring of thy land that the LORD
thy God giveth thee, and shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go to the
place which the LORD thy God shall choose to place his name there.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> And thou shalt go to the priest that
shall be in those days, and say to him, I profess this day to the LORD
thy God, that I have come to the country which the LORD swore to our
fathers to give us.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And the priest shall take the basket from
thy hand, and set it down before the altar of the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> And thou shalt speak and say before the
LORD thy God, A Syrian ready to perish was my father, and he went down
to Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation,
great, mighty, and populous:

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And the Egyptians ill-treated us, and
afflicted us, and laid upon us hard bondage:

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And when we cried to the LORD God of our
fathers, the LORD heard our voice, and looked on our affliction, and our
labor, and our oppression:

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And the LORD brought us out of Egypt with
a mighty hand, and with an out-stretched arm, and with great
terribleness, and with signs, and with wonders;

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> And he hath brought us into this place,
and hath given us this land, even a land that floweth with milk and
honey.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And now, behold, I have brought the
first-fruits of the land, which thou, O LORD, hast given me: and thou
shalt set it before the LORD thy God, and worship before the LORD thy
God:

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And thou shalt rejoice in every good
thing which the LORD thy God hath given to thee, and to thy house, thou,
and the Levite, and the stranger that is among you.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> When thou hast made an end of tithing
all the tithes of thy increase the third year, which is the year of
tithing, and hast given it to the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless,
and the widow, that they may eat within thy gates, and be filled:

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> Then thou shalt say before the LORD thy
God, I have brought away the hallowed things out of my house, and also
have given them to the Levite, and to the stranger, to the fatherless,
and to the widow, according to all thy commandments which thou hast
commanded me: I have not transgressed thy commandments, neither have I
forgotten them:

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> I have not eaten of it in my mourning,
neither have I taken away aught of it for any unclean use, nor given
aught of it for the dead: but I have hearkened to the voice of the LORD
my God, and have done according to all that thou hast commanded me.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Look down from thy holy habitation,
from heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the land which thou hast
given us, as thou didst swear to our fathers, a land that floweth with
milk and honey.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> This day the LORD thy God hath
commanded thee to perform these statutes and judgments: thou shalt
therefore keep and do them with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Thou hast avouched the LORD this day to
be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his
commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken to his voice:

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> And the LORD hath avouched thee this
day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised thee, and that thou
shouldst keep all his commandments;

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> And to make thee high above all nations
which he hath made, in praise, and in name, and in honor; and that thou
mayest be a holy people to the LORD thy God, as he hath spoken.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And Moses with the elders of Israel
commanded the people, saying, Keep all the commandments which I command
you this day.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And it shall be on the day when ye shall
pass over Jordan to the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, that
thou shalt set thee up great stones, and plaster them with plaster:

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And thou shalt write upon them all the
words of this law, when thou hast passed over, that thou mayest enter in
to the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee, a land that floweth with
milk and honey; as the LORD God of thy fathers hath promised thee.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Therefore it shall be when ye have gone
over Jordan, that ye shall set up these stones, which I command you this
day, in mount Ebal, and thou shalt plaster them with plaster.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And there shalt thou build an altar to
the LORD thy God, an altar of stones: thou shalt not lift up any iron
tool upon them.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Thou shalt build the altar of the LORD
thy God of whole stones: and thou shalt offer on it burnt-offerings to
the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And thou shalt offer peace-offerings, and
shalt eat there, and rejoice before the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> And thou shalt write upon the stones all
the words of this law, very plainly.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And Moses and the priests the Levites
spoke to all Israel, saying, Take heed and hearken, O Israel, this day
thou art become the people of the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of
the LORD thy God, and do his commandments and his statutes which I
command thee this day.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And Moses charged the people the same
day, saying,

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> These shall stand upon mount Gerizim to
bless the people, when ye have come over Jordan; Simeon, and Levi, and
Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin:

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And these shall stand upon mount Ebal
to curse; Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> And the Levites shall speak, and say to
all the men of Israel with a loud voice,

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Cursed be the man that maketh any
graven or molten image, an abomination to the LORD, the work of the
hands of the artificer, and putteth it in a secret place: and all the
people shall answer, and say Amen.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Cursed be he that setteth light by his
father or his mother: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Cursed be he that removeth his
neighbor's landmark: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Cursed be he that maketh the blind to
wander out of the way: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> Cursed be he that perverteth the
judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and widow: and all the people
shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Cursed be he that lieth with his
father's wife; because he uncovereth his father's skirt: and all the
people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Cursed be he that lieth with any manner
of beast: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Cursed be he that lieth with his
sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother: and
all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Cursed be he that lieth with his
mother-in-law: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbor
secretly: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> Cursed be he that taketh reward to slay
an innocent person: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Cursed be he that confirmeth not all
the words of this law to do them: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt
hearken diligently to the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe and to
do all his commandments which I command thee this day; that the LORD thy
God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth:

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And all these blessings shall come on
thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken to the voice of the LORD
thy God.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and
blessed shalt thou be in the field.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body,
and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase
of thy cattle, and the flocks of thy sheep.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Blessed shall be thy basket and thy
store.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest
in, and blessed shalt thou be when thou goest out.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> The LORD shall cause thy enemies that
rise up against thee to be smitten before thy face: they shall come out
against thee one way, and flee before thee seven ways.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The LORD shall command the blessing upon
thee in thy store-houses, and in all that thou settest thy hand to: and
he shall bless thee in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> The LORD shall establish thee a holy
people to himself, as he hath sworn to thee, if thou shalt keep the
commandments of the LORD thy God, and walk in his ways.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> And all the people of the earth shall
see that thou art called by the name of the LORD; and they shall be
afraid of thee.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And the LORD shall make thee to abound
in goods, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and
in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which the LORD swore to thy
fathers to give thee.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> The LORD shall open to thee his good
treasure, the heaven to give rain to thy land in its season, and to
bless all the work of thy hand: and thou shalt lend to many nations, and
thou shalt not borrow.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And the LORD shall make thee the head,
and not the tail; and thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be
beneath; if thou shalt hearken to the commandments of the LORD thy God,
which I command thee this day, to observe and to do them:

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> And thou shalt not go aside from any of
the words which I command thee this day, to the right hand or to the
left, to go after other gods to serve them.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt
not hearken to the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe to do all his
commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day; that all
these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee:

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and
cursed shalt thou be in the field.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Cursed shall be thy basket and thy
store.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body,
and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of
thy sheep.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest
in, and cursed shalt thou be when thou goest out.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> The LORD shall send upon thee cursing,
vexation, and rebuke, in all that thou undertakest to perform, until
thou shalt be destroyed, and until thou shalt perish quickly; because of
the wickedness of thy doings by which thou hast forsaken me.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> The LORD shall make the pestilence
cleave to thee, until he shall have consumed thee from off the land,
whither thou goest to possess it.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> The LORD shall smite thee with a
consumption, and with a fever, and with an inflammation, and with an
extreme burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew:
and they shall pursue thee until thou dost perish.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And thy heaven that is over thy head
shall be brass, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> The LORD shall make the rain of thy
land powder and dust: from heaven shall it come down upon thee, until
thou art destroyed.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> The LORD shall cause thee to be smitten
before thy enemies: thou shalt go out one way against them, and flee
seven ways before them; and shalt be removed into all the kingdoms of
the earth.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> And thy carcass shall be food to all
fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the earth, and no man shall drive
them away.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> The LORD will smite thee with the botch
of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, of
which thou canst not be healed.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> The LORD shall smite thee with the
madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart:

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> And thou shalt grope at noon-day, as
the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways:
and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall
save thee.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another
man shall lie with her: thou shalt build a house, and thou shalt not
dwell in it: thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the
grapes of it.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> Thy ox shall be slain before thy eyes,
and thou shalt not eat of it: thy ass shall be violently taken away from
before thy face, and shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep shall be
given to thy enemies, and thou shalt have none to rescue them.

<span id="an_28:32">28:32</span> Thy sons and thy daughters shall be
given to another people, and thy eyes shall look, and fail with longing
for them all the day long: and there shall be no might in thy hand.

<span id="an_28:33">28:33</span> The fruit of thy land, and all thy
labors, shall be eaten by a nation which thou knowest not: and thou
shalt be only oppressed and crushed always:

<span id="an_28:34">28:34</span> So that thou shalt be mad for the sight
of thy eyes which thou shalt see.

<span id="an_28:35">28:35</span> The LORD shall smite thee in the knees,
and in the legs, with a sore botch that cannot be healed, from the sole
of thy foot to the top of thy head.

<span id="an_28:36">28:36</span> The LORD shall bring thee, and thy king
which thou shalt set over thee, to a nation which neither thou nor thy
fathers have known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and
stone.

<span id="an_28:37">28:37</span> And thou shalt become an astonishment,
a proverb, and a by-word, among all nations whither the LORD shall lead
thee.

<span id="an_28:38">28:38</span> Thou shalt carry much seed into the
field, and shalt gather but little: for the locust shall consume it.

<span id="an_28:39">28:39</span> Thou shalt plant vineyards and dress
them, but shalt neither drink of the wine, nor gather the grapes: for
the worm shall eat them.

<span id="an_28:40">28:40</span> Thou shalt have olive-trees throughout
all thy coasts, but thou shalt not anoint thyself with the oil: for thy
olive shall cast its fruit.

<span id="an_28:41">28:41</span> Thou shalt beget sons and daughters,
but thou shalt not enjoy them: for they shall go into captivity.

<span id="an_28:42">28:42</span> All thy trees and fruit of thy land
shall the locust consume.

<span id="an_28:43">28:43</span> The stranger that is within thee shall
rise above thee very high; and thou shalt come down very low.

<span id="an_28:44">28:44</span> He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt
not lend to him: he shall be the head, and thou shalt be the tail.

<span id="an_28:45">28:45</span> Moreover, all these curses shall come
upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou art
destroyed: because thou hearkenedst not to the voice of the LORD thy
God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee:

<span id="an_28:46">28:46</span> And they shall be upon thee for a sign
and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever.

<span id="an_28:47">28:47</span> Because thou didst not serve the LORD
thy God with joyfulness and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of
all things:

<span id="an_28:48">28:48</span> Therefore shalt thou serve thy enemies
which the LORD shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in
nakedness, and in want of all things: and he shall put a yoke of iron
upon thy neck, until he hath destroyed thee.

<span id="an_28:49">28:49</span> The LORD shall bring a nation against
thee from far, from the end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flieth,
a nation whose language thou shalt not understand:

<span id="an_28:50">28:50</span> A nation of fierce countenance, which
shall not regard the person of the old, nor show favor to the young:

<span id="an_28:51">28:51</span> And he shall eat the fruit of thy
cattle, and the fruit of thy land, until thou art destroyed: which also
shall not leave thee either corn, wine, or oil, or the increase of thy
cattle, or flocks of thy sheep, until he hath destroyed thee.

<span id="an_28:52">28:52</span> And he shall besiege thee in all thy
gates, until thy high and fortified walls come down, in which thou didst
trust, throughout all thy land; and he shall besiege thee in all thy
gates throughout all thy land which the LORD thy God hath given thee.

<span id="an_28:53">28:53</span> And thou shalt eat the fruit of thy own
body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters which the LORD thy God
hath given thee, in the siege and in the straitness with which thy
enemies shall distress thee:

<span id="an_28:54">28:54</span> So that the man that is tender among
you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil towards his brother, and
towards the wife of his bosom, and towards the remnant of his children
whom he shall leave:

<span id="an_28:55">28:55</span> So that he will not give to any of them
of the flesh of his children whom he shall eat: because he hath nothing
left him in the siege and in the straitness with which thy enemies shall
distress thee in all thy gates.

<span id="an_28:56">28:56</span> The tender and delicate woman among
you, who would not venture to set the sole of her foot upon the ground
for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil towards the
husband of her bosom, and towards her son, and towards her daughter,

<span id="an_28:57">28:57</span> And towards her young one, her own
offspring, and towards her children which she shall bear: for she shall
eat them for want of all things secretly in the siege and straitness
with which thy enemy shall distress thee in thy gates.

<span id="an_28:58">28:58</span> If thou wilt not observe to do all the
words of this law that are written in this book, that thou mayest fear
this glorious and fearful name, THE LORD THY GOD;

<span id="an_28:59">28:59</span> Then the LORD will make thy plagues
wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long
continuance, and severe sicknesses, and of long continuance.

<span id="an_28:60">28:60</span> Moreover, he will bring upon thee all
the diseases of Egypt, of which thou wast afraid; and they shall cleave
to thee.

<span id="an_28:61">28:61</span> Also every sickness, and every plague
which is not written in the book of this law, them will the LORD bring
upon thee, until thou art destroyed.

<span id="an_28:62">28:62</span> And ye shall be left few in number,
whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude; because thou
wouldst not obey the voice of the LORD thy God.

<span id="an_28:63">28:63</span> And it shall come to pass, that as the
LORD rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you; so the LORD
will rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring you to naught; and ye
shall be plucked from off the land whither thou goest to possess it.

<span id="an_28:64">28:64</span> And the LORD shall scatter thee among
all people from the one end of the earth even to the other; and there
thou shalt serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have
known, even wood and stone.

<span id="an_28:65">28:65</span> And among these nations shalt thou find
no ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest: but the LORD
shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow
of mind:

<span id="an_28:66">28:66</span> And thy life shall hang in doubt before
thee; and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt have no assurance of
thy life:

<span id="an_28:67">28:67</span> In the morning thou shalt say, O that
it were evening, and at evening thou shalt say, O that it were morning!
for the fear of thy heart with which thou shalt fear, and for the sight
of thy eyes which thou shalt see.

<span id="an_28:68">28:68</span> And the LORD shall bring thee into
Egypt again with ships, by the way of which I have said to thee, Thou
shalt see it no more again: and there ye shall be sold to your enemies
for bond-men and bond-women, and no man shall buy you.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> These are the words of the covenant which
the LORD commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land
of Moab, besides the covenant which he made with them in Horeb.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And Moses called to all Israel, and said
to them, Ye have seen all that the LORD did before your eyes in the land
of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land;

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> The great temptations which thy eyes have
seen, the signs, and those great miracles:

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> Yet the LORD hath not given you a heart
to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, to this day.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And I have led you forty years in the
wilderness: your clothes have not become old upon you, and thy shoe hath
not become old upon thy foot.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye
drank wine or strong drink: that ye might know that I am the LORD your
God.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And when ye came to this place, Sihon the
king of Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, came out against us to
battle, and we smote them:

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And we took their land, and gave it for
an inheritance to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the
half-tribe of Manasseh.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> Keep therefore the words of this
covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Ye stand this day all of you before the
LORD your God; your captains of your tribes, your elders, and your
officers, with all the men of Israel,

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> Your little ones, your wives, and thy
stranger that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood to the drawer
of thy water:

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> That thou shouldst enter into covenant
with the LORD thy God, and into his oath, which the LORD thy God maketh
with thee this day:

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> That he may establish thee to-day for a
people to himself, and that he may be to thee a God, as he hath said to
thee, and as he hath sworn to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> Neither with you only do I make this
covenant and this oath;

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> But with him that standeth here with us
this day before the LORD our God, and also with him that is not here
with us this day:

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> (For ye know how we have dwelt in the
land of Egypt; and how we came through the nations which ye passed by;

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And ye have seen their abominations,
and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which were among
them:)

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Lest there should be among you man, or
woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from the
LORD our God, to go and serve the gods of these nations; lest there
should be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood;

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> And it should come to pass, when he
heareth the words of this curse, that he should bless himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of
my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst:

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> The LORD will not spare him, but then
the anger of the LORD and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and
all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the
LORD shall blot out his name from under heaven.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> And the LORD shall separate him to evil
out of all the tribes of Israel according to all the curses of the
covenant that are written in this book of the law:

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> So that the generation to come of your
children that shall arise after you, and the stranger that shall come
from a distant land, shall say, when they see the plagues of that land,
and the sicknesses which the LORD hath laid upon it;

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And that the whole land of it is
brimstone, and salt, and burning, that it is not sown, nor doth it bear,
nor doth any grass grow in it, like the overthrow of Sodom, and
Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, which the LORD overthrew in his anger and
in his wrath:

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> Even all the nations shall say, Why
hath the LORD done thus to this land? what meaneth the heat of this
great anger?

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> Then men shall say, Because they have
forsaken the covenant of the LORD God of their fathers, which he made
with them when he brought them forth from the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> For they went and served other gods,
and worshiped them, gods which they knew not, and which he had not given
to them:

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> And the anger of the LORD was kindled
against this land, to bring upon it all the curses that are written in
this book:

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> And the LORD rooted them out of their
land in anger and in wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them into
another land, as it is this day.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> The secret things belong to the LORD
our God: but those things which are revealed belong to us, and to our
children for ever, that we may do all the words of this law.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And it shall come to pass, when all these
things have come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set
before thee, and thou shalt call them to mind among all the nations
whither the LORD thy God hath driven thee,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> And shalt return to the LORD thy God, and
shalt obey his voice according to all that I command thee this day, thou
and thy children, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul;

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> That then the LORD thy God will turn thy
captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather
thee from all the nations whither the LORD thy God hath scattered thee.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> If any of thine shall be driven out to
the outmost parts of heaven, from thence will the LORD thy God gather
thee, and from thence will he bring thee:

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> And the LORD thy God will bring thee into
the land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it: and he
will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> And the LORD thy God will circumcise thy
heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the LORD thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And the LORD thy God will put all these
curses upon thy enemies, and on them that hate thee, who persecuted
thee.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And thou shalt return and obey the voice
of the LORD, and do all his commandments which I command thee this day.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> And the LORD thy God will make thee to
abound in every work of thy hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the
fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy land, for good: for the
LORD will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy
fathers:

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> If thou shalt hearken to the voice of
the LORD thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which are
written in this book of the law, and if thou shalt turn to the LORD thy
God with all thy heart and with all thy soul.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For this commandment which I command
thee this day, it is not hid from thee, neither is it far off.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> It is not in heaven, that thou shouldst
say, Who shall ascend for us to heaven, and bring it to us, that we may
hear it, and do it?

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou
shouldst say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it to us, that
we may hear it, and do it?

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> But the word is very nigh to thee, in
thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> See, I have set before thee this day
life and good, and death and evil;

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> In that I command thee this day to love
the LORD thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments, and
his statutes, and his judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply: and
the LORD thy God shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> But if thy heart shall turn away, so
that thou wilt not hear, but shalt be drawn away, and worship other
gods, and serve them;

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> I denounce to you this day, that ye
shall surely perish, and that ye shall not prolong your days upon the
land, whither thou passest over Jordan to go to possess it.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> I call heaven and earth to record this
day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and
cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live:

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> That thou mayest love the LORD thy God,
and that thou mayest obey his voice, and that thou mayest cleave to him
(for he is thy life, and the length of thy days) that thou mayest dwell
in the land which the LORD swore to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac,
and to Jacob, to give them.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And Moses went and spoke these words to
all Israel.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> And he said to them, I am a hundred and
twenty years old this day; I can no more go out and come in: also the
LORD hath said to me, thou shalt not go over this Jordan.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> The LORD thy God, he will go over before
thee, and he will destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt
possess them: and Joshua he shall go over before thee, as the LORD hath
said.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> And the LORD shall do to them as he did
to Sihon, and to Og, kings of the Amorites, and to the land of them,
whom he destroyed.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> And the LORD shall give them up before
your face, that ye may do to them according to all the commandments
which I have commanded you.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Be strong and of a good courage, fear
not, nor be afraid of them: for the LORD thy God, he it is that doth go
with thee, he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> And Moses called to Joshua, and said to
him in the sight of all Israel, Be strong and of a good courage: for
thou must go with this people to the land which the LORD hath sworn to
their fathers to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> And the LORD, he it is that doth go
before thee; he will be with thee, he will not fail thee, neither
forsake thee: fear not, neither be dismayed.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> And Moses wrote this law, and delivered
it to the priests the sons of Levi, who bore the ark of the covenant of
the LORD, and to all the elders of Israel.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> And Moses commanded them, saying, At
the end of every seven years, in the solemnity of the year of release,
in the feast of tabernacles,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> When all Israel is come to appear
before the LORD thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt
read this law before all Israel in their hearing.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> Convene the people, men, and women, and
children, and thy stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear,
and that they may learn, and fear the LORD your God, and observe to do
all the words of this law:

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> And that their children who have not
known any thing, may hear, and learn to fear the LORD your God, as long
as ye live in the land whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Behold, thy
days approach that thou must die: call Joshua, and present yourselves in
the tabernacle of the congregation, that I may give him a charge. And
Moses and Joshua went and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the
congregation.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> And the LORD appeared in the tabernacle
in a pillar of a cloud; and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door
of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Behold,
thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, and this people will rise up, and
commit idolatry with the gods of the strangers of the land, whither they
go to be among them, and will forsake me, and break my covenant which I
have made with them.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> Then my anger shall be kindled against
them in that day, and I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from
them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall
befall them, so that they will say in that day, Have not these evils
come upon us, because our God is not among us?

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> And I will surely hide my face in that
day for all the evils which they shall have wrought, in that they are
turned to other gods.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> Now therefore write ye this song for
you, and teach it to the children of Israel: put it in their mouths,
that this song may be a witness for me against the children of Israel.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> For when I shall have brought them into
the land which I swore to their fathers, that floweth with milk and
honey; and they shall have eaten and filled themselves, and waxed fat;
then will they turn to other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and
break my covenant.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> And it shall come to pass, when many
evils and troubles have befallen them, that this song shall testify
against them as a witness: for it shall not be forgotten out of the
mouths of their seed: for I know their imagination which they form, even
now, before I have brought them into the land which I swore.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> Moses therefore wrote this song the
same day, and taught it to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a
charge, and said, Be strong and of a good courage: for thou shalt bring
the children of Israel into the land which I swore to them: and I will
be with thee.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> And it came to pass, when Moses had
made an end of writing the words of this law in a book, until they were
finished,

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> That Moses commanded the Levites who
bore the ark of the covenant of the LORD, saying,

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> Take this book of the law, and put it
in the side of the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, that it may
be there for a witness against thee.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> For I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff
neck: behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been
rebellious against the LORD; and how much more after my death?

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Assemble to me all the elders of your
tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these words in their ears,
and call heaven and earth to record against them.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> For I know that after my death ye will
utterly corrupt yourselves, and turn aside from the way which I have
commanded you; and evil will befall you in the latter days; because ye
will do evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger through
the work of your hands.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> And Moses spoke in the ears of all the
congregation of Israel the words of this song until they were ended.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak;
and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my
speech shall distill as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb,
and as the showers upon the grass:

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> Because I will publish the name of the
LORD: ascribe ye greatness to our God.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for
all his ways are judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity: just and
right is he.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> They have corrupted themselves, their
spot is not the spot of his children: they are a perverse and crooked
generation.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> Do ye thus requite the LORD, O foolish
people and unwise? is not he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he
not made thee, and established thee?

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Remember the days of old, consider the
years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will show thee; thy
elders, and they will tell thee.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> When the Most High divided to the nations
their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds
of the people according to the number of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> For the LORD'S portion is his people;
Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> He found him in a desert land, and in
the waste howling wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him, he
kept him as the apple of his eye.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> As an eagle stirreth up her nest,
fluttereth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them,
beareth them on her wings;

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> So the LORD alone did lead him, and
there was no strange God with him.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> He made him ride on the high places of
the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields; and he made him
to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock;

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Butter of cows, and milk of sheep, with
fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of Bashan, and goats, with the fat
of kidneys of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure blood of the grape.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked:
thou hast waxed fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with
fatness; then he forsook God who made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock
of his salvation.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> They provoked him to jealousy with
strange gods, with abominations they provoked him to anger.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> They sacrificed to devils, not to God;
to gods which they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your
fathers feared not.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Of the Rock that begat thee thou art
unmindful, and hast forgotten God that formed thee.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And when the LORD saw it, he abhorred
them, because of the provoking of his sons, and of his daughters.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And he said, I will hide my face from
them, I will see what their end will be: for they are a very froward
generation, children in whom is no faith.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> They have moved me to jealousy with
that which is not God; they have provoked me to anger with their
vanities: and I will move them to jealousy with those who are not a
people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> For a fire is kindled in my anger, and
shall burn to the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her
increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> I will heap mischiefs upon them; I will
spend my arrows upon them.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> They shall be burnt with hunger, and
devoured with burning heat, and with bitter destruction: I will also
send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of the
dust.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> The sword without, and terror within,
shall destroy both the young man and the virgin, the suckling also with
the man of gray hairs.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> I said, I would scatter them into
corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men;

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> Were it not that I feared the wrath of
the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely,
and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and the LORD hath not done
all this.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> For they are a nation void of counsel,
neither is there any understanding in them.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> O that they were wise, that they
understood this, that they would consider their latter end!

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> How should one chase a thousand, and
two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the
LORD had shut them up?

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> For their rock is not as our Rock, even
our enemies themselves being judges:

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> For their vine is of the vine of Sodom,
and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their
clusters are bitter:

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> Their wine is the poison of dragons,
and the cruel venom of asps.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> Is not this laid up in store with me,
and sealed up among my treasures?

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> To me belongeth vengeance, and
recompense; their foot shall slide in due time: for the day of their
calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make
haste.

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> For the LORD shall judge his people,
and repent for his servants: when he seeth that their power is gone, and
there is none shut up, or left.

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> And he shall say, Where are their gods,
their rock in whom they trusted,

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> Which ate the fat of their sacrifices,
and drank the wine of their drink-offerings? let them rise up and help
you, and be your protection.

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> See now that I, even I am he, and there
is no god with me: I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal:
neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> For I lift up my hand to heaven, and
say, I live for ever.

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> If I shall whet my glittering sword,
and my hand take hold on judgment; I will render vengeance to my
enemies, and will reward them that hate me.

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> I will make my arrows drunk with blood,
and my sword shall devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain
and of the captives from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.

<span id="an_32:43">32:43</span> Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people:
for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance
to his adversaries, and will be merciful to his land, and to his people.

<span id="an_32:44">32:44</span> And Moses came and spoke all the words
of this song in the ears of the people, he and Hoshea the son of Nun.

<span id="an_32:45">32:45</span> And Moses made an end of speaking all
these words to all Israel;

<span id="an_32:46">32:46</span> And he said to them, Set your hearts to
all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye shall command
your children to observe to do, all the words of this law.

<span id="an_32:47">32:47</span> For it is not a vain thing for you:
because it is your life; and through this thing ye shall prolong your
days in the land whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.

<span id="an_32:48">32:48</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses that same
day, saying,

<span id="an_32:49">32:49</span> Ascend this mountain Abarim, to mount
Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, that is over against Jericho; and
behold the land of Canaan which I give to the children of Israel for a
Possession:

<span id="an_32:50">32:50</span> And die in the mount whither thou
goest, and be gathered to thy people; as Aaron thy brother died in mount
Hor, and was gathered to his people:

<span id="an_32:51">32:51</span> Because ye trespassed against me among
the children of Israel at the waters of Meribah-Kadesh, in the
wilderness of Zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_32:52">32:52</span> Yet thou shalt see the land before
thee, but thou shalt not go thither to the land which I give the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And this is the with which Moses, the man
of God, blessed the children of Israel before his death.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> And he said, the LORD came from Sinai,
and rose up from Seir to them; he shined forth from mount Paran, and he
came with ten thousands of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law
for them.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> Yea, he loved the people; all his saints
are in thy hand: and they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive
of thy words.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> Moses commanded us a law; even the
inheritance of the congregation of Jacob.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And he was king in Jeshurun, when the
heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were assembled.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Let Reuben live, and not die; and let not
his men be few.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And this is the blessing of Judah: and he
said, Hear, LORD, the voice of Judah, and bring him to his people: let
his hands be sufficient for him, and be thou a help to him from his
enemies.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and
thy Urim be with thy holy one, whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with
whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah;

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> Who said to his father and to his mother,
I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor know
his own children: for they have observed thy word, and kept thy
covenant.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> They shall teach Jacob thy judgments,
and Israel thy law; they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt
sacrifice upon thy altar.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Bless, LORD, his substance, and accept
the work of his hands: smite through the loins of them that rise against
him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of
the LORD shall dwell in safety by him; and the LORD shall cover him all
the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the
LORD be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and
for the deep that coucheth beneath,

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And for the precious fruits brought
forth by the sun, and for the precious things put forth by the moon,

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And for the chief things of the ancient
mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills,

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> And for the precious things of the
earth and fullness of it, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the
bush; let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of
the head of him that was separated from his brethren.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> His glory is like the firstling of his
bullock, and his horns are like the horns of unicorns: with them he
shall push the people together to the ends of the earth: and they are
the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice,
Zebulun, in thy going out; and Issachar, in thy tents.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> They shall call the people to the
mountain; there they shall offer sacrifices of righteousness: for they
shall suck of the abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the
sand.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And of Gad he said: Blessed be he that
enlargeth Gad: he dwelleth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown
of the head.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> And he provided the first part for
himself, because there, in a portion of the lawgiver, was he seated: and
he came with the heads of the people, he executed the justice of the
LORD, and his judgments with Israel.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And of Dan he said, Dan is a lion's
whelp: he shall leap from Bashan.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali,
satisfied with favor, and full with the blessing of the LORD: possess
thou the west and the south.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> And of Asher he said, Let Asher be
blessed with children; let him be acceptable to his brethren, and let
him dip his foot in oil.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and
as thy days, so shall thy strength be.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> There is none like to the God of
Jeshurun, who rideth upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellence
on the sky.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> The eternal God is thy refuge, and
underneath are the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy
from before thee, and shall say, Destroy them.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> Israel then shall dwell in safety
alone; the fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and wine, also
his heavens shall drop down dew.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like
to thee, O people saved by the LORD, the shield of thy help, and who is
the sword of thy excellence! and thy enemies shall be found liars to
thee; and thou shalt tread upon their high places.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Moses went up from the plains of
Moab, upon the mountain of Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is over
against Jericho: and the LORD showed him all the land of Gilead, to Dan,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> And all Naphtali, and the land of
Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, to the utmost sea,

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> And the south, and the plain of the
valley of Jericho, the city of palm-trees, to Zoar.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And the LORD said to him, This is the
land which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, I will
give it to thy seed: I have caused thee to see it with thy eyes, but
thou shalt not go over thither.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> So Moses the servant of the LORD died
there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the LORD.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And he buried him in a valley in the land
of Moab, over against Beth-peor: but no man knoweth of his sepulcher to
this day.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And Moses was a hundred and twenty years
old when he died: his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And the children of Israel wept for Moses
in the plains of Moab thirty days: so the days of weeping and mourning
for Moses were ended.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the
spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the
children of Israel hearkened to him, and did as the LORD commanded
Moses.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And there arose not a prophet
afterwards in Israel like to Moses, whom the LORD knew face to face,

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> In all the signs and the wonders which
the LORD sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his
servants, and to all his land,

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> And in all that mighty hand, and in all
the great terror which Moses showed in the sight of all Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua](jos.md)
