[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lam)  [Next](dan) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Ezekiel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year,
in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I was among the
captives by the river of Kebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw
visions of God.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> In the fifth day of the month, which was
the fifth year of king Jehoiachin's captivity,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The word of the LORD came expressly to
Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the
river Kebar; and the hand of the LORD was there upon him.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And I looked, and behold, a whirlwind came
out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a
brightness was about it, and from the midst of it as the color of amber,
from the midst of the fire.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Also from the midst of it came the likeness
of four living creatures. And this was their appearance; they had the
likeness of a man.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And every one had four faces, and every one
had four wings.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And their feet were straight feet; and the
sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot: and they sparkled
like the color of burnished brass.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And they had the hands of a man under their
wings on their four sides; and they four had their faces and their
wings.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Their wings were joined one to another;
they turned not when they went; they went every one straight forward.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> As for the likeness of their faces, they
four had the face of a man and the face of a lion, on the right side:
and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; they four also had
the face of an eagle.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Thus were their faces: and their wings
were stretched upward; two wings of every one were joined one to
another, and two covered their bodies.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And they went every one straight forward:
whither the spirit was to go, they went; and they turned not when they
went.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> As for the likeness of the living
creatures, their appearance was like burning coals of fire, and like the
appearance of lamps: it went up and down among the living creatures; and
the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the living creatures ran and returned
as the appearance of a flash of lightning.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Now as I beheld the living creatures,
behold one wheel upon the earth by the living creatures, with his four
faces.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The appearance of the wheels and their
work was like the color of a beryl: and they four had one likeness: and
their appearance and their work was as it were a wheel in the middle of
a wheel.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> When they went, they went upon their four
sides: and they returned not when they went.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> As for their rings, they were so high
that they were dreadful; and their rings were full of eyes around them
four.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And when the living creatures went, the
wheels went by them: and when the living creatures were lifted up from
the earth, the wheels were lifted up.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they
went, thither was their spirit to go; and the wheels were lifted up over
against them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> When those went, these went; and when
those stood, these stood; and when those were lifted up from the earth,
the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the spirit of the
living creature was in the wheels.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And the likeness of the firmament upon
the heads of the living creature was as the color of the terrible
crystal, stretched forth over their heads above.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And under the firmament were their wings
straight, the one towards the other: every one had two, which covered on
this side, and every one had two, which covered on that side, their
bodies.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And when they went, I heard the noise of
their wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice of the
Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of a host: when they stood,
they let down their wings.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And there was a voice from the firmament
that was over their heads, when they stood, and had let down their
wings.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And above the firmament that was over
their heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a
sapphire stone: and upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness as
the appearance of a man above upon it.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And I saw as the color of amber, as the
appearance of fire around within it, from the appearance of his loins
even upward, and from the appearance of his loins even downward, I saw
as it were the appearance of fire, and it had brightness on all sides.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> As the appearance of the bow that is in
the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness
around. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the
LORD. And when I saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one
speaking.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And he said to me, Son of man, stand upon
thy feet, and I will speak to thee.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the spirit entered into me when he
spoke to me, and set me upon my feet, that I heard him that spoke to me.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And he said to me, Son of man, I send thee
to the children of Israel, to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled
against me: they and their fathers have transgressed against me: even to
this very day.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For they are impudent children and
obstinate in heart. I send thee to them; and thou shalt say to them,
Thus saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And they, whether they will hear, or
whether they will forbear, (for they are a rebellious house,) yet shall
know that there hath been a prophet among them.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And thou, son of man, be not afraid of
them, neither be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns are
with thee, and thou dost dwell among scorpions: be not afraid of their
words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they are a rebellious
house.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And thou shalt speak my words to them,
whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear: for they are most
rebellious.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But thou, son of man, hear what I say to
thee; Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house: open thy mouth,
and eat that which I give thee.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And when I looked, behold, a hand was sent
to me; and lo, a roll of a book was in it;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And he spread it before me: and it was
written within and without: and there was written in it lamentations,
and mourning, and woe.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Moreover he said to me, Son of man, eat
what thou findest; eat this roll, and go, speak to the house of Israel.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to
eat that roll.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he said to me, Son of man, cause thy
belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then
did I eat it; and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he said to me, Son of man, depart, go
to the house of Israel, and speak with my words to them.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For thou art not sent to a people of a
strange speech and of a hard language, but to the house of Israel;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Not to many people of a strange speech and
of a hard language, whose words thou canst not understand. Surely, had I
sent thee to them, they would have hearkened to thee.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But the house of Israel will not hearken to
thee; for they will not hearken to me: for all the house of Israel are
impudent and hard-hearted.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Behold, I have made thy face strong against
their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> As an adamant harder than flint have I made
thy forehead: fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though
they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Moreover he said to me, Son of man, all
my words that I shall speak to thee receive in thy heart, and hear with
thy ears.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And depart, go to them of the captivity,
to the children of thy people, and speak to them, and tell them, Thus
saith the Lord GOD; whether they will hear, or whether they will
forbear.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Then the spirit took me up, and I heard
behind me a voice of a great rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of
the LORD from his place.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> I heard also the noise of the wings of
the living creatures that touched one another, and the noise of the
wheels over against them, and the noise of a great rushing.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> So the spirit lifted me up, and took me
away, and I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; but the hand
of the LORD was strong upon me.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Then I came to them of the captivity at
Tel-abib, that dwelt by the river of Kebar, and I sat where they sat,
and remained there astonished among them seven days.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And it came to pass at the end of seven
days, that the word of the LORD came to me, saying,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Son of man, I have made thee a watchman
to the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give
them warning from me.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> When I say to the wicked, Thou shalt
surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the
wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall
die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thy hand.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Yet if thou shalt warn the wicked, and he
shall not turn from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall
die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Again, When a righteous man doth turn
from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling-block
before him, he shall die: because thou hast not given him warning, he
shall die in his sin, and his righteousness which he hath done shall not
be remembered; but his blood will I require at thy hand.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Nevertheless if thou shalt warn the
righteous man, that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall
surely live, because he is warned; also thou hast delivered thy soul.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the hand of the LORD was there upon
me; and he said to me, Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there
talk with thee.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then I arose, and went forth into the
plain; and behold, the glory of the LORD stood there, as the glory which
I saw by the river of Kebar: and I fell on my face.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Then the spirit entered into me, and set
me upon my feet, and spoke with me, and said to me, Go, shut thyself
within thy house.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> But thou, O son of man, behold, they
shall put bands upon thee, and shall bind thee with them, and thou shalt
not go out among them:

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And I will make thy tongue cleave to the
roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a
reprover: for they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> But when I speak with thee, I will open
thy mouth, and thou shalt say to them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; He that
heareth, let him hear; and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for they
are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile,
and lay it before thee, and pourtray upon it the city, even Jerusalem;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And lay siege against it, and build a fort
against it, and cast a mount against it; set the camp also against it,
and set battering rams against it on every side.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Moreover take thou to thee an iron pan, and
set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city: and set thy face
against it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against
it. This shall be a sign to the house of Israel.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Lie thou also upon thy left side, and lay
the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it: according to the number of
the days that thou shalt lie upon it thou shalt bear their iniquity.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For I have laid upon thee the years of
their iniquity, according to the number of the days, three hundred and
ninety days: so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And when thou hast accomplished them, lie
again on thy right side, and thou shalt bear the iniquity of the house
of Judah forty days: I have appointed thee each day for a year.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Therefore thou shalt set thy face towards
the siege of Jerusalem, and thy arm shall be uncovered, and thou shalt
prophesy against it.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And behold, I will lay bands upon thee, and
thou shalt not turn thee from one side to another, till thou hast ended
the days of thy siege.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Take thou also to thee wheat, and barley,
and beans, and lentils, and millet, and fitches, and put them in one
vessel, and make thee bread thereof, according to the number of the days
that thou shalt lie upon thy side, three hundred and ninety days shalt
thou eat of it.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And thy food which thou shalt eat shall
be by weight, twenty shekels a day: from time to time shalt thou eat it.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Thou shalt drink also water by measure,
the sixth part of a hin: from time to time shalt thou drink.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes,
and thou shalt bake it with human excrement in their sight.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And the LORD said, Even thus shall the
children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I
will drive them.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! behold, my soul
hath not been polluted: for from my youth even till now have I not eaten
of that which dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; neither hath
abominable flesh come into my mouth.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Then he said to me, Lo, I have given thee
cow's dung for man's dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread with them.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Moreover he said to me, Son of man,
behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat
bread by weight, and with care; and they shall drink water by measure,
and with astonishment.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> That they may want bread and water, and
be astonished one with another, and consume away for their iniquity.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp
knife, take thee a barber's razor, and cause it to pass upon thy head
and upon thy beard: then take to thee balances to weigh, and divide the
hair.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Thou shalt burn with fire a third part in
the midst of the city, when the days of the siege are fulfilled: and
thou shalt take a third part, and smite about it with a knife: and a
third part thou shalt scatter in the wind; and I will draw out a sword
after them.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Thou shalt also take of them a few in
number, and bind them in thy skirts.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Then take of them again, and cast them into
the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire: from which a fire
shall come forth into all the house of Israel.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; This is Jerusalem:
I have set it in the midst of the nations and countries that are around
her.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And she hath changed my judgments into
wickedness more than the nations, and my statutes more than the
countries that are around her: for they have refused my judgments and my
statutes, they have not walked in them.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because
ye multiplied more than the nations that are around you, and have not
walked in my statutes, neither have kept my judgments, neither have done
according to the judgments of the nations that are around you:

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold,
I, even I, am against thee, and will execute judgments in the midst of
thee in the sight of the nations.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And I will do in thee that which I have not
done, and the like to which I will not do any more, because of all thy
abominations.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons
in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will
execute judgments in thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter
into all the winds.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD;
Surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable
things, and with all thy abominations, therefore I will also diminish
thee; neither shall my eye spare, neither will I have any pity.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> A third part of thee shall die with the
pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee:
and a third part shall fall by the sword around thee; and I will scatter
a third part into all the winds, and I will draw out a sword after them.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Thus shall my anger be accomplished, and
I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted: and
they shall know that I the LORD have spoken it in my zeal, when I have
accomplished my fury in them.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Moreover I will make thee waste, and a
reproach among the nations that are around thee, in the sight of all
that pass by.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, an
instruction and an astonishment to the nations that are around thee,
when I shall execute judgments in thee in anger and in fury and in
furious rebukes. I the LORD have spoken it.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> When I shall send upon them the evil
arrows of famine, which shall be for their destruction, and which I will
send to destroy you: and I will increase the famine upon you, and will
break your staff of bread:

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> So will I send upon you famine and evil
beasts, and they shall bereave thee; and pestilence and blood shall pass
through thee; and I will bring the sword upon thee. I the LORD have
spoken it.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Son of man, set thy face towards the
mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the
word of the Lord GOD: Thus saith the Lord GOD to the mountains, and to
the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys; Behold, I, even I, will
bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high places.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And your altars shall be desolate, and your
images shall be broken: and I will cast down your slain men before your
idols.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And I will lay the dead carcasses of the
children of Israel before their idols; and I will scatter your bones
about your altars.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> In all your dwelling-places the cities
shall be laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate; that your
altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken
and cease, and your images may be cut down, and your works may be
abolished.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the slain shall fall in the midst of
you, and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may
have some that shall escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall
be scattered through the countries.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And they that escape of you shall remember
me among the nations whither they shall be carried captives, because I
am broken with their apostate heart, which hath departed from me, and
with their eyes which go astray after their idols: and they shall lothe
themselves for the evils which they have committed in all their
abominations.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And they shall know that I am the LORD,
and that I have not said in vain that I would do this evil to them.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Smite with thy
hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas, for all the evil
abominations of the house of Israel! for they shall fall by the sword,
by the famine, and by the pestilence.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> He that is far off shall die by the
pestilence; and he that is near shall fall by the sword; and he that
remaineth and is besieged shall die by the famine: thus will I
accomplish my fury upon them.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Then shall ye know that I am the LORD,
when their slain men shall be among their idols round about their
altars, upon every high hill, on all the tops of the mountains, and
under every green tree, and under every thick oak, the place where they
offered sweet savor to all their idols.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> So will I stretch out my hand upon them,
and make the land desolate, even, more desolate than the wilderness
towards Diblath, in all their habitations: and they shall know that I am
the LORD.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Also, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord
GOD to the land of Israel; An end, the end is come upon the four corners
of the land.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Now is the end come upon thee, and I will
send my anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and
will recompense upon thee all thy abominations.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And my eye shall not spare thee, neither
will I have pity: but I will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thy
abominations shall be in the midst of thee: and ye shall know that I am
the LORD.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; An evil, an only
evil, behold, is come.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> An end is come, the end is come: it
watcheth for thee; behold, it is come.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> The morning is come upon thee, O thou that
dwellest in the land: the time is come, the day of trouble is near, and
not the sounding again of the mountains.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon
thee, and accomplish my anger upon thee: and I will judge thee according
to thy ways, and will recompense thee for all thy abominations.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And my eye shall not spare, neither will I
have pity: I will recompense thee according to thy ways and thy
abominations that are in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am
the LORD that smiteth.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Behold the day, behold, it is come; the
morning is gone forth; the rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Violence hath risen into a rod of
wickedness: none of them shall remain, nor of their multitude, nor of
any of theirs: neither shall there be wailing for them.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> The time is come, the day draweth near:
let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn: for wrath is upon all
the multitude thereof.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> For the seller shall not return to that
which is sold, although they were yet alive: for the vision is
concerning the whole multitude thereof, which shall not return; neither
shall any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> They have blown the trumpet, even to make
all ready; but none goeth to the battle: for my wrath is upon all the
multitude thereof:

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> The sword is without, and the pestilence
and the famine within: he that is in the field shall die with the sword;
and he that is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> But they that escape of them shall
escape, and shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of
them mourning, every one for his iniquity.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> All hands shall be feeble, and all knees
shall be weak as water.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> They shall also gird themselves with
sackcloth, and horror shall cover them; and shame shall be upon all
faces, and baldness upon all their heads.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> They shall cast their silver in the
streets, and their gold shall be removed: their silver and their gold
shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the LORD:
they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels because it
is the stumbling-block of their iniquity.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> As for the beauty of his ornament, he set
it in majesty: but they made the images of their abominations and of
their detestable things therein: therefore have I set it far from them.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And I will give it into the hands of the
strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and
they shall pollute it.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> My face will I turn also from them, and
they shall pollute my secret place: for the robbers shall enter into it,
and defile it.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Make a chain: for the land is full of
bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Wherefore I will bring the worst of the
heathen, and they shall possess their houses: I will also make the pomp
of the strong to cease, and their holy places shall be defiled.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Destruction cometh; and they shall seek
peace, and there shall be none.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Mischief shall come upon mischief, and
rumor shall be upon rumor; then shall they seek a vision of the prophet;
but the law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the elders.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> The king shall mourn, and the prince
shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of the
land shall be troubled: I will do to them after their way, and according
to their deserts will I judge them, and they shall know that I am the
LORD.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And it came to pass in the sixth year, in
the sixth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I sat in my house,
and the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand of the Lord GOD
fell there upon me.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Then I beheld, and lo a likeness as the
appearance of fire: from the appearance of his loins even downward,
fire; and from his loins even upward, as the appearance of brightness,
as the color of amber.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And he put forth the form of a hand, and
took me by a lock of my head; and the spirit lifted me up between the
earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem,
to the door of the inner gate that looketh towards the north; where was
the seat of the image of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And behold, the glory of the God of Israel
was there, according to the vision that I saw in the plain.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Then said he to me, Son of man, lift up thy
eyes now the way towards the north. So I lifted up my eyes the way
towards the north, and behold northward at the gate of the altar this
image of jealousy in the entry.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> He said furthermore to me, Son of man,
seest thou what they do? even the great abominations that the house of
Israel committeth here, that I should withdraw from my sanctuary? but
turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And he brought me to the door of the court;
and when I looked, behold a hole in the wall.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Then said he to me, Son of man, dig now in
the wall: and when I had digged in the wall, behold a door.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And he said to me, Go in, and behold the
wicked abominations that they do here.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> So I went in and saw; and behold every
form of creeping animals, and abominable beasts, and all the idols of
the house of Israel, portrayed around upon the wall.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And there stood before them seventy men
of the elders of the house of Israel, and in the midst of them stood
Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, with every man his censer in his hand; and
a thick cloud of incense went up.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Then said he to me, Son of man, hast thou
seen what the elders of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in
the chambers of his imagery? for they say, The LORD seeth us not; the
LORD hath forsaken the earth.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> He said also to me, Turn thee yet again,
and thou shalt see greater abominations that they do.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Then he brought me to the door of the
gate of the LORD'S house which was towards the north; and behold, there
sat women weeping for Tammuz.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Then said he to me, Hast thou seen this,
O son of man? turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater
abominations than these.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And he brought me into the inner court of
the LORD'S house, and behold, at the door of the temple of the LORD,
between the porch and the altar, were about five and twenty men, with
their backs towards the temple of the LORD, and their faces towards the
east; and they worshiped the sun towards the east.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then he said to me, Hast thou seen this,
O son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that they commit
the abominations which they commit here? for they have filled the land
with violence, and have returned to provoke me to anger: and lo, they
put the branch to their nose.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Therefore will I also deal in fury: my
eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: and though they cry in my
ears with a loud voice, yet I will not hear them.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> He cried also in my ears with a loud voice,
saying, Cause them that have charge over the city to draw near, even
every man with his destroying weapon in his hand.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And behold, six men came from the way of
the higher gate, which lieth towards the north, and every man a
slaughter-weapon in his hand; and one man among them was clothed with
linen, with a writer's inkhorn by his side: and they went in and stood
beside the brazen altar.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And the glory of the God of Israel had gone
up from the cherub on which he was, to the threshhold of the house. And
he called to the man clothed with linen, who had the writer's inkhorn by
his side;

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And the LORD said to him, Go through the
midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon
the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations
that are done in the midst of it.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And to the others he said in my hearing, Go
ye after him through the city, and smite: let not your eye spare,
neither have ye pity:

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Slay utterly old and young, both maids, and
little children, and women: but come not near any man upon whom is the
mark; and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the elderly men who
were before the house.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And he said to them, Defile the house, and
fill the courts with the slain: go ye forth. And they went forth, and
slew in the city.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And it came to pass, while they were
slaying them, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cried, and
said, Ah Lord GOD! wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israel in thy
pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Then said he to me, The iniquity of the
house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, and the land is full of
blood, and the city full of perverseness: for they say, The LORD hath
forsaken the earth, and the LORD seeth not.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And as for me also, my eye shall not
spare, neither will I have pity, but I will recompense their way upon
their head.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And behold, the man clothed with linen,
who had the inkhorn by his side, reported the matter, saying, I have
done as thou hast commanded me.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Then I looked, and behold, in the
firmament that was above the head of the cherubim there appeared over
them as it were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a
throne.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And he spoke to the man clothed with
linen, and said, Go in between the wheels, even under the cherub, and
fill thy hand with coals of fire from between the cherubim, and scatter
them over the city. And he entered in my sight.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Now the cherubim stood on the right side
of the house, when the man went in; and the cloud filled the inner
court.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Then the glory of the LORD went up from
the cherub, and stood over the threshhold of the house; and the house
was filled with the cloud, and the court was full of the brightness of
the LORD'S glory.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And the sound of the cherubim's wings was
heard even to the outer court, as the voice of the Almighty God when he
speaketh.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And it came to pass, that when he had
commanded the man clothed with linen, saying, Take fire from between the
wheels, from between the cherubim; then he went in, and stood beside the
wheels.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And one cherub stretched forth his hand
from between the cherubim, to the fire that was between the cherubim,
and took of it, and put it into the hands of him that was clothed with
linen: who took it, and went out.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And there appeared in the cherubim the
form of a man's hand under their wings.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And when I looked, behold the four wheels
by the cherubim, one wheel by one cherub, and another wheel by another
cherub: and the appearance of the wheels was as the color of a beryl
stone.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And as for their appearances, they four
had one likeness, as if a wheel had been in the midst of a wheel.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> When they went, they went upon their
four sides; they turned not as they went, but to the place whither the
head looked, they followed it; they turned not as they went.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And their whole body, and their backs,
and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes on
every side, even the wheels that they four had.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> As for the wheels, it was cried to them
in my hearing, O wheel.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And every one had four faces: the first
face was the face of a cherub, and the second face was the face of a
man, and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an
eagle.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the cherubim were lifted up. This
is the living creature that I saw by the river of Kebar.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And when the cherubim went, the wheels
went by them: and when the cherubim lifted up their wings to mount up
from the earth, the same wheels also turned not from beside them.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> When they stood, these stood; and when
they were lifted up, these lifted up themselves also: for the spirit of
the living creature was in them.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Then the glory of the LORD departed
from off the threshhold of the house, and stood over the cherubim.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And the cherubim lifted up their wings,
and mounted up from the earth in my sight: when they went out, the
wheels also were beside them, and every one stood at the door of the
east-gate of the LORD'S house; and the glory of the God of Israel was
over them above.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> This is the living creature that I saw
under the God of Israel by the river of Kebar; and I knew that they were
the cherubim.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Every one had four faces each, and
every one four wings; and the likeness of the hands of a man was under
their wings.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And the likeness of their faces was the
same faces which I saw by the river of Kebar, their appearances and
themselves: they went every one straight forward.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Moreover the spirit lifted me up, and
brought me to the east-gate of the LORD'S house, which looketh eastward:
and behold, at the door of the gate five and twenty men; among whom I
saw Jaazaniah the son of Azur, and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, princes
of the people.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Then said he to me, Son of man, these are
the men that devise mischief, and give wicked counsel in this city:

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Who say, It is not near; let us build
houses: this city is the caldron, and we are the flesh.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Therefore prophesy against them,
prophesy, O son of man.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And the spirit of the LORD fell upon me,
and said to me, Speak; Thus saith the LORD; Thus have ye said, O house
of Israel: for I know the things that come into your mind, every one of
them.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Ye have multiplied your slain in this
city, and ye have filled its streets with the slain.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Your
slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this
city is the caldron: but I will bring you forth out of the midst of it.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Ye have feared the sword; and I will
bring a sword upon you, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And I will bring you out of the midst of
it, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and will execute
judgments among you.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Ye shall fall by the sword; I will
judge you in the border of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> This city shall not be your caldron,
neither shall ye be the flesh in the midst of it; but I will judge you
in the border of Israel:

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And ye shall know that I am the LORD:
for ye have not walked in my statutes, neither executed my judgments,
but have done after the manners of the heathen that are around you.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And it came to pass, when I prophesied,
that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then I fell down upon my face,
and cried with a loud voice, and said, Ah Lord GOD! wilt thou make a
full end of the remnant of Israel?

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Again the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Son of man, thy brethren, even thy
brethren, the men of thy kindred, and all the house of Israel wholly,
are they to whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Retire far from
the LORD: to us is this land given in possession.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Although I have cast them far off among the heathen, and although I have
scattered them among the countries, yet will I be to them as a little
sanctuary in the countries where they shall come.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
I will even gather you from the people, and assemble you out of the
countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of
Israel.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And they shall come thither, and they
shall take away from thence all its detestable things, and all its
abominations.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And I will give them one heart, and I
will put a new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of
their flesh, and will give them a heart of flesh:

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> That they may walk in my statutes, and
keep my ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and I will
be their God.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> But as for them whose heart walketh
after the heart of their detestable things and their abominations, I
will recompense their way upon their own heads, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Then the cherubim raised their wings,
and the wheels beside them; and the glory of the God of Israel was over
them above.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And the glory of the LORD went up from
the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which is on the east
side of the city.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Afterwards the spirit took me up, and
brought me in vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of the
captivity. So the vision that I had seen went up from me.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Then I spoke to them of the captivity
all the things that the LORD had shown me.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> The word of the LORD also came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of
a rebellious house, who have eyes to see, and see not; they have ears to
hear, and hear not: for they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee
stuff for removing, and remove by day in their sight; and thou shalt
remove from thy place to another place in their sight; it may be they
will consider, though they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Then shalt thou bring forth thy stuff by
day in their sight, as stuff for removing: and thou shalt go forth at
evening in their sight, as they that go forth into captivity.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Dig thou through the wall in their sight,
and carry out thereby.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> In their sight shalt thou bear it upon
thy shoulders, and carry it forth in the twilight: thou shalt cover thy
face, that thou mayest not see the ground: for I have set thee for a
sign to the house of Israel.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And I did so as I was commanded: I
brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for captivity, and in the
evening I digged through the wall with my hand; I brought it forth in
the twilight, and I bore it upon my shoulder in their sight.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And in the morning came the word of the
LORD to me, saying,

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Son of man, hath not the house of Israel,
the rebellious house, said to thee, What doest thou?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Say thou to them, Thus saith the Lord
GOD, This burden concerneth the prince in Jerusalem, and all the house
of Israel that are among them.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Say, I am your sign: as I have done, so
shall it be done to them: they shall remove and go into captivity.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And the prince that is among them shall
bear upon his shoulder in the twilight, and shall go forth: they shall
dig through the wall to carry out thereby: he shall cover his face, that
he may not see the ground with his eyes.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> My net also will I spread upon him, and
he shall be taken in my snare: and I will bring him to Babylon to the
land of the Chaldeans, yet shall he not see it, though he shall die
there.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And I will scatter towards every wind
all that are about him to help him, and all his bands; and I will draw
out the sword after them.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And they shall know that I am the LORD,
when I shall scatter them among the nations, and disperse them in the
countries.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But I will leave a few men of them from
the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; that they may
declare all their abominations among the heathen whither they come; and
they shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to
me, saying,

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking,
and drink thy water with trembling and with solicitude.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And say to the people of the land, Thus
saith the Lord GOD of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the land of
Israel; They shall eat their bread with solicitude, and drink their
water with astonishment, that her land may be desolate from all that is
therein, because of the violence of all them that dwell therein.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And the cities that are inhabited shall
be laid waste, and the land shall be desolate; and ye shall know that I
am the LORD.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Son of man, what is that proverb that
ye have in the land of Israel, saying, The days are prolonged, and every
vision faileth?

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Tell them therefore, Thus saith the
Lord GOD: I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more use
it as a proverb in Israel; but say to them, The days are at hand, and
the effect of every vision.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> For there shall no more be any vain
vision nor flattering divination within the house of Israel.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> For I am the LORD: I will speak, and
the word that I shall speak shall come to pass; it shall no more be
prolonged: for in your days, O rebellious house, will I say the word,
and will perform it, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> Again the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Son of man, behold, they of the house
of Israel say, The vision that he seeth is for many days to come, and he
prophesieth of the times that are distant.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Therefore say to them, Thus saith the
Lord GOD; There shall none of my words be further deferred, but the word
which I have spoken shall be done, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Son of man, prophesy against the prophets
of Israel that prophesy, and say thou to them that prophesy out of their
own hearts, Hear ye the word of the LORD;

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the
foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> O Israel, thy prophets are like the foxes
in the deserts.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Ye have not gone up into the gaps,
neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel to stand in the battle
in the day of the LORD.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> They have seen vanity and lying
divination, saying, The LORD saith: and the LORD hath not sent them: and
they have made others to hope that they would confirm the word.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Have ye not seen a vain vision, and have
ye not spoken a lying divination, whereas ye say, The LORD saith it,
although I have not spoken?

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Because ye have spoken vanity, and seen lies, therefore, behold, I am
against you, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And my hand shall be upon the prophets
that see vanity, and that divine lies: they shall not be in the assembly
of my people, neither shall they be written in the writing of the house
of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel; and ye
shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Because, even because they have seduced
my people, saying, Peace; and there was no peace; and one built up a
wall, and lo, others daubed it with untempered mortar:

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Say to them who daub it with untempered
mortar, that it shall fall: there shall be an overflowing shower; and
ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy wind shall rend it.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Lo, when the wall hath fallen, shall it
not be said to you, Where is the daubing with which ye have daubed it?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I
will even rend it with a stormy wind in my fury; and there shall be an
overflowing shower in my anger, and great hailstones in my fury to
consume it.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> So will I break down the wall that ye
have daubed with untempered mortar, and bring it down to the ground, so
that its foundation shall be made bare, and it shall fall, and ye shall
be consumed in the midst of it: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon
the wall, and upon them that have daubed it with untempered mortar, and
will say to you, The wall is no more, neither they that daubed it;

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> To wit, the prophets of Israel who
prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and who see visions of peace for her, and
there is no peace, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Likewise, thou son of man, set thy face
against the daughters of thy people, who prophesy out of their own
heart; and prophesy thou against them,

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe
to the women that sew pillows to all arm-holes, and make kerchiefs upon
the head of every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of my
people, and will ye save the souls alive that come to you?

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And will ye profane me among my people
for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to slay the souls that
should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by
your lying to my people that hear your lies?

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I am against your pillows, with which ye there hunt the souls to
make them fly, and I will tear them from your arms, and will let the
souls go, even the souls that ye hunt to make them fly.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and
deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall no more be in your
hand to be hunted; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Because with lies ye have made the
heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened
the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way,
by promising him life:

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Therefore ye shall see no more vanity,
nor divine divinations: for I will deliver my people out of your hand:
and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Then came certain of the elders of Israel
to me, and sat before me.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Son of man, these men have set up their
idols in their heart, and put the stumbling-block of their iniquity
before their face: should I be inquired of at all by them?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Therefore speak to them, and say to them,
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Every man of the house of Israel that setteth
up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumbling-block of his
iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet; I the LORD will
answer him that cometh according to the multitude of his idols;

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> That I may take the house of Israel in
their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their
idols.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Therefore say to the house of Israel,
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Repent, and turn yourselves from your idols;
and turn away your faces from all your abominations.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For every one of the house of Israel, or
of the stranger that sojourneth in Israel, who separateth himself from
me, and setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the
stumbling-block of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to a prophet
to inquire of him concerning me; I the LORD will answer him by myself:

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And I will set my face against that man,
and will make him a sign and a proverb, and I will cut him off from the
midst of my people; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And if the prophet be deceived when he
hath spoken a thing, I the LORD have deceived that prophet, and I will
stretch out my hand upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of my
people Israel.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And they shall bear the punishment of
their iniquity: the punishment of the prophet shall be even as the
punishment of him that seeketh to him;

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> That the house of Israel may no more go
astray from me, neither be polluted any more with all their
transgressions; but that they may be my people, and I may be their God,
saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> The word of the LORD came again to me,
saying,

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Son of man, when the land sinneth
against me by trespassing grievously, then will I stretch out my hand
upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof, and will send
famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast from it:

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Though these three men, Noah, Daniel,
and Job, were in it, they should deliver their own souls only by their
righteousness, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> If I cause noisome beasts to pass
through the land, and they lay it waste, so that it be desolate, that no
man may pass through because of the beasts:

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Though these three men were in it, as I
live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters;
they only shall be delivered, but the land shall be desolate.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Or if I bring a sword upon that land,
and say, Sword, go through the land; so that I cut off man and beast
from it:

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> Though these three men were in it, as I
live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters,
but they only shall be delivered themselves.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Or if I send a pestilence into that
land, and pour out my fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and
beast:

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Though Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in
it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither son nor
daughter; they shall deliver their own souls only by their
righteousness.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> For thus saith the Lord GOD; How much
more when I send my four severe judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword, and
the famine, and the noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from
it man and beast?

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Yet behold, therein shall be left a
remnant that shall be brought forth, both sons and daughters: behold,
they shall come forth to you, and ye shall see their way and their
doings: and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have
brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all that I have brought upon it.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And they shall comfort you, when ye see
their ways and their doings: and ye shall know that I have not done
without cause all that I have done in it, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Son of man, What is the vine-tree more
than any tree, or than a branch which is among the trees of the forest?

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Shall wood be taken of it to do any work?
or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel upon it?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Behold, it is cast into the fire for
fuel; the fire devoureth both the ends of it, and the midst of it is
burned. Is it suitable for any work?

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Behold, when it was whole, it was fit for
no work: how much less then shall it be fit for any work, when the fire
hath devoured it, and it is burned?

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; As the
vine-tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire
for fuel, so will I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And I will set my face against them; they
shall go out from one fire, and another fire shall devour them; and ye
shall know that I am the LORD, when I set my face against them.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And I will make the land desolate,
because they have committed a trespass, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Again the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her
abominations,

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD to
Jerusalem; Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan; thy
father was an Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And as for thy nativity, in the day thou
wast born thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to
supple thee; thou wast not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> No eye pitied thee, to do any of these to
thee, to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open
field, to the lothing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And when I passed by thee, and saw thee
polluted in thy own blood, I said to thee when thou wast in thy blood,
Live; yes, I said to thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> I have caused thee to multiply as the bud
of the field, and thou hast increased and become great, and thou art
come to excellent ornaments: thy breasts are fashioned, and thy hair is
grown, whereas thou wast naked and bare.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Now when I passed by thee, and looked
upon thee, behold, thy time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt
over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yes, I swore to thee, and entered
into a covenant with thee, saith the Lord GOD, and thou becamest mine.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Then I washed thee with water; yes, I
thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with
oil.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> I clothed thee also with broidered
work, and shod thee with badgers' skin, and I girded thee with fine
linen, and I covered thee with silk.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> I decked thee also with ornaments, and
I put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And I put a jewel on thy forehead, and
ear-rings in thy ears, and a beautiful crown upon thy head.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Thus wast thou decked with gold and
silver; and thy raiment was of fine linen, and silk, and broidered work;
thou didst eat fine flour, and honey, and oil: and thou wast exceeding
beautiful, and thou didst prosper into a kingdom.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And thy renown went forth among the
heathen for thy beauty: for it was perfect through my comeliness, which
I had put upon thee, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> But thou didst trust in thy own beauty,
and playedst the harlot because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy
fornications on every one that passed by; his it was.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And of thy garments thou didst take,
and deck thy high places with divers colors, and play the harlot upon
them: the like things shall not come, neither shall it be so.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of
my gold and of my silver, which I had given thee, and hast made to
thyself images of men, and hast committed lewdness with them.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And hast taken thy broidered garments,
and covered them: and thou hast set my oil and my incense before them.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> My provisions also which I gave thee,
fine flour, and oil, and honey, with which I fed thee, thou hast even
set before them for a sweet savor: and thus it was, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and
thy daughters, whom thou hast borne to me, and these hast thou
sacrificed to them to be devoured. Is this of thy lewdness a small
matter,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> That thou hast slain my children, and
delivered them to cause them to pass through the fire for them?

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And in all thy abominations and thy
deeds of lewdness thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when
thou wast naked and bare, and wast polluted in thy blood.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And it came to pass after all thy
wickedness, (woe, woe to thee! saith the Lord GOD;)

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> That thou hast also built to thee an
eminent place, and hast made thee a high place in every street.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> Thou hast built thy high place at every
head of the way, and hast made thy beauty to be abhorred, and hast
prostituted thyself to every one that passed by, and multiplied thy lewd
deeds.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> Thou hast also committed fornication
with the Egyptians thy neighbors, great of flesh; and hast multiplied
thy lewd deeds, to provoke me to anger.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> Behold, therefore I have stretched out
my hand over thee, and have diminished thy ordinary food, and delivered
thee to the will of them that hate thee, the daughters of the
Philistines, who are ashamed of thy lewd way.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> Thou hast played the harlot also with
the Assyrians, because thou wast insatiable; yes, thou hast played the
harlot with them, and yet couldst not be satisfied.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> Thou hast moreover multiplied thy
fornication in the land of Canaan to Chaldea; and yet with this thou
wast not satisfied.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> How weak is thy heart, saith the Lord
GOD, seeing thou doest all these things, the work of an imperious lewd
woman;

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> In that thou buildest thy eminent place
in the head of every way, and makest thy high place in every street; and
hast not been as a harlot, in that thou scornest hire;

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> But as a wife that committeth adultery,
who taketh strangers instead of her husband!

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> They give gifts to all lewd women: but
thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hirest them, that they may
come to thee on every side for thy lewdness.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> And the contrary is in thee from other
women in thy unlawful commerce, whereas none followeth thee to commit
lewdness: and in that thou givest a reward, and no reward is given to
thee, therefore thou art contrary.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of
the LORD:

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thy
filthiness was poured out, and thy nakedness exposed through thy carnal
connection with thy lovers, and with all the idols of thy abominations,
and by the blood of thy children, which thou didst give to them;

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> Behold therefore, I will gather all thy
lovers, with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all them that thou hast
loved, with all them that thou hast hated; I will even gather them on
every side against thee, and will uncover thy nakedness to them, that
they may see all thy nakedness.

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> And I will judge thee, as women that
break wedlock and shed blood are judged; and I will give thee blood in
fury and jealousy.

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> And I will also give thee into their
hand, and they shall throw down thy eminent place, and shall break down
thy high places: they shall strip thee also of thy clothes, and shall
take thy fair jewels, and leave thee naked and bare.

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> They shall also bring up a company
against thee, and they shall stone thee with stones, and thrust thee
through with their swords.

<span id="an_16:41">16:41</span> And they shall burn thy houses with
fire, and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women: and I
will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou also shalt
give no hire any more.

<span id="an_16:42">16:42</span> So will I make my fury towards thee to
rest, and my jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and
will be no more angry.

<span id="an_16:43">16:43</span> Because thou hast not remembered the
days of thy youth, but hast provoked me in all these things; behold
therefore, I also will recompense thy way upon thy head, saith the Lord
GOD: and thou shalt not commit this lewdness above all thy abominations.

<span id="an_16:44">16:44</span> Behold, every one that useth proverbs
shall use this proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her
daughter.

<span id="an_16:45">16:45</span> Thou art thy mother's daughter, that
lotheth her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of thy
sisters, who lothed their husbands and their children: your mother was a
Hittite, and your father an Amorite.

<span id="an_16:46">16:46</span> And thy elder sister is Samaria, she
and her daughters that dwell at thy left hand: and thy younger sister,
that dwelleth at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.

<span id="an_16:47">16:47</span> Yet hast thou not walked after their
ways, nor done after their abominations: but as if that were a very
little thing, thou wast corrupted more than they in all thy ways.

<span id="an_16:48">16:48</span> As I live, saith the Lord GOD, Sodom
thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou
and thy daughters.

<span id="an_16:49">16:49</span> Behold, this was the iniquity of thy
sister Sodom, pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in
her and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the
poor and needy.

<span id="an_16:50">16:50</span> And they were haughty, and committed
abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw good.

<span id="an_16:51">16:51</span> Neither hath Samaria committed half of
thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thy abominations more than they, and
hast justified thy sisters in all thy abominations which thou hast done.

<span id="an_16:52">16:52</span> Thou also, who hast judged thy sisters,
bear thy own shame for thy sins that thou hast committed more abominable
than they: they are more righteous than thou: yes, be thou confounded
also, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters.

<span id="an_16:53">16:53</span> When I shall bring again their
captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity
of Samaria and her daughters, then will I bring again the captivity of
thy captives in the midst of them:

<span id="an_16:54">16:54</span> That thou mayest bear thy own shame,
and mayest be confounded in all that thou hast done, in that thou art a
comfort to them.

<span id="an_16:55">16:55</span> When thy sisters, Sodom and her
daughters, shall return to their former state, and Samaria and her
daughters shall return to their former state, then thou and thy
daughters shall return to your former state.

<span id="an_16:56">16:56</span> For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned
by thy mouth in the day of thy pride,

<span id="an_16:57">16:57</span> Before thy wickedness was disclosed, as
at the time of thy reproach of the daughters of Syria, and all that are
around her, the daughters of the Philistines, who despise thee on every
side.

<span id="an_16:58">16:58</span> Thou hast borne thy lewdness and thy
abominations, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_16:59">16:59</span> For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will
even deal with thee as thou hast done, who hast despised the oath in
breaking the covenant.

<span id="an_16:60">16:60</span> Nevertheless I will remember my
covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish to
thee an everlasting covenant.

<span id="an_16:61">16:61</span> Then thou shalt remember thy ways, and
be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thy elder and thy
younger: and I will give them to thee for daughters, but not by thy
covenant.

<span id="an_16:62">16:62</span> And I will establish my covenant with
thee; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD:

<span id="an_16:63">16:63</span> That thou mayest remember, and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when
I am pacified towards thee for all that thou hast done, saith the Lord
GOD.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak
a parable to the house of Israel;

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; A great
eagle with great wings, long-winged, full of feathers, which had divers
colors, came to Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the cedar:

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> He cropped off the top of its young
twigs, and carried it into a land of traffick; he set it in a city of
merchants.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> He took also of the seed of the land, and
planted it in a fruitful field; he placed it by great waters, and set it
as a willow tree.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And it grew, and became a spreading vine
of low stature, whose branches turned towards him, and its roots were
under him: so it became a vine, and brought forth branches, and shot
forth sprigs.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> There was also another great eagle with
great wings and many feathers: and behold, this vine did bend her roots
towards him, and shot forth her branches towards him, that he might
water it by the furrows of her plantation.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> It was planted in a good soil by great
waters, that it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear
fruit, that it might be a goodly vine.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Say thou, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Shall
it prosper? shall he not pull up its roots, and cut off its fruit, that
it may wither? it shall wither in all the leaves of her spring, even
without great power or many people to pluck it up by its roots.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> Yes, behold, being planted, shall it
prosper? shall it not utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it? it
shall wither in the furrows where it grew.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to
me, saying,

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Say now to the rebellious house, Know
ye not what these things mean? tell them, Behold, the king of Babylon
hath come to Jerusalem, and hath taken its king, and its princes, and
led them with him to Babylon;

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And hath taken of the king's seed, and
made a covenant with him, and hath taken an oath from him: he hath also
taken the mighty of the land:

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> That the kingdom might be base, that it
might not lift itself up, but that by keeping his covenant it might
stand.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> But he rebelled against him in sending
his embassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and many
people. Shall he prosper? shall he escape that doeth such things? or
shall he break the covenant, and be delivered?

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely
in the place where the king dwelleth that made him king, whose oath he
despised, and whose covenant he broke, even with him in the midst of
Babylon he shall die.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty
army and great company make for him in the war, by casting up mounts,
and building forts, to cut off many persons:

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Seeing he despised the oath by breaking
the covenant, when lo, he had given his hand, and hath done all these
things, he shall not escape.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; As I
live, surely my oath that he hath despised, and my covenant that he hath
broken, even that will I recompense upon his own head.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And I will spread my net upon him, and
he shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will
plead with him there for his trespass that he hath trespassed against
me.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> And all his fugitives with all his
bands shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered
towards all winds: and ye shall know that I the LORD have spoken it.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD, I will also
take of the highest branch of the high cedar, and will set it; I will
crop off from the top of its young twigs a tender one, and will plant it
upon a high mountain and eminent:

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> In the mountain of the hight of Israel
will I plant it: and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be
a goodly cedar: and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing; in the
shade of its branches shall they dwell.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And all the trees of the field shall
know that I the LORD have brought down the high tree, have exalted the
low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to
flourish: I the LORD have spoken and have done it.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The word of the LORD came to me again,
saying,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> What mean ye, that ye use this proverb
concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour
grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge?

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> As I live, saith the Lord GOD, ye shall
not have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul
of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that
sinneth, it shall die.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> But if a man is just, and doeth that
which is lawful and right,

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And hath not eaten upon the mountains,
neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel,
neither hath defiled his neighbor's wife, neither hath come near to a
polluted woman,

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And hath not oppressed any, but hath
restored to the debtor his pledge, hath stripped none by violence, hath
given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a
garment:

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> He that hath not given forth upon
interest, neither hath taken any increase, that hath withdrawn his hand
from iniquity, hath executed true judgment between man and man,

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> Hath walked in my statutes, and hath kept
my judgments, to deal truly; he is just, he shall surely live, saith the
Lord GOD.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> If he begetteth a son that is a robber,
a shedder of blood, and that doeth the like to any one of these things,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And that doeth not any of those duties,
but even hath eaten upon the mountains, and defiled his neighbor's wife,

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Hath oppressed the poor and needy, hath
stripped by violence, hath not restored the pledge, and hath lifted up
his eyes to the idols, hath committed abomination.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Hath given forth upon interest, and
hath taken increase: shall he then live? he shall not live: he hath done
all these abominations; he shall surely die; his blood shall be upon
him.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Now lo, if he begetteth a son, that
seeth all his father's sins which he hath done, and considereth, and
doeth not such like,

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> That hath not eaten upon the mountains,
neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel,
hath not defiled his neighbor's wife,

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> Neither hath oppressed any, hath not
withheld the pledge, neither hath stripped by violence, but hath given
his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment,

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> That hath taken off his hand from the
poor, that hath not received interest nor increase, hath executed my
judgments, hath walked in my statutes; he shall not die for the iniquity
of his father, he shall surely live.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> As for his father, because he cruelly
oppressed, stripped his brother by violence, and did that which is not
good among his people, lo, even he shall die in his iniquity.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Yet say ye, Why? doth not the son bear
the iniquity of the father? When the son hath done that which is lawful
and right, and hath kept all my statutes, and hath done them, he shall
surely live.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> The soul that sinneth, it shall die.
The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the
father bear the iniquity of the son: the righteousness of the righteous
shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> But if the wicked will turn from all
his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that
which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> All his transgressions that he hath
committed, they shall not be mentioned to him: in his righteousness that
he hath done he shall live.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Have I any pleasure at all that the
wicked should die? saith the Lord GOD: and not that he should return
from his ways, and live?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> But when the righteous turneth away
from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doeth according to
all the abominations that the wicked man doeth, shall he live? All his
righteousness that he hath done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass
that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in them
shall he die.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not
equal. Hear now, O house of Israel; Is not my way equal? are not your
ways unequal?

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> When a righteous man turneth away from
his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and dieth in them; for his
iniquity that he hath done shall he die.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> Again, when a wicked man turneth away
from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doeth that which is
lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> Because he considereth and turneth away
from all his transgressions that he hath committed, he shall surely
live, he shall not die.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> Yet saith the house of Israel, The way
of the Lord is not equal. O house of Israel, are not my ways equal? are
not your ways unequal?

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Therefore I will judge you, O house of
Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord GOD. Repent, and
turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be
your ruin.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Cast away from you all your
transgressions, by which ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart
and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> For I have no pleasure in the death of
him that dieth, saith the Lord GOD: wherefore turn ye, and live.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Moreover take thou up a lamentation for
the princes of Israel,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And say, What is thy mother: A lioness:
she lay down among lions, she nourished her whelps among young lions.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And she brought up one of her whelps: it
became a young lion, and it learned to catch the prey; it devoured men.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> The nations also heard of him; he was
taken in their pit, and they brought him with chains to the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> Now when she saw that she had waited, and
her hope was lost, then she took another of her whelps, and made him a
young lion.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And he went up and down among the lions,
he became a young lion, and learned to catch the prey, and devoured men.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And he knew their desolate palaces, and
he laid waste their cities; and the land was desolate, and the fullness
of it, by the noise of his roaring.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Then the nations set against him on every
side from the provinces, and spread their net over him: he was taken in
their pit.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And they put him in custody in chains,
and brought him to the king of Babylon: they brought him into holds,
that his voice should no more be heard upon the mountains of Israel.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Thy mother is like a vine in thy blood,
planted by the waters: she was fruitful and full of branches by reason
of many waters.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And she had strong rods for the
scepters of them that bore rule, and her stature was exalted among the
thick branches, and she appeared in her hight with the multitude of her
branches.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> But she was plucked up in fury, she was
cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried up her fruit: her
strong rods were broken and withered; the fire consumed them.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And now she is planted in the
wilderness, in a dry and thirsty ground.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And fire hath gone out of a rod of her
branches, which hath devoured her fruit, so that she hath no strong rod
to be a scepter to rule. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a
lamentation.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And it came to pass in the seventh year,
in the fifth month, the tenth day of the month, that certain of the
elders of Israel came to inquire of the LORD, and sat before me.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Then came the word of the LORD to me,
saying,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Son of man, speak to the elders of
Israel, and say to them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Are ye come to inquire
of me? As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will not be inquired of by you.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt
thou judge them? cause them to know the abominations of their fathers:

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And say to them, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
In the day when I chose Israel, and lifted up my hand to the seed of the
house of Jacob, and made myself known to them in the land of Egypt, when
I lifted up my hand to them, saying, I am the LORD your God;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> In the day that I lifted up my hand to
them, to bring them forth from the land of Egypt into a land that I had
espied for them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all
lands:

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Then said I to them, Cast ye away every
man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not yourselves with the
idols of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> But they rebelled against me, and would
not hearken to me: they did not every man cast away the abominations of
their eyes, neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt: then I said, I
will pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in
the midst of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> But I wrought for my name's sake, that it
should not be profaned before the heathen, among whom they were, in
whose sight I made myself known to them, in bringing them forth from the
land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Wherefore I caused them to go forth
from the land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And I gave them my statutes, and showed
them my judgments, which if a man doeth, he shall even live in them.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Moreover also I gave them my sabbaths,
to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the
LORD that sanctify them.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> But the house of Israel rebelled
against me in the wilderness: they walked not in my statutes, and they
despised my judgments, which if a man doeth, he shall even live in them;
and my sabbaths they greatly profaned: then I said, I would pour out my
fury upon them in the wilderness, to consume them.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> But I wrought for my name's sake, that
it should not be profaned before the heathen, in whose sight I brought
them out.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Yet also I lifted up my hand to them in
the wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land which I had
given them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all
lands;

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Because they despised my judgments, and
walked not in my statutes, but profaned my sabbaths: for their heart
went after their idols.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Nevertheless my eye spared them from
destroying them, neither did I make an end of them in the wilderness.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> But I said to their children in the
wilderness, Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe
their judgments, nor defile yourselves with their idols:

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> I am the LORD your God; walk in my
statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them;

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And hallow my sabbaths; and they shall
be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the LORD your
God.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> Notwithstanding the children rebelled
against me: they walked not in my statutes, neither kept my judgments to
do them, which if a man doeth, he shall even live in them: they profaned
my sabbaths: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them, to
accomplish my anger against them in the wilderness.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Nevertheless I withdrew my hand, and
wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be profaned in the sight
of the heathen, in whose sight I brought them forth.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> I lifted up my hand to them also in the
wilderness, that I would scatter them among the heathen, and disperse
them through the countries;

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> Because they had not executed my
judgments, but had despised my statutes, and had profaned my sabbaths,
and their eyes were after their fathers' idols.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> Wherefore I gave them also statutes
that were not good, and judgments by which they should not live;

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And I polluted them in their own gifts,
in that they caused to pass through the fire all the first-born, that I
might make them desolate, to the end that they might know that I am the
LORD.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Therefore, son of man, speak to the
house of Israel, and say to them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Yet in this
your fathers have blasphemed me, in that they have committed a trespass
against me.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> For when I had brought them into the
land, for which I lifted up my hand to give it to them, then they saw
every high hill, and all the thick trees, and they offered there their
sacrifices, and there they presented the provocation of their offering:
there also they made their sweet savor, and poured out there their
drink-offerings.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> Then I said to them, What is the high
place to which ye go? and its name is called Bamah to this day.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Wherefore say to the house of Israel,
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Are ye polluted after the manner of your
fathers? and commit ye lewd deeds after their abominations?

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> For when ye offer your gifts, when ye
make your sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute yourselves with all
your idols, even to this day: and shall I be inquired of by you, O house
of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will not be inquired of by
you.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And that which cometh into your mind
shall not be at all, that ye say, We will be as the heathen, as the
families of the countries, to serve wood and stone.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely
with a mighty hand, and with an out-stretched arm, and with fury poured
out, will I rule over you:

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And I will bring you out from the
people, and will gather you out of the countries in which ye are
scattered, with a mighty hand, and with an out-stretched arm, and with
fury poured out.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> And I will bring you into the
wilderness of the people, and there will I plead with you face to face.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> As I pleaded with your fathers in the
wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the
Lord GOD.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> And I will cause you to pass under the
rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant.

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> And I will purge out from among you the
rebels, and them that transgress against me: I will bring them forth out
of the country where they sojourn, and they shall not enter into the
land of Israel: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> As for you, O house of Israel, thus
saith the Lord GOD; Go ye, serve ye every one his idols, and hereafter
also, if ye will not hearken to me: but profane ye my holy name no more
with your gifts, and with your idols.

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> For on my holy mountain, on the
mountain of the hight of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, there shall all the
house of Israel, all of them in the land, serve me: there will I accept
them, and there will I require your offerings, and the first fruits of
your oblations, with all your holy things.

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> I will accept you with your sweet
savor, when I bring you out from the people, and gather you out of the
countries in which ye have been scattered; and I will be sanctified in
you before the heathen.

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> And ye shall know that I am the LORD,
when I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the country for
which I lifted up my hand to give it to your fathers.

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> And there shall ye remember your ways,
and all your doings in which ye have been defiled; and ye shall lothe
yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that ye have committed.

<span id="an_20:44">20:44</span> And ye shall know that I am the LORD,
when I have wrought with you for my name's sake, not according to your
wicked ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel,
saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_20:45">20:45</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to
me, saying,

<span id="an_20:46">20:46</span> Son of man, set thy face towards the
south, and drop thy word towards the south, and prophesy against the
forest of the south field;

<span id="an_20:47">20:47</span> And say to the forest of the south,
Hear the word of the LORD; Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will
kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and
every dry tree: the flaming flame shall not be quenched, and all faces
from the south to the north shall be burned therein.

<span id="an_20:48">20:48</span> And all flesh shall see that I the LORD
have kindled it: it shall not be quenched.

<span id="an_20:49">20:49</span> Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! they say of
me, Doth he not speak parables?

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Son of man, set thy face towards
Jerusalem, and drop thy word towards the holy places, and prophesy
against the land of Israel,

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And say to the land of Israel, Thus saith
the LORD; Behold, I am against thee, and will draw forth my sword out of
its sheath, and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Seeing then that I will cut off from thee
the righteous and the wicked, therefore shall my sword go forth from its
sheath against all flesh from the south to the north:

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> That all flesh may know that I the LORD
have drawn my sword out of its sheath: it shall not return any more.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Sigh therefore, thou son of man, with the
breaking of thy loins; and with bitterness sigh before their eyes.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And it shall be, when they say to thee,
Why sighest thou? that thou shalt answer, For the tidings; because it
cometh: and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and
every spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water: behold,
it cometh, and shall be brought to pass, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Again the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith
the LORD; Say, A sword, a sword is sharpened, and also furbished:

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> It is sharpened to make a grievous
slaughter; it is furbished that it may glitter: should we then make
mirth? it contemneth the rod of my son, as every tree.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And he hath given it to be furbished,
that it may be handled: the sword is sharpened, and it is furbished, to
give it into the hand of the slayer.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Cry and howl, son of man: for it shall
be upon my people, it shall be upon all the princes of Israel: terrors
by reason of the sword shall be upon my people: smite therefore upon thy
thigh.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Because it is a trial, and what if the
sword contemneth even the rod? it shall be no more, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Thou therefore, son of man, prophesy,
and smite thy hands together, and let the sword be doubled the third
time, the sword of the slain: it is the sword of the great men that are
slain, which entereth into their private chambers.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> I have set the point of the sword
against all their gates, that their heart may faint, and their ruins be
multiplied: ah! it is made bright, it is sharpened for the slaughter.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Go thee one way or other, either on the
right hand, or on the left, whithersoever thy face is set.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> I will also smite my hands together,
and I will cause my fury to rest: I the LORD have said it.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> The word of the LORD came to me again,
saying,

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Also, thou son of man, appoint thee two
ways, that the sword of the king of Babylon may come: both ways shall
come forth from one land: and choose thou a place, choose it at the head
of the way to the city.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Appoint a way, that the sword may come
to Rabbah of the Ammonites, and to Judah in Jerusalem the fortified.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> For the king of Babylon stood at the
parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination; he
made his arrows bright, he consulted with images, he looked in the
liver.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> At his right hand was the divination
for Jerusalem, to appoint captains, to open the mouth in the slaughter,
to lift up the voice with shouting, to appoint battering rams against
the gates, to cast a mount, and to build a fort.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And it shall be to them as a false
divination in their sight, to them that have sworn oaths: but he will
call to remembrance the iniquity, that they may be taken.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your
transgressions are disclosed, so that in all your doings your sins do
appear; because, I say, that ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be
taken with the hand.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And thou, profane wicked prince of
Israel, whose day is come, when iniquity shall have an end,

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Remove the
diadem, and take off the crown: this shall not be the same: exalt him
that is low, and abase him that is high.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> I will overturn, overturn, overturn it:
and it shall be no more, until he cometh whose right it is; and I will
give it him.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> And thou, son of man, prophesy and say,
Thus saith the Lord GOD concerning the Ammonites, and concerning their
reproach; even say thou, The sword, the sword is drawn: for the
slaughter it is furbished, to consume because of the glittering:

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> While they see vanity to thee, while
they divine a lie to thee, to bring thee upon the necks of them that are
slain, of the wicked, whose day is come, when their iniquity shall have
an end.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> Shall I cause it to return into its
sheath? I will judge thee in the place where thou wast created, in the
land of thy nativity.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> And I will pour out my indignation upon
thee, I will blow against thee in the fire of my wrath, and deliver thee
into the hand of brutish men, and skillful to destroy.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thy
blood shall be in the midst of the land; thou shalt be no more
remembered: for I the LORD have spoken it.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Now, thou son of man, wilt thou judge,
wilt thou judge the bloody city? yes, thou shalt show her all her
abominations.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Then say thou, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
The city sheddeth blood in the midst of it, that her time may come, and
maketh idols against herself to defile herself.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Thou art become guilty in thy blood that
thou hast shed; and hast defiled thyself by thy idols which thou hast
made; and thou hast caused thy days to draw near, and art come even to
thy years: therefore have I made thee a reproach to the heathen, and a
mocking to all countries.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Those that are near, and those that are
far from thee, shall mock thee, who art infamous and much troubled.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Behold, the princes of Israel, every one
were in thee to their power to shed blood.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> In thee have they set light by father and
mother: in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppression with the
stranger: in thee have they oppressed the fatherless and the widow.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> Thou hast despised my holy things, and
hast profaned my sabbaths.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> In thee are men that carry tales to shed
blood: and in thee they eat upon the mountains: in the midst of thee
they commit lewdness.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> In thee have they uncovered their
fathers' nakedness: in thee have they humbled her that was set apart for
pollution.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And one hath committed abomination with
his neighbor's wife; and another hath lewdly defiled his
daughter-in-law; and another in thee hath humbled his sister, his
father's daughter.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> In thee have they taken gifts to shed
blood; thou hast taken interest and increase, and thou hast greedily
gained from thy neighbors by extortion, and hast forgotten me, saith the
Lord GOD.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Behold, therefore I have smitten my
hand at thy dishonest gain which thou hast made, and at thy blood which
hath been in the midst of thee.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Can thy heart endure, or can thy hands
be strong, in the days that I shall deal with thee? I the LORD have
spoken it, and will do it.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And I will scatter thee among the
heathen, and disperse thee in the countries, and will consume thy
filthiness out of thee.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And thou shalt take thy inheritance in
thyself in the sight of the heathen, and thou shalt know that I am the
LORD.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Son of man, the house of Israel is to
me become dross: all they are brass, and tin, and iron, and lead, in the
midst of the furnace; they are even the dross of silver.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD,
Because ye are all become dross, behold, therefore I will gather you
into the midst of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> As they gather silver, and brass, and
iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire
upon it, to melt it; so will I gather you in my anger and in my fury,
and I will leave you there, and melt you.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Yes, I will gather you, and blow upon
you in the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst of it.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> As silver is melted in the midst of the
furnace, so shall ye be melted in the midst of it; and ye shall know
that I the LORD have poured out my fury upon you.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Son of man, say to her, Thou art the
land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> There is a conspiracy of her prophets
in the midst of her, like a roaring lion ravening the prey; they have
devoured souls; they have taken the treasure and precious things; they
have made her many widows in the midst of her.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Her priests have violated my law, and
have profaned my holy things: they have put no difference between the
holy and profane, neither have they shown difference between the unclean
and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am
profaned among them.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> Her princes in the midst of her are
like wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, and to destroy souls, to
get dishonest gain.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And her prophets have daubed them with
untempered mortar, seeing vanity, and divining lies to them, saying,
Thus saith the Lord GOD, when the LORD hath not spoken.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> The people of the land have used
oppression, and exercised robbery, and have oppressed the poor and
needy: yes, they have oppressed the stranger wrongfully.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> And I sought for a man among them, that
should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land,
that I should not destroy it: but I found none.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> Therefore have I poured out my
indignation upon them; I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath:
their own way have I recompensed upon their heads, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> The word of the LORD came again to me,
saying,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Son of man, there were two women, the
daughters of one mother:

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And they committed lewd deeds in Egypt;
they committed lewd deeds in their youth: there were their breasts
pressed, and there they were first corrupted.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And the names of them were Aholah the
elder, and Aholibah her sister: and they were mine, and they bore sons
and daughters. Thus were their names; Samaria is Aholah, and Jerusalem
Aholibah.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And Aholah played the harlot when she was
mine; and she doted on her lovers, on the Assyrians her neighbors.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Who were clothed with blue, captains and
rulers, all of them desirable young men, horsemen riding upon horses.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Thus she committed her lewd deeds with
them, with all them that were the chosen men of Assyria, and with all on
whom she doted: with all their idols she defiled herself.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Neither left she her lewd deeds brought
from Egypt: for in her youth they lay with her, and they first corrupted
her, and poured their impurities upon her.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Wherefore I have delivered her into the
hand of her lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians, upon whom she doted.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> These uncovered her nakedness: they
took her sons and her daughters, and slew her with the sword: and she
became famous among women; for they had executed judgment upon her.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And when her sister Aholibah saw this,
she was more corrupt in her inordinate love than she, and in her
prostitutions more than her sister in her prostitutions.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> She doted upon the Assyrians her
neighbors, captains and rulers clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding
upon horses, all of them desirable young men.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Then I saw that she was defiled, that
they took both one way.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And that she increased her
prostitutions: for when she saw men pourtrayed upon the wall, the images
of the Chaldeans pourtrayed with vermilion.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Girded with girdles upon their loins,
exceeding in dyed attire upon their heads, all of them princes to look
to, after the manner of the Babylonians of Chaldea, the land of their
nativity:

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And as soon as she saw them with her
eyes she doted upon them, and sent messengers to them into Chaldea.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And the Babylonians came to her into
the bed of love, and they defiled her with their lewdness, and she was
polluted with them, and her mind was alienated from them.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> So she disclosed her lewd deeds, and
exposed her nakedness: then my mind was alienated from her, as my mind
was alienated from her sister.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Yet she multiplied her prostitutions,
in calling to remembrance the days of her youth, in which she had played
the harlot in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> For she doted upon their paramours,
whose flesh is as the flesh of asses, and whose issue is like the issue
of horses.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Thus thou calledst to remembrance the
lewdness of thy youth, by being corrupted by the Egyptians in thy youth.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> Therefore, O Aholibah, thus saith the
Lord GOD; Behold, I will raise up thy lovers against thee, from whom thy
mind is alienated, and I will bring them against thee on every side;

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> The Babylonians, and all the Chaldeans,
Pekod, and Shoa, and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them: all of them
desirable young men, captains and rulers, great lords and renowned, all
of them riding upon horses.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> And they shall come against thee with
chariots, wagons, and wheels, and with an assembly of people, which
shall set against thee buckler and shield and helmet on every side: and
I will set judgment before them, and they shall judge thee according to
their judgments.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And I will set my jealousy against
thee, and they shall deal furiously with thee: they shall take away thy
nose and thy ears; and thy remnant shall fall by the sword: they shall
take thy sons and thy daughters; and thy residue shall be devoured by
the fire.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> They shall also strip thee of thy
clothes, and take away thy fair jewels.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> Thus will I make thy lewdness to cease
from thee, and thy adultery brought from the land of Egypt: so that thou
shalt not lift up thy eyes to them, nor remember Egypt any more.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I
will deliver thee into the hand of them whom thou hatest, into the hand
of them from whom thy mind is alienated:

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> And they shall treat thee with hatred,
and shall take away all thy labor, and shall leave thee naked and bare:
and the nakedness of thy prostitutions shall be disclosed, both thy
lewdness and thy prostitutions.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> I will do these things to thee, because
thou hast gone astray after the heathen, and because thou art polluted
with their idols.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Thou hast walked in the way of thy
sister; therefore will I give her cup into thy hand.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou shalt
drink of thy sister's cup deep and large: thou shalt be treated with
scorn and had in derision; it containeth much.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness
and sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of
thy sister Samaria.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> Thou shalt even drink it, and empty it
to the dregs, and thou shalt break its pieces, and pluck off thy own
breasts: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Because thou hast forgotten me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore
bear thou also thy lewdness and thy prostitutions.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> The LORD said moreover to me; Son of
man, wilt thou judge Aholah and Aholibah? yes, declare to them their
abominations;

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> That they have committed adultery, and
blood is in their hands, and with their idols have they committed
adultery, and have also caused their sons, whom they bore to me, to pass
for them through the fire, to devour them.

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> Moreover this they have done to me:
they have defiled my sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my
sabbaths.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> For when they had slain their children
to their idols, then they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane
it; and lo, thus have they done in the midst of my house.

<span id="an_23:40">23:40</span> And furthermore, that ye have sent for
men to come from far, to whom a messenger was sent; and lo, they came:
for whom thou didst wash thyself, paint thy eyes, and deck thyself with
ornaments,

<span id="an_23:41">23:41</span> And sattest upon a stately bed and a
table prepared before it, upon which thou hast set my incense and my
oil.

<span id="an_23:42">23:42</span> And a voice of a multitude being at
ease was with her: and with the men of the common sort were brought
Sabeans from the wilderness, who put bracelets upon their hands, and
beautiful crowns upon their heads.

<span id="an_23:43">23:43</span> Then said I to her that was old in
adulteries, Will they now commit lewd deeds with her, and she with them?

<span id="an_23:44">23:44</span> Yet they went in to her, as they go in
to a woman that playeth the harlot: so they went in to Aholah and to
Aholibah, the lewd women.

<span id="an_23:45">23:45</span> And the righteous men, they shall judge
them after the manner of adulteresses, and after the manner of women
that shed blood; because they are adulteresses, and blood is in their
hands.

<span id="an_23:46">23:46</span> For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will
bring up a company upon them, and will give them to be removed and
plundered.

<span id="an_23:47">23:47</span> And the company shall stone them with
stones, and dispatch them with their swords; they shall slay their sons
and their daughters, and burn their houses with fire.

<span id="an_23:48">23:48</span> Thus will I cause lewdness to cease out
of the land, that all women may be taught not to do after your lewdness.

<span id="an_23:49">23:49</span> And they shall recompense your lewdness
upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of your idols: and ye shall know
that I am the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Again in the ninth year, in the tenth
month, in the tenth day of the month, the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> Son of man, Write for thee the name of
the day, even of this same day: the king of Babylon set himself against
Jerusalem this same day.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And utter a parable to the rebellious
house, and say to them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Set on a pot, set it
on, and also pour water into it:

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> Gather its pieces into it, even every
good piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Take the choice of the flock, and burn
also the bones under it, and make it boil well, and let them boil its
bones in it.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to
the bloody city, to the pot whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not
gone out of it! bring it out piece by piece; let no lot fall upon it.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> For her blood is in the midst of her; she
set it upon the top of a rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to
cover it with dust;

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> That it might cause fury to come up to
take vengeance; I have set her blood upon the top of a rock, that it
should not be covered.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to
the bloody city! I will even make the pile for fire great.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume
the flesh, and spice it well, and let the bones be burned.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Then set it empty upon its coals, that
the brass of it may be hot, and may burn, and that the filthiness of it
may be melted in it, that the scum of it may be consumed.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> She hath wearied herself with lies, and
her great scum went not forth out of her: her scum shall be in the fire.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> In thy filthiness is lewdness: because
I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged
from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon
thee.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> I the LORD have spoken it; it shall
come to pass, and I will do it; I will not go back, neither will I
spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and according to
thy doings, shall they judge thee, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Also the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Son of man, behold, I take away from
thee the desire of thy eyes with a stroke: yet neither shalt thou mourn
nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Forbear to cry, make no mourning for
the dead, bind the tire of thy head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon
thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> So I spoke to the people in the
morning: and at evening my wife died; and I did in the morning as I was
commanded.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And the people said to me, Wilt thou
not tell us what these things are to us, that thou doest so?

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Then I answered them, the word of the
LORD came to me, saying,

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> Speak to the house of Israel, Thus
saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will profane my sanctuary, the excellence
of your strength, the desire of your eyes, and that which your soul
pitieth; and your sons and your daughters whom ye have left shall fall
by the sword.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And ye shall do as I have done: ye
shall not cover your lips, nor eat the bread of men.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And your tires shall be upon your
heads, and your shoes upon your feet: ye shall not mourn nor weep; but
ye shall pine away for your iniquities, and mourn one towards another.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> Thus Ezekiel is to you a sign:
according to all that he hath done shall ye do: and when this cometh, ye
shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> Also, thou son of man, shall it not be
in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory,
the desire of their eyes, and that on which they set their minds, their
sons and their daughters,

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> That he that escapeth in that day shall
come to thee, to cause thee to hear it with thy ears?

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> In that day shall thy mouth be opened
to him who hath escaped, and thou shalt speak, and be no more dumb: and
thou shalt be a sign to them; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> The word of the LORD came again to me,
saying,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Son of man, set thy face against the
Ammonites, and prophesy against them;

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> And say to the Ammonites, Hear the word
of the Lord GOD; Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou saidst, Aha,
against my sanctuary, when it was profaned; and against the land of
Israel, when it was desolate; and against the house of Judah, when they
went into captivity;

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Behold, therefore I will deliver thee to
the men of the east for a possession, and they shall set their palaces
in thee, and make their dwellings in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and
they shall drink thy milk.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And I will make Rabbah a stable for
camels, and the Ammonites a couching-place for flocks: and ye shall know
that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> For thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou
hast clapped thy hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced in heart
with all thy despite against the land of Israel;

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Behold, therefore I will stretch out my
hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to the heathen; and I
will cut thee off from the people, and I will cause thee to perish out
of the countries: I will destroy thee; and thou shalt know that I am the
LORD.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because that
Moab and Seir do say, Behold, the house of Judah is like all the
heathen;

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Therefore behold, I will open the side of
Moab from the cities, from his cities which are on his frontiers, the
glory of the country, Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kiriathaim,

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> To the men of the east with the
Ammonites, and will give them in possession, that the Ammonites may not
be remembered among the nations.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And I will execute judgments upon Moab;
and they shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because Edom
hath dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath
greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them;

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I
will also stretch out my hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and beast
from it; and I will make it desolate from Teman; and they of Dedan shall
fall by the sword.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom
by the hand of my people Israel: and they shall do in Edom according to
my anger and according to my fury; and they shall know my vengeance,
saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because the
Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with a
despiteful heart, to destroy it for the old hatred;

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I will stretch out my hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut
off the Cherethims, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And I will execute great vengeance upon
them with furious rebukes; and they shall know that I am the LORD, when
I shall lay my vengeance upon them.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And it came to pass in the eleventh year,
in the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Son of man, because that Tyre hath said
against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken that was the gates of the people:
she is turned to me: I shall be replenished, now she is laid waste:

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I am against thee, O Tyre, and will cause many nations to come
up against thee, as the sea causeth its waves to come up.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And they shall destroy the walls of Tyre,
and break down her towers: I will also scrape her dust from her, and
make her like the top of a rock.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> It shall be a place for the spreading of
nets in the midst of the sea: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD:
and it shall become a spoil to the nations.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And her daughters who are in the field
shall be slain by the sword; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I
will bring upon Tyre Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, a king of kings,
from the north, with horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and
companies, and much people.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> He shall slay with the sword thy
daughters in the field: and he shall make a fort against thee, and cast
a mount against thee, and lift up the buckler against thee.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> And he shall set engines of war against
thy walls, and with his axes he shall break down thy towers.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> By reason of the abundance of his
horses their dust shall cover thee: thy walls shall shake at the noise
of the horsemen, and of the wheels, and of the chariots, when he shall
enter into thy gates, as men enter into a city in which is made a
breach.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> With the hoofs of his horses shall he
tread down all thy streets: he shall slay thy people by the sword, and
thy strong garrisons shall go down to the ground.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And they shall make a spoil of thy
riches, and make a prey of thy merchandise: and they shall break down
thy walls, and destroy thy pleasant houses: and they shall lay thy
stones and thy timber and thy dust in the midst of the water.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And I will cause the noise of thy songs
to cease; and the sound of thy harps shall be no more heard.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And I will make thee like the top of a
rock: thou shalt be a place to spread nets upon; thou shalt be built no
more: for I the LORD have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD to Tyre; Shall
not the isles shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded cry, when
the slaughter is made in the midst of thee?

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Then all the princes of the sea shall
come down from their thrones, and lay away their robes, and put off
their broidered garments: they shall clothe themselves with trembling;
they shall sit upon the ground, and shall tremble at every moment, and
be astonished at thee.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And they shall take up a lamentation
for thee, and say to thee, How art thou destroyed, that wast inhabited
by sea-faring men, the renowned city, which wast strong in the sea, she
and her inhabitants, who cause their terror to be on all that haunt it!

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> Now shall the isles tremble in the day
of thy fall; yes, the isles that are in the sea shall be disturbed at
thy departure.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> For thus saith the Lord GOD; When I
shall make thee a desolate city, like the cities that are not inhabited;
when I shall bring up the deep upon thee, and great waters shall cover
thee;

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> When I shall bring thee down with them
that descend into the pit, with the people of old time, and shall set
thee in the low parts of the earth, in places desolate of old, with them
that go down to the pit, that thou be not inhabited; and I shall set
glory in the land of the living;

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> I will make thee a terror, and thou
shalt be no more: though thou shalt be sought for, yet shalt thou never
be found again, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> The word of the LORD came again to me,
saying,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Now, thou son of man, take up a
lamentation for Tyre;

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And say to Tyre, O thou that art situated
at the entry of the sea, which art a merchant of the people for many
isles, Thus saith the Lord GOD; O Tyre, thou hast said, I am of perfect
beauty.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Thy borders are in the midst of the seas,
thy builders have perfected thy beauty.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> They have made all thy ship-boards of
fir-trees of Senir: they have taken cedars from Lebanon to make masts
for thee.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thy
oars; the company of the Ashurites have made thy benches of ivory,
brought out of the isles of Chittim.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt
was that which thou spreadest forth to be thy sail; blue and purple from
the isles of Elishah was that which covered thee.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were
thy mariners: thy wise men, O Tyre, that were in thee, were thy pilots.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> The ancients of Gebal and its wise men
were in thee thy calkers: all the ships of the sea with their mariners
were in thee to occupy thy merchandise.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> They of Persia and of Lud and of Phut
were in thy army, thy military men: they hung the shield and helmet in
thee; they set forth thy comeliness.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> The men of Arvad with thy army were
upon thy walls on all sides, and the Gammadims were in thy towers: they
hung their shields upon thy walls on every side; they have made thy
beauty perfect.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of
the multitude of all kind of riches; with silver, iron, tin, and lead,
they traded in thy fairs.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were
thy merchants: they traded in the persons of men and vessels of brass in
thy market.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> They of the house of Togarmah traded in
thy fairs with horses and horsemen and mules.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> The men of Dedan were thy merchants;
many isles were the merchandise of thy hand: they brought thee for a
present horns of ivory and ebony.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Syria was thy merchant by reason of the
multitude of the wares of thy making: they occupied in thy fairs with
emeralds, purple, and broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and
agate.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Judah, and the land of Israel, they
were thy merchants: they traded in thy market in wheat of Minnith, and
Pannag, and honey, and oil, and balm.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Damascus was thy merchant in the
multitude of the wares of thy making, for the multitude of all riches;
in the wine of Helbon, and white wool.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> Dan also and Javan going to and fro
occupied in thy fairs: bright iron, cassia, and calamus, were in thy
market.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Dedan was thy merchant in precious
clothes for chariots.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Arabia, and all the princes of Kedar,
they occupied with thee in lambs, and rams, and goats: in these were
they thy merchants.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> The merchants of Sheba and Raamah, they
were thy merchants: they occupied in thy fairs with chief of all spices,
and with all precious stones, and gold.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the
merchants of Sheba, Asshur, and Chilmad, were thy merchants.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> These were thy merchants in all sorts
of things, in blue clothes, and broidered work, and in chests of rich
apparel, bound with cords, and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee
in thy market; and thou wast replenished, and made very glorious in the
midst of the seas.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Thy rowers have brought thee into great
waters: the east wind hath broken thee in the midst of the seas.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> Thy riches, and thy fairs, thy
merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy calkers, and the
occupiers of thy merchandise, and all thy military men, that are in
thee, and in all thy company which is in the midst of thee, shall fall
into the midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> The suburbs shall shake at the sound of
the cry of thy pilots.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> And all that handle the oar, the
mariners, and all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their
ships, they shall stand upon the land;

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> And shall cause their voice to be heard
against thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their
heads, they shall wallow themselves in the ashes:

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> And they shall make themselves utterly
bald for thee, and gird themselves with sackcloth, and they shall weep
for thee with bitterness of heart and bitter wailing.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> And in their wailing they shall take up
a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, saying, What city is like
Tyre, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea?

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> When thy wares went forth out of the
seas, thou filledst many people; thou didst enrich the kings of the
earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy merchandise.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> In the time when thou shalt be broken
by the seas in the depths of the waters, thy merchandise and all thy
company in the midst of thee shall fall.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> All the inhabitants of the isles shall
be astonished at thee, and their kings shall be terribly afraid, they
shall be troubled in their countenance.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> The merchants among the people shall
hiss at thee; thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt be any more.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> The word of the LORD came again to me,
saying,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Son of man, say to the prince of Tyre,
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thy heart is lifted up, and thou hast
said, I am a god, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the seas;
yet thou art a man, and not God, though thou settest thy heart as the
heart of God:

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel; there
is no secret that they can hide from thee:

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> With thy wisdom and with thy
understanding thou hast gained for thee riches, and hast gained gold and
silver into thy treasures:

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> By thy great wisdom and by thy traffick
hast thou increased thy riches, and thy heart is lifted up because of
thy riches:

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Because thou hast set thy heart as the heart of God;

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Behold, therefore I will bring strangers
upon thee, the terrible of the nations: and they shall draw their swords
against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> They shall bring thee down to the pit,
and thou shalt die the deaths of them that are slain in the midst of the
seas.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth
thee, I am God? but thou shalt be a man, and no god, in the hand of him
that slayeth thee.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Thou shalt die the deaths of the
uncircumcised by the hand of strangers: for I have spoken it, saith the
Lord GOD.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to
me, saying,

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Son of man, take up a lamentation upon
the king of Tyre, and say to him, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou sealest
up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Thou hast been in Eden the garden of
God; every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the
diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald,
and the carbuncle, and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy
pipes was prepared in thee in the day that thou wast created.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Thou art the anointed cherub that
covereth; and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of
God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the
day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> By the multitude of thy merchandise
they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned:
therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God: and I
will destroy thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of
fire.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Thy heart was lifted up because of thy
beauty, thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I
will cast thee to the ground, I will lay thee before kings, that they
may behold thee.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by
the multitude of thy iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffick;
therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall
devour thee, and I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight
of all them that behold thee.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> All they that know thee among the
people shall be astonished at thee: thou shalt be a terror, and never
shalt thou be any more.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Again the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> Son of man, set thy face against Zidon,
and prophesy against it,

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I am against thee, O Zidon; and I will be glorified in the midst
of thee: and they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall have
executed judgments in her, and shall be sanctified in her.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> For I will send into her pestilence,
and blood into her streets; and the wounded shall be judged in the midst
of her by the sword upon her on every side; and they shall know that I
am the LORD.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And there shall be no more a pricking
brier to the house of Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that are
around them, that despised them; and they shall know that I am the Lord
GOD.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; When I shall
have gathered the house of Israel from the people among whom they are
scattered, and shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen,
then shall they dwell in their land that I have given to my servant
Jacob.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> And they shall dwell safely therein,
and shall build houses, and plant vineyards; yes, they shall dwell with
confidence, when I have executed judgments upon all those that despise
them around them; and they shall know that I am the LORD their God.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in
the twelfth day of the month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh
king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and against all Egypt:

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> Speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great dragon that
lieth in the midst of his rivers, which hath said, My river is my own,
and I have made it for myself.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> But I will put hooks in thy jaws, and I
will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick to thy scales, and I will
bring thee out of the midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy
rivers shall stick to thy scales.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And I will leave thee thrown into the
wilderness, thee and all the fish of thy rivers: thou shalt fall upon
the open fields; thou shalt not be brought together, nor gathered: I
have given thee for food to the beasts of the field and to the fowls of
heaven.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall
know that I am the LORD, because they have been a staff of reed to the
house of Israel.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> When they took hold of thee by thy hand,
thou didst break, and rend all their shoulder: and when they leaned upon
thee, thou didst break, and make all their loins to be at a stand.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I will bring a sword upon thee, and cut off man and beast out of
thee.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> And the land of Egypt shall be desolate
and waste; and they shall know that I am the LORD: because he hath said,
The river is mine, and I have made it.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Behold, therefore, I am against thee,
and against thy rivers, and I will make the land of Egypt utterly waste
and desolate, from the tower of Syene even to the border of Cush.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> No foot of man shall pass through it,
nor foot of beast shall pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited
forty years.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And I will make the land of Egypt
desolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate, and her cities
among the cities that are laid waste shall be desolate forty years: and
I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them
through the countries.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> Yet thus saith the Lord GOD; At the end
of forty years will I gather the Egyptians from the people whither they
were scattered:

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> And I will bring again the captivity of
Egypt, and will cause them to return into the land of Pathros, into the
land of their habitation; and they shall be there a base kingdom.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> It shall be the basest of the kingdoms;
neither shall it exalt itself any more above the nations: for I will
diminish them, that they shall no more rule over the nations.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> And it shall be no more the confidence
of the house of Israel, which bringeth their iniquity to remembrance,
when they shall look after them: but they shall know that I am the Lord
GOD.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And it came to pass in the seven and
twentieth year, in the first month, in the first day of the month, the
word of the LORD came to me, saying,

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon caused his army to serve a great service against Tyre: every
head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled: yet had he no wages,
nor his army, for Tyre, for the service that he had served against it:

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I will give the land of Egypt to Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon;
and he shall take her multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey;
and it shall be the wages for his army.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> I have given him the land of Egypt for
his labor with which he served against it, because they wrought for me,
saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> In that day will I cause the horn of
the house of Israel to bud forth, and I will give thee the opening of
the mouth in the midst of them; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The word of the LORD came again to me,
saying,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith
the Lord GOD; Howl ye, Alas the day!

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For the day is near, even the day of the
LORD is near, a cloudy day; it shall be the time of the heathen.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And the sword shall come upon Egypt, and
great pain shall be in Cush, when the slain shall fall in Egypt, and
they shall take away her multitude, and her foundations shall be broken
down.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Cush, and Libya, and Lydia, and all the
mingled people, and Kub, and the men of the land that is in league,
shall fall with them by the sword.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Thus saith the LORD; They also that
uphold Egypt shall fall; and the pride of her power shall come down:
from the tower of Syene shall they fall in it by the sword, saith the
Lord GOD.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And they shall be desolate in the midst
of the countries that are desolate, and her cities shall be in the midst
of the cities that are wasted.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And they shall know that I am the LORD,
when I have set a fire in Egypt, and when all her helpers shall be
destroyed.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> In that day shall messengers go forth
from me in ships to make the careless Cushites afraid, and great pain
shall come upon them, as in the day of Egypt: for lo, it cometh.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also
make the multitude of Egypt to cease by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king
of Babylon.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> He and his people with him, the
terrible of the nations, shall be brought to destroy the land: and they
shall draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the land with the slain.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> And I will make the rivers dry, and
sell the land into the hand of the wicked: and I will make the land
waste, and all that is in it, by the hand of strangers: I the LORD have
spoken it.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also
destroy the idols, and I will cause their images to cease out of Noph;
and there shall be no more a prince of the land of Egypt: and I will put
a fear in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> And I will make Pathros desolate, and
will set fire in Zoan, and will execute judgments in No.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> And I will pour my fury upon Sin, the
strength of Egypt; and I will cut off the multitude of No.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And I will set fire in Egypt: Sin shall
have great pain, and No shall be rent asunder, and Noph shall have
distresses daily.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> The young men of Aven and of Pibeseth
shall fall by the sword: and these cities shall go into captivity.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be
darkened, when I shall break there the yokes of Egypt: and the pomp of
her strength shall cease in her: as for her, a cloud shall cover her,
and her daughters shall go into captivity.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt:
and they shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And it came to pass in the eleventh
year, in the first month, in the seventh day of the month, that the word
of the LORD came to me, saying,

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Son of man, I have broken the arm of
Pharaoh king of Egypt; and lo, it shall not be bound up to be healed, to
put a roller to bind it, to make it strong to hold the sword.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and will break his arms, the
strong, and that which was broken; and I will cause the sword to fall
out of his hand.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> And I will scatter the Egyptians among
the nations, and will disperse them through the countries.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> And I will strengthen the arms of the
king of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand: but I will break
Pharaoh's arms, and he shall groan before him with the groanings of a
deadly wounded man.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> But I will strengthen the arms of the
king of Babylon, and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall
know that I am the LORD, when I shall put my sword into the hand of the
king of Babylon, and he shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> And I will scatter the Egyptians among
the nations, and disperse them among the countries; and they shall know
that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And it came to pass in the eleventh year,
in the third month, in the first day of the month, that the word of the
LORD came to me, saying,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Son of man, speak to Pharaoh king of
Egypt, and to his multitude; Whom art thou like in thy greatness?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in
Lebanon with fair branches, and with a shady cover, and of a high
stature; and his top was among the thick boughs.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> The waters made him great, the deep set
him up on high with her rivers running round his plants, and sent out
her little rivers to all the trees of the field.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Therefore his hight was exalted above all
the trees of the field, and his boughs were multiplied, and his branches
became long because of the multitude of waters, when he shot forth.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> All the fowls of heaven made their nests
in his boughs, and under his branches did all the beasts of the field
bring forth their young, and under his shade dwelt all great nations.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the
length of his branches: for his root was by great waters.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> The cedars in the garden of God could not
hide him: the fir-trees were not like his boughs, and the chesnut-trees
were not like his branches; not any tree in the garden of God was like
to him in his beauty.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> I have made him fair by the multitude of
his branches: so that all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of
God, envied him.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Because thou hast lifted up thyself in hight, and he hath shot up his
top among the thick boughs, and his heart is lifted up in his hight;

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> I have therefore delivered him into the
hand of the mighty one of the heathen; he shall surely deal with him: I
have driven him out for his wickedness.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And strangers, the terrible of the
nations, have cut him off, and have left him: upon the mountains and in
all the valleys his branches are fallen, and his boughs are broken by
all the rivers of the land; and all the people of the earth have gone
down from his shade, and have left him.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Upon his ruin shall all the fowls of
the heaven remain, and all the beasts of the field shall be upon his
branches:

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> To the end that none of all the trees
by the waters exalt themselves for their hight, neither shoot up their
top among the thick boughs, neither their trees stand up in their hight,
all that drink water: for they are all delivered to death, to the nether
parts of the earth, in the midst of the children of men, with them that
go down to the pit.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day
when he went down to the grave I caused a mourning: I covered the deep
for him, and I restrained its floods, and the great waters were stayed:
and I caused Lebanon to mourn for him, and all the trees of the field
fainted for him.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> I made the nations to shake at the
sound of his fall, when I cast him down to the grave with them that
descend into the pit: and all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of
Lebanon, all that drink water, shall be comforted in the nether parts of
the earth.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> They also went down into the grave with
him to them that are slain with the sword; and they that were his arm,
that dwelt under his shade in the midst of the heathen.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> To whom art thou thus like in glory and
in greatness among the trees of Eden? yet shalt thou be brought down
with the trees of Eden to the nether parts of the earth: thou shalt lie
in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that are slain by the sword.
This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And it came to pass in the twelfth year,
in the twelfth month, in the first day of the month, that the word of
the LORD came to me, saying,

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> Son of man, take up a lamentation for
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say to him, Thou art like a young lion of the
nations, and thou art as a whale in the seas: and thou didst come forth
with thy rivers, and disturb the waters with thy feet, and render their
rivers foul.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will therefore
spread out my net over thee with a company of many people; and they
shall bring thee up in my net.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> Then will I leave thee upon the land, and
I will cast thee forth upon the open field, and will cause all the fowls
of the heaven to remain upon thee, and I will fill the beasts of the
whole earth with thee.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And I will lay thy flesh upon the
mountains, and fill the valleys with thy hight.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> I will also water with thy blood the land
in which thou swimmest, even to the mountains; and the rivers shall be
full of thee.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> And when I shall extinguish thee, I will
cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun
with a cloud, and the moon shall not give her light.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> All the bright lights of heaven will I
make dark over thee, and set darkness upon thy land, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> I will also vex the hearts of many
people, when I shall bring thy destruction among the nations, into the
countries which thou hast not known.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Yes, I will make many people amazed at
thee, and their kings shall be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall
brandish my sword before them; and they shall tremble at every moment,
every man for his own life, in the day of thy fall.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> For thus saith the Lord GOD; The sword
of the king of Babylon shall come upon thee.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> By the swords of the mighty will I
cause thy multitude to fall, the terrible of the nations, all of them:
and they shall lay waste the pomp of Egypt, and all its multitude shall
be destroyed.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> I will destroy also all its beasts from
beside the great waters; neither shall the foot of man disturb them any
more, nor the hoofs of beasts disturb them.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Then will I make their waters deep, and
cause their rivers to run like oil, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> When I shall make the land of Egypt
desolate, and the country shall be destitute of that of which it was
full, when I shall smite all them that dwell in it, then shall they know
that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> This is the lamentation with which they
shall lament her: the daughters of the nations shall lament her: they
shall lament for her, even for Egypt, and for all her multitude, saith
the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> It came to pass also in the twelfth
year, in the fifteenth day of the month, that the word of the LORD came
to me, saying,

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Son of man, wail for the multitude of
Egypt, and cast them down, even her, and the daughters of the famous
nations, to the nether parts of the earth, with them that go down into
the pit.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> Whom dost thou pass in beauty? go down,
and be thou laid with the uncircumcised.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> They shall fall in the midst of them
that are slain by the sword: she is delivered to the sword: draw her and
all her multitudes.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> The strong among the mighty shall speak
to him out of the midst of the grave with them that help him: they are
gone down, they lie uncircumcised, slain by the sword.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> Asshur is there and all her company:
his graves are about him: all of them slain, fallen by the sword:

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> Whose graves are set in the sides of
the pit, and her company is around her grave: all of them slain, fallen
by the sword, who caused terror in the land of the living.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> There is Elam and all her multitude
around her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, who are gone
down uncircumcised into the nether parts of the earth, who caused their
terror in the land of the living; yet have they borne their shame with
them that go down to the pit.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> They have set her a bed in the midst of
the slain with all her multitude: her graves are around him: all of them
uncircumcised, slain by the sword: though their terror was caused in the
land of the living, yet have they borne their shame with them that go
down to the pit: he is put in the midst of them that are slain.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her
multitude: her graves are around him: all of them uncircumcised, slain
by the sword, though they caused their terror in the land of the living.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> And they shall not lie with the mighty
that are fallen of the uncircumcised, who are gone down to the grave,
with their weapons of war: and they have laid their swords under their
heads, but their iniquities shall be upon their bones, though they were
the terror of the mighty in the land of the living.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> Yes, thou shalt be broken in the midst
of the uncircumcised, and shalt lie with them that are slain with the
sword.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> There is Edom, her kings, and all her
princes, who with their might are laid by them that were slain by the
sword: they shall lie with the uncircumcised, and with them that go down
to the pit.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> There are the princes of the north, all
of them, and all the Zidonians, who are gone down with the slain; with
their terror they are ashamed of their might; and they lie uncircumcised
with them that are slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them
that go down to the pit.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be
comforted over all his multitude, even Pharaoh and all his army slain by
the sword, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> For I have caused my terror in the land
of the living: and he shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised
with them that are slain with the sword, even Pharaoh and all his
multitude, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Again the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Son of man, speak to the children of thy
people, and say to them, When I bring the sword upon a land, if the
people of the land take a man of their borders, and set him for their
watchman:

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> If when he seeth the sword come upon the
land, he shall blow the trumpet, and warn the people;

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> Then whoever heareth the sound of the
trumpet, and taketh not warning; if the sword shall come and take him
away, his blood shall be upon his own head.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> He heard the sound of the trumpet, and
took not warning; his blood shall be upon him. But he that taketh
warning shall deliver his soul.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> But if the watchman shall see the sword
come, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned; if the
sword shall come, and take any person from among them, he is taken away
in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at the watchman's hand.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a
watchman to the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at
my mouth, and warn them from me.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> When I say to the wicked, O wicked man,
thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from
his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I
require at thy hand.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> Nevertheless, if thou shalt warn the
wicked of his way to turn from it; if he shall not turn from his way, he
shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Therefore, O thou son of man, speak to
the house of Israel; Thus ye speak, saying, If our transgressions and
our sins are upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live?

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Say to them, As I live, saith the Lord
GOD, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked
should turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways;
for why will ye die, O house of Israel?

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Therefore, thou son of man, say to the
children of thy people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not
deliver him in the day of his transgression: as for the wickedness of
the wicked, he shall not fall by it in the day that he turneth from his
wickedness; neither shall the righteous be able to live for his
righteousness in the day that he sinneth.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> When I shall say to the righteous, that
he shall surely live; if he shall trust to his own righteousness, and
commit iniquity, all his righteousnesses shall not be remembered; but
for his iniquity that he hath committed, he shall die for it.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> Again, when I say to the wicked, Thou
shalt surely die; if he shall turn from his sin, and do that which is
lawful and right;

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> If the wicked shall restore the pledge,
give again that which he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life,
without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> None of his sins that he hath committed
shall be mentioned to him: he hath done that which is lawful and right;
he shall surely live.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> Yet the children of thy people say, The
way of the Lord is not equal: but as for them, their way is not equal.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> When the righteous turneth from his
righteousness, and committeth iniquity, for that he shall even die.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> But if the wicked shall turn from his
wickedness, and do that which is lawful and right, for that he shall
live.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not
equal. O ye house of Israel, I will judge you every one after his ways.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> And it came to pass in the twelfth year
of our captivity, in the tenth month, in the fifth day of the month,
that one that had escaped out of Jerusalem came to me, saying, The city
is smitten.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> Now the hand of the LORD was upon me in
the evening, before he that had escaped came; and had opened my mouth,
until he came to me in the morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was
no more dumb.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> Then the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Son of man, they that inhabit those
wastes of the land of Israel speak, saying, Abraham was one, and he
inherited the land: but we are many; the land is given to us for
inheritance.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Wherefore say to them, Thus saith the
Lord GOD; Ye eat with the blood, and lift up your eyes towards your
idols, and shed blood: and shall ye possess the land?

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> Ye stand upon your sword, ye work
abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbor's wife: and shall ye
possess the land?

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> Say thou thus to them, Thus saith the
Lord GOD; As I live, surely they that are in the wastes shall fall by
the sword, and him that is in the open field will I give to the beasts
to be devoured, and they that are in the forts and in the caves shall
die by the pestilence.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> For I will lay the land most desolate,
and the pomp of her strength shall cease; and the mountains of Israel
shall be desolate, that none shall pass through.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Then shall they know that I am the
LORD, when I have laid the land most desolate because of all their
abominations which they have committed.

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> Also, thou son of man, the children of
thy people still are talking against thee by the walls and in the doors
of the houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother,
saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth
from the LORD.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> And they come to thee as the people
come, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words,
but they will not do them: for with their mouth they show much love, but
their heart goeth after their covetousness.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> And lo, thou art to them as a very
lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument: for they hear thy words, but they do not perform them.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> And when this cometh to pass, (lo, it
will come,) then shall they know that a prophet hath been among them.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Son of man, prophesy against the
shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say to them, Thus saith the Lord GOD
to the shepherds; Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed
themselves! should not the shepherds feed the flocks?

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe yourselves
with the wool, ye kill them that are fed: but ye feed not the flock.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> The diseased ye have not strengthened,
neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up
that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was
driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force
and with cruelty have ye ruled them.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And they were scattered, because there is
no shepherd: and they became food to all the beasts of the field, when
they were scattered.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> My sheep wandered through all the
mountains, and upon every high hill: yes, my flock was scattered upon
all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek for them.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of
the LORD;

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely
because my flock became a prey, and my flock became food to every beast
of the field, because there was no shepherd, neither did my shepherds
search for my flock, but the shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my
flock;

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> Therefore, O ye shepherds, hear the word
of the LORD;

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am
against the shepherds; and I will require my flock at their hand, and
cause them to cease from feeding the flock; neither shall the shepherds
feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my flock from their mouth,
that they may not be food for them.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I
even I, will both search for my sheep, and seek them out.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> As a shepherd seeketh out his flock in
the day that he is among his sheep that are scattered; so will I seek
out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places where they have
been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> And I will bring them out from the
people, and gather them from the countries, and will bring them to their
own land, and feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and
in all the inhabited places of the country.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> I will feed them in a good pasture, and
upon the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be: there shall they
lie in a good fold, and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the
mountains of Israel.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> I will feed my flock, and I will cause
them to lie down, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> I will seek that which was lost, and
bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was
broken, and will strengthen that which was sick: but I will destroy the
fat and the strong; I will feed them with judgment.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> And as for you, O my flock, Thus saith
the Lord GOD; Behold, I judge between cattle and cattle, between the
rams and the he-goats.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Seemeth it a small thing to you to have
eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the
residue of your pastures? and to have drank of the deep waters, but ye
must foul the residue with your feet?

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> And as for my flock, they eat that
which ye have trodden with your feet; and they drink that which ye have
fouled with your feet.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD to
them; Behold, I, even I, will judge between the fat cattle and between
the lean cattle.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Because ye have thrust with side and
with shoulder, and pushed all the diseased with your horns, till ye have
scattered them abroad;

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> Therefore will I save my flock, and
they shall no more be a prey; and I will judge between cattle and
cattle.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> And I will set up one shepherd over
them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David; he shall feed them,
and he shall be their shepherd.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> And I the LORD will be their God, and
my servant David a prince among them; I the LORD have spoken it.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> And I will make with them a covenant of
peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land: and they
shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> And I will make them and the places
around my hill a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in
its season; there shall be showers of blessing.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> And the tree of the field shall yield
her fruit, and the earth shall yield her increase, and they shall be
safe in their land, and shall know that I am the LORD, when I have
broken the bands of their yoke, and delivered them out of the hand of
those that subjected them to service.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> And they shall no more be a prey to the
heathen, neither shall the beast of the land devour them; but they shall
dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> And I will raise up for them a plant of
renown, and they shall be no more consumed with hunger in the land,
neither bear the shame of the heathen any more.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> Thus shall they know that I the LORD
their God am with them, and that they, even the house of Israel, are my
people, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> And ye my flock, the flock of my
pasture, are men, and I am your God, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Son of man, set thy face against mount
Seir, and prophesy against it,

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> And say to it, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, O mount Seir, I am against thee, and I will stretch out my hand
against thee, and I will make thee most desolate.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> I will lay thy cities waste, and thou
shalt be desolate, and thou shalt know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred,
and hast shed the blood of the children of Israel by the force of the
sword in the time of their calamity, in the time that their iniquity had
an end:

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD,
I will prepare thee to blood, and blood shall pursue thee: since thou
hast not hated blood, even blood shall pursue thee.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> Thus will I make mount Seir most
desolate, and cut off from it him that passeth out and him that
returneth.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And I will fill his mountains with his
slain men: in thy hills, and in thy valleys, and in all thy rivers,
shall they fall that are slain with the sword.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> I will make thee perpetual desolations,
and thy cities shall not return: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> Because thou hast said, These two
nations and these two countries shall be mine, and we will possess it;
whereas the LORD was there:

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord
GOD, I will even do according to thy anger, and according to thy envy
which thou hast used out of thy hatred against them; and I will make
myself known among them, when I have judged thee.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> And thou shalt know that I am the LORD,
and that I have heard all thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against
the mountains of Israel, saying, They are laid desolate, they are given
us to consume.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> Thus with your mouth ye have boasted
against me, and have multiplied your words against me: I have heard
them.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; When the whole
earth rejoiceth, I will make thee desolate.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> As thou didst rejoice at the
inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so will I
do to thee: thou shalt be desolate, O mount Seir, and all Edom, even all
of it: and they shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> Also thou son of man, prophesy to the
mountains of Israel, and say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of
the LORD:

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because the
enemy had said against you, Aha, even the ancient high places are ours
in possession:

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> Therefore prophesy and say, Thus saith
the Lord GOD; Because they have made you desolate, and swallowed you up
on every side, that ye might be a possession to the residue of the
heathen, and ye are taken up in the lips of talkers, and are an infamy
of the people:

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> Therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear
the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith the Lord GOD to the mountains, and
to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys, to the desolate wastes,
and to the cities that are forsaken, which became a prey and derision to
the residue of the heathen that are around;

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Surely
in the fire of my jealousy have I spoken against the residue of the
heathen, and against all Edom, who have appointed my land into their
possession with the joy of all their heart, with despiteful minds, to
cast it out for a prey.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Prophesy therefore concerning the land of
Israel, and say to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and
to the valleys, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I have spoken in my
jealousy and in my fury, because ye have borne the shame of the heathen:

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I have
lifted up my hand, Surely the heathen that are about you, they shall
bear their shame.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall
shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people of Israel;
for they are at hand to come.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> For behold, I am for you, and I will turn
to you, and ye shall be tilled and sown:

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And I will multiply men upon you, all
the house of Israel, even all of it: and the cities shall be inhabited,
and the wastes shall be built.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> And I will multiply upon you man and
beast; and they shall increase and bring fruit: and I will settle you
after your old states, and will do better to you than at your
beginnings: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> Yes, I will cause men to walk upon you,
even my people Israel; and they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be
their inheritance, and thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them of
men.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because they
say to you, Thou land devourest men, and hast bereaved thy nations;

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> Therefore thou shalt devour men no
more, neither bereave thy nations any more, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> Neither will I cause men to hear in
thee the shame of the heathen any more, neither shalt thou bear the
reproach of the people any more, neither shalt thou cause thy nations to
fall any more, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to
me, saying,

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> Son of man, when the house of Israel
dwelt in their own land, they defiled it by their own way and by their
doings: their way was before me as the uncleanness of a removed woman.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Wherefore I poured my fury upon them
for the blood that they had shed upon the land, and for their idols with
which they had polluted it:

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> And I scattered them among the heathen,
and they were dispersed through the countries: according to their way
and according to their doings I judged them.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> And when they entered among the
heathen, whither they went, they profaned my holy name, when they said
to them, These are the people of the LORD, and are gone forth out of his
land.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> But I had pity for my holy name, which
the house of Israel had profaned among the heathen, whither they went.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Therefore say to the house of Israel,
Thus saith the Lord GOD; I do not this for your sakes, O house of
Israel, but for my holy name's sake, which ye have profaned among the
heathen, whither ye went.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> And I will sanctify my great name,
which was profaned among the heathen, which ye have profaned in the
midst of them; and the heathen shall know that I am the LORD, saith the
Lord GOD, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> For I will take you from among the
heathen, and gather you out of all countries, and will bring you into
your own land.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> Then will I sprinkle clean water upon
you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your
idols, will I cleanse you.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> A new heart also will I give you, and a
new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart
out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> And I will put my spirit within you,
and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments,
and do them.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> And ye shall dwell in the land that I
gave to your fathers; and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> I will also save you from all your
uncleannesses: and I will call for the corn, and will increase it, and
lay no famine upon you.

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> And I will multiply the fruit of the
tree, and the increase of the field, that ye shall receive no more
reproach of famine among the heathen.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> Then shall ye remember your own evil
ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall lothe yourselves in
your own sight for your iniquities, and for your abominations.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> Not for your sakes do I this, saith the
Lord GOD, be it known to you: be ashamed and confounded for your own
ways, O house of Israel.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day
that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities I will also
cause you to dwell in the cities, and the wastes shall be built.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> And the desolate land shall be tilled,
whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> And they shall say, This land that was
desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate
and ruined cities are become fortified, and are inhabited.

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> Then the heathen that are left around
you shall know that I the LORD build the ruined places, and plant that
which was desolate: I the LORD have spoken it, and I will do it.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will yet for
this be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them; I will
increase them with men like a flock.

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> As the holy flock, as the flock of
Jerusalem in her solemn feasts; so shall the waste cities be filled with
flocks of men: and they shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> The hand of the LORD was upon me, and
carried me out in the spirit of the LORD, and set me down in the midst
of the valley which was full of bones,

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> And caused me to pass by them around: and
behold, there were very many in the open valley; and lo, they were very
dry.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And he said to me, Son of man, can these
bones live? and I answered, O Lord GOD, thou knowest.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> Again he said to me, Prophesy upon these
bones, and say to them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the LORD.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD to these bones;
Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live:

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And I will lay sinews upon you, and will
bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you,
and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> So I prophesied as I was commanded: and
as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones
came together, bone to his bone.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> And when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the
flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered them above: but there was
no breath in them.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> Then said he to me, Prophesy to the wind,
prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Come
from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they
may live.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> So I prophesied as he commanded me, and
the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet,
an exceeding great army.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Then he said to me, Son of man, these
bones are the whole house of Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are
dried, and our hope is lost: we are cut off for our parts.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Therefore prophesy and say to them,
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, O my people, I will open your graves,
and cause you to come out of your graves, and bring you into the land of
Israel.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And ye shall know that I am the LORD,
when I have opened your graves, O my people, and brought you out of your
graves,

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> And shall put my spirit in you, and ye
shall live, and I shall place you in your own land: then shall ye know
that I the LORD have spoken it, and performed it, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> The word of the LORD came again to me,
saying,

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> Moreover, thou son of man, take thee
one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel
his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph,
the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions:

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> And join them one to another into one
stick; and they shall become one in thy hand.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> And when the children of thy people
shall speak to thee, saying, Wilt thou not show us what thou meanest by
these?

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Say to them, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of
Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with
him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they
shall be one in my hand.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And the sticks on which thou writest
shall be in thy hand before their eyes.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And say to them, Thus saith the Lord
GOD; Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen,
whither they are gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring
them into their own land:

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> And I will make them one nation in the
land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them
all: and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be
divided into two kingdoms any more at all:

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> Neither shall they defile themselves
any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with
any of their transgressions: but I will save them out of all their
dwelling-places, in which they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so
shall they be my people, and I will be their God.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> And David my servant shall be king over
them; and they all shall have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my
judgments, and observe my statutes, and do them.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> And they shall dwell in the land that I
have given to Jacob my servant, in which your fathers have dwelt, and
they shall dwell in it, even they, and their children, and their
children's children for ever: and my servant David shall be their prince
for ever.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> Moreover I will make a covenant of
peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them: and I
will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the
midst of them for evermore.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> My tabernacle also shall be with them:
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> And the heathen shall know that I the
LORD do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them
for ever.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the
land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy
against him.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD: Behold,
I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal:

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And I will turn thee back, and put hooks
into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thy army, horses and
horsemen, all of them clothed with all sorts of armor, even a great
company with bucklers and shields, all of them handling swords:

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Persia, Cush, and Phut with them; all of
them with shield and helmet:

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> Gomer, and all his bands; the house of
Togarmah of the north quarters, and all his bands: and many people with
thee.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> Be thou prepared, and prepare for
thyself, thou, and all thy company that are assembled to thee, and be
thou a guard to them.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> After many days thou shalt be visited: in
the latter years thou shalt come into the land that is brought back from
the sword, and is gathered out of many people, against the mountains of
Israel, which have been always waste: but it is brought forth out of the
nations, and they shall all dwell in safety.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm,
thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy bands,
and many people with thee.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; It shall also
come to pass, that at the same time shall things come into thy mind, and
thou shalt think an evil thought:

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> And thou shalt say, I will go up to the
land of unwalled villages; I will go to them that are at rest, that
dwell safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither
bars nor gates,

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> To take a spoil, and to take a prey; to
turn thy hand upon the desolate places that are now inhabited, and upon
the people that are gathered out of the nations, which have gotten
cattle and goods, that dwell in the midst of the land.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of
Tarshish, with all its young lions, shall say to thee, Art thou come to
take a spoil? hast thou gathered thy company to take a prey? to carry
away silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take a great
spoil?

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> Therefore, son of man, prophesy and say
to Gog, Thus saith the Lord GOD; In that day when my people of Israel
dwelleth safely, shalt thou not know it?

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And thou shalt come from thy place out
of the north parts, thou, and many people with thee, all of them riding
upon horses, a great company, and a mighty army:

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> And thou shalt come against my people
of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shall be in the latter days,
and I will bring thee against my land, that the heathen may know me,
when I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog, before their eyes.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Art thou he of
whom I have spoken in old time by my servants the prophets of Israel,
who prophesied in those days many years, that I would bring thee against
them?

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And it shall come to pass at the same
time when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord GOD,
that my fury shall come up in my face.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> For in my jealousy and in the fire of
my wrath have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great
shaking in the land of Israel.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> So that the fishes of the sea, and the
fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping
animals that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the
face of the earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall
be overturned, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall
fall to the ground.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> And I will call for a sword against him
throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord GOD: every man's sword shall
be against his brother.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> And I will plead against him with
pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands,
and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and
great hailstones, fire, and brimstone.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> Thus will I magnify myself, and
sanctify myself; and I will be known in the eyes of many nations, and
they shall know that I am the LORD.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> Therefore, thou son of man, prophesy
against Gog, and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against
thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal:

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And I will turn thee back, and leave but
the sixth part of thee, and will cause thee to come from the north
parts, and will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel:

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> And I will strike thy bow out of thy left
hand, and I will cause thy arrows to fall from thy right hand.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of
Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the people that are with thee: I
will give thee to the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of
the field to be devoured.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> Thou shalt fall upon the open field: for
I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> And I will send a fire on Magog, and
among them that dwell carelessly in the isles: and they shall know that
I am the LORD.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> So will I make my holy name known in the
midst of my people Israel; and I will not let them profane my holy name
any more: and the heathen shall know that I am the LORD, the Holy One in
Israel.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> Behold, it is come, and it is done, saith
the Lord GOD; this is the day of which I have spoken.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> And they that dwell in the cities of
Israel shall go forth, and shall set on fire and burn the weapons, both
the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the
handstaffs, and the spears, and they shall burn them with fire seven
years:

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> So that they shall take no wood out of
the field, neither cut down any out of the forests; for they shall burn
the weapons with fire: and they shall lay waste those that wasted them,
and rob those that robbed them, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that I will give to Gog a place there of graves in Israel, the valley of
the passengers on the east of the sea: and it shall stop the noses of
the passengers: and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude: and
they shall call it The valley of Hamon-gog.

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> And seven months shall the house of
Israel be in burying them, that they may cleanse the land.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> Yes, all the people of the land shall
bury them: and it shall be to them a renown in the day that I shall be
glorified, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> And they shall sever out men of
continual employment, passing through the land to bury with the
passengers those that remain upon the face of the earth, to cleanse it:
after the end of seven months shall they search.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And as passengers pass through the
land, when any seeth a man's bone, then shall he set up a sign by it,
till the buriers have buried it in the valley of Hamon-gog.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> And also the name of the city shall be
Hamonah. Thus shall they cleanse the land.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> And, thou son of man, thus saith the
Lord GOD; Speak to every feathered fowl, and to every beast of the
field, Assemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every side to
my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon
the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty,
and drink the blood of the princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and
of goats, of bullocks, all of them fatlings of Bashan.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> And ye shall eat fat till ye are full,
and drink blood till ye are drunken, of my sacrifice which I have
sacrificed for you.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> Thus ye shall be filled at my table
with horses and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war,
saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> And I will set my glory among the
heathen, and all the heathen shall see my judgment that I have executed,
and my hand that I have laid upon them.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> So the house of Israel shall know that
I am the LORD their God from that day and forward.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> And the heathen shall know that the
house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity: because they
trespassed against me, therefore I hid my face from them, and gave them
into the hand of their enemies: so they all fell by the sword.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> According to their uncleanness and
according to their transgressions have I done to them, and hid my face
from them.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Now
will I bring again the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole
house of Israel, and will be jealous for my holy name;

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> After they have borne their shame, and
all their trespasses by which they have trespassed against me, when they
dwelt safely in their land, and none made them afraid.

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> When I have brought them again from the
people, and gathered them out of the lands of their enemies, and am
sanctified in them in the sight of many nations;

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> Then shall they know that I am the LORD
their God, who caused them to be led into captivity among the heathen:
but I have gathered them to their own land, and have left none of them
there any more.

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> Neither will I hide my face any more
from them: for I have poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel,
saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> In the five and twentieth year of our
captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth day of the month,
in the fourteenth year after the city was smitten, in the same day the
hand of the LORD was upon me, and brought me thither.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> In the visions of God he brought me into
the land of Israel, and set me upon a very high mountain, by which was
as the frame of a city on the south.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> And he brought me thither, and behold,
there was a man, whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with
a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the
gate.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And the man said to me, Son of man,
behold with thy eyes, and hear with thy ears, and set thy heart upon all
that I shall show thee; for, to the intent that I might show them to
thee art thou brought hither: declare all that thou seest to the house
of Israel.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And behold a wall on the outside of the
house around, and in the man's hand a measuring reed of six cubits long
by the cubit and a hand-breadth: so he measured the breadth of the
building, one reed: and the hight, one reed.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> Then he came to the gate which looketh
towards the east, and ascended its stairs, and measured the threshhold
of the gate, which was one reed broad; and the other threshhold of the
gate, which was one reed broad.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> And every little chamber was one reed
long, and one reed broad; and between the little chambers were five
cubits; and the threshhold of the gate by the porch of the gate within
was one reed.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> He measured also the porch of the gate
within, one reed.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> Then he measured the porch of the gate,
eight cubits; and its posts, two cubits; and the porch of the gate was
inward.

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> And the little chambers of the gate
eastward were three on this side, and three on that side; they three
were of one measure: and the posts had one measure on this side and on
that side.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> And he measured the breadth of the
entry of the gate, ten cubits; and the length of the gate, thirteen
cubits.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> The space also before the little
chambers was one cubit on this side, and the space was one cubit on that
side: and the little chambers were six cubits on this side, and six
cubits on that side.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> He measured then the gate from the roof
of one little chamber to the roof of another: the breadth was five and
twenty cubits, door against door.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> He made also posts of sixty cubits;
even to the post of the court around the gate.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> And from the face of the gate of the
entrance to the face of the porch of the inner gate were fifty cubits.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> And there were narrow windows to the
little chambers, and to their posts within the gate around, and likewise
to the arches: and windows were around inward: and upon each post were
palm-trees.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> Then he brought me into the outward
court, and lo, there were chambers, and a pavement made for the court
around: thirty chambers were upon the pavement.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> And the pavement by the side of the
gates over against the length of the gates was the lower pavement.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> Then he measured the breadth from the
front of the lower gate to the front of the inner court without, a
hundred cubits eastward and northward.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> And the gate of the outward court that
looked towards the north, he measured its length, and its breadth.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> And the little chambers of it were
three on this side and three on that side; and its posts and its arches
were after the measure of the first gate; its length was fifty cubits,
and its breadth five and twenty cubits.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> And their windows, and their arches,
and their palm-trees, were after the measure of the gate that looketh
towards the east; and they went up to it by seven steps; and its arches
were before them.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> And the gate of the inner court was
over against the gate towards the north, and towards the east; and he
measured from gate to gate a hundred cubits.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> After that he brought me towards the
south, and behold a gate towards the south: and he measured its posts
and its arches according to these measures.

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> And there were windows in it and in its
arches around, like those windows: the length was fifty cubits, and the
breadth five and twenty cubits.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> And there were seven steps to go up to
it, and its arches were before them: and it had palm-trees, one on this
side, and another on that side, upon its posts.

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> And there was a gate in the inner court
towards the south: and he measured from gate to gate towards the south a
hundred cubits.

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> And he brought me to the inner court by
the south gate; and he measured the south gate according to these
measures;

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> And its little chambers, and its posts,
and its arches, according to these measures; and there were windows in
it and in its arches around: it was fifty cubits long, and five and
twenty cubits broad.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> And the arches around were five and
twenty cubits long, and five cubits broad.

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> And its arches were towards the outer
court; and palm-trees were upon its posts: and the ascent to it had
eight steps.

<span id="an_40:32">40:32</span> And he brought me into the inner court
towards the east: and he measured the gate according to these measures.

<span id="an_40:33">40:33</span> And its little chambers, and its posts,
and its arches, were according to these measures; and there were windows
in it and in its arches around: it was fifty cubits long, and five and
twenty cubits broad.

<span id="an_40:34">40:34</span> And its arches were towards the outward
court; and palm-trees were upon its posts, on this side, and on that
side: and the ascent to it had eight steps.

<span id="an_40:35">40:35</span> And he brought me to the north gate,
and measured it according to these measures;

<span id="an_40:36">40:36</span> Its little chambers, its posts, and its
arches, and the windows to it around: the length was fifty cubits, and
the breadth five and twenty cubits.

<span id="an_40:37">40:37</span> And its posts were towards the outer
court; and palm-trees were upon its posts, on this side, and on that
side: and the ascent to it had eight steps.

<span id="an_40:38">40:38</span> And the chambers and its entries were
by the posts of the gates, where they washed the burnt-offering.

<span id="an_40:39">40:39</span> And in the porch of the gate were two
tables on this side, and two tables on that side, to slay upon it the
burnt-offering and the sin-offering and the trespass-offering.

<span id="an_40:40">40:40</span> And at the side without, as one goeth
up to the entry of the north gate, were two tables; and on the other
side, which was at the porch of the gate, were two tables.

<span id="an_40:41">40:41</span> Four tables were on this side, and four
tables on that side, by the side of the gate; eight tables, upon which
they slew their sacrifices.

<span id="an_40:42">40:42</span> And the four tables were of hewn stone
for the burnt-offering, of a cubit and a half long, and a cubit and a
half broad, and one cubit high: upon which also they laid the
instruments with which they slew the burnt-offering and the sacrifice.

<span id="an_40:43">40:43</span> And within were hooks, a hand broad,
fastened around: and upon the tables was the flesh of the offering.

<span id="an_40:44">40:44</span> And without the inner gate were the
chambers of the singers in the inner court, which was at the side of the
north gate; and their prospect was towards the south: one at the side of
the east gate having the prospect towards the north.

<span id="an_40:45">40:45</span> And he said to me, This chamber, whose
prospect is towards the south, is for the priests, the keepers of the
charge of the house.

<span id="an_40:46">40:46</span> And the chamber whose prospect is
towards the north is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the
altar: these are the sons of Zadok among the sons of Levi, who come near
to the LORD to minister to him.

<span id="an_40:47">40:47</span> So he measured the court, a hundred
cubits long, and a hundred cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar that
was before the house.

<span id="an_40:48">40:48</span> And he brought me to the porch of the
house, and measured each post of the porch, five cubits on this side,
and five cubits on that side: and the breadth of the gate was three
cubits on this side, and three cubits on that side.

<span id="an_40:49">40:49</span> The length of the porch was twenty
cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits; and he brought me by the steps by
which they went up to it: and there were pillars by the posts, one on
this side, and another on that side.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> Afterward he brought me to the temple,
and measured the posts, six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits
broad on the other side, which was the breadth of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> And the breadth of the door was ten
cubits; and the sides of the door were five cubits on the one side, and
five cubits on the other side: and he measured the length of it forty
cubits: and the breadth, twenty cubits.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> Then he went inward, and measured the
post of the door, two cubits; and the door, six cubits; and the breadth
of the door, seven cubits.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> So he measured the length of it twenty
cubits; and the breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple: and he said
to me, This is the most holy place.

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> Afterward he measured the wall of the
house, six cubits; and the breadth of every side-chamber, four cubits,
round the house on every side.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> And the side-chambers were three, one
over another, and thirty in order; and they entered into the wall which
was of the house for the side-chambers around, that they might have
hold, but they had not hold in the wall of the house.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> And there was an enlarging, and a winding
about still upward to the side-chambers: for the winding about of the
house went still upward around the house; therefore the breadth of the
house was still upward, and so increased from the lowest chamber to the
highest by the midst.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> I saw also the hight of the house around:
the foundations of the side-chambers were a full reed of six great
cubits.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> The thickness of the wall, which was for
the side-chamber without, was five cubits: and that which was left was
the place of the side-chambers that were within.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> And between the chambers was the width
of twenty cubits around the house on every side.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> And the doors of the side-chambers were
towards the place that was left, one door towards the north, and another
door towards the south: and the breadth of the place that was left was
five cubits around.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> Now the building that was before the
separate place at the end towards the west was seventy cubits broad; and
the wall of the building was five cubits thick around, and its length
ninety cubits.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> So he measured the house, a hundred
cubits long; and the separate place, and the building, with its walls, a
hundred cubits long;

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> Also the breadth of the face of the
house, and of the separate place towards the east, a hundred cubits.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> And he measured the length of the
building over against the separate place which was behind it, and its
galleries on the one side and on the other side, a hundred cubits, with
the inner temple, and the porches of the court;

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> The door posts, and the narrow windows,
and the galleries around on their three stories, over against the door,
ceiled with wood around, and from the ground up to the windows, and the
windows were covered;

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> To that above the door, even to the
inner house, and without, and by all the wall around within and without,
by measure.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> And it was made with cherubim and
palm-trees, so that a palm-tree was between a cherub and a cherub; and
every cherub had two faces;

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> So that the face of a man was towards
the palm-tree on the one side, and the face of a young lion towards the
palm-tree on the other side: it was made through all the house around.

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> From the ground to above the door were
cherubim and palm-trees made, and on the wall of the temple.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> The posts of the temple were squared,
and the face of the sanctuary; the appearance of the one as the
appearance of the other.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> The altar of wood was three cubits
high, and its length two cubits; and its corners, and its length, and
its walls, were of wood: and he said to me, This is the table that is
before the LORD.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> And the temple and the sanctuary had
two doors.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> And the doors had two leaves each, two
turning leaves; two leaves for the one door, and two leaves for the
other door.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> And there were made on them, on the
doors of the temple, cherubim and palm-trees, as were made upon the
walls; and there were thick planks upon the face of the porch without.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> And there were narrow windows and
palm-trees on the one side and on the other side, on the sides of the
porch, and upon the side-chambers of the house, and thick planks.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> Then he brought me forth into the outer
court, the way towards the north: and he brought me into the chamber
that was over against the separate place, and which was before the
building towards the north.

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> Before the length of a hundred cubits was
the north door, and the breadth was fifty cubits.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> Over against the twenty cubits which were
for the inner court, and over against the pavement which was for the
outer court, was gallery against gallery in three stories.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> And before the chambers was a walk of ten
cubits breadth inward, a way of one cubit; and their doors towards the
north.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> Now the upper chambers were shorter: for
the galleries were higher than these, than the lower, and than the
middlemost of the building.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> For they were in three stories, but had
not pillars as the pillars of the courts: therefore the building was
straitened more than the lowest and the middlemost from the ground.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And the wall that was without over
against the chambers, towards the outer court on the forepart of the
chambers, the length of it was fifty cubits.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> For the length of the chambers that were
in the outer court was fifty cubits: and lo, before the temple were a
hundred cubits.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> And from under these chambers was the
entry on the east side, as one goeth into them from the outer court.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> The chambers were in the thickness of
the wall of the court towards the east, over against the separate place,
and over against the building.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> And the way before them was like the
appearance of the chambers which were towards the north, as long as
they, and as broad as they: and all their goings out were both according
to their fashions, and according to their doors.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And according to the doors of the
chambers that were towards the south was a door in the head of the way,
even the way directly before the wall towards the east, as one entereth
into them.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> Then said he to me, The north chambers
and the south chambers which are before the separate place, they are
holy chambers, where the priests that approach to the LORD shall eat the
most holy things: there shall they lay the most holy things, and the
meat-offering, and the sin-offering, and the trespass-offering; for the
place is holy.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> When the priests enter therein, then
shall they not go out of the holy place into the outer court, but there
they shall lay their garments in which they minister; for they are holy;
and shall put on other garments, and shall approach to those things
which are for the people.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> Now when he had made an end of
measuring the inner house, he brought me forth towards the gate whose
prospect is towards the east, and measured it around.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> He measured the east side with the
measuring reed, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed around.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> He measured the north side, five
hundred reeds, with the measuring reed around.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> He measured the south side, five
hundred reeds, with the measuring reed.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> He turned about to the west side, and
measured five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed.

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> He measured it by the four sides: it
had a wall around, five hundred reeds long, and five hundred broad, to
make a separation between the sanctuary and the profane place.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> Afterward he brought me to the gate, even
the gate that looketh towards the east:

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> And behold, the glory of the God of
Israel came from the way of the east: and his voice was like a noise of
many waters: and the earth shined with his glory.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> And it was according to the appearance of
the vision which I saw, even according to the vision that I saw when I
came to destroy the city: and the visions were like the vision that I
saw by the river Kebar; and I fell upon my face.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> And the glory of the LORD came into the
house by the way of the gate whose prospect is towards the east.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> So the spirit took me up, and brought me
into the inner court; and behold, the glory of the LORD filled the
house.

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> And I heard him speaking to me out of the
house; and the man stood by me.

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> And he said to me, Son of man, the place
of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell
in the midst of the children of Israel for ever, and my holy name, shall
the house of Israel no more defile, neither they, nor their kings, by
their lewd deeds, nor by the carcasses of their kings in their high
places.

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> In their setting of their threshhold by
my threshholds, and their post by my posts, and the wall between me and
them, they have even defiled my holy name by their abominations that
they have committed: wherefore I have consumed them in my anger.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Now let them put away their lewd deeds,
and the carcasses of their kings, far from me, and I will dwell in the
midst of them for ever.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> Thou son of man, show the house to the
house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities: and let
them measure the pattern.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> And if they shall be ashamed of all
that they have done, show them the form of the house, and the fashion of
it, and its goings out, and its comings in, and all its forms, and all
its ordinances, and all its forms, and all its laws: and write it in
their sight, that they may keep the whole form of it, and all its
ordinances, and do them.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> This is the law of the house; Upon the
top of the mountain, the whole limit of it around shall be most holy.
Behold, this is the law of the house.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> And these are the measures of the altar
after the cubits: The cubit is a cubit and a hand-breadth; even the
bottom shall be a cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the border of it
by its edge around shall be a span: and this shall be the higher place
of the altar.

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> And from the bottom upon the ground
even to the lower settle shall be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit;
and from the lesser settle even to the greater settle shall be four
cubits, and the breadth one cubit.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> So the altar shall be four cubits; and
from the altar and upward shall be four horns.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> And the altar shall be twelve cubits
long, twelve broad, square in the four squares of it.

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> And the settle shall be fourteen cubits
long and fourteen broad in its four squares; and the border about it
shall be half a cubit; and the bottom of it shall be a cubit about; and
its stairs shall look towards the east.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> And he said to me, Son of man, thus
saith the Lord GOD; These are the ordinances of the altar in the day
when they shall make it, to offer burnt-offerings upon it, and to
sprinkle blood upon it.

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> And thou shalt give to the priests the
Levites that are of the seed of Zadok, who approach to me, to minister
to me, saith the Lord GOD, a young bullock for a sin-offering.

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> And thou shalt take of his blood, and
put it on the four horns of it, and on the four corners of the settle,
and upon the border around: thus shalt thou cleanse and purge it.

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> Thou shalt take the bullock also of the
sin-offering, and he shall burn it in the appointed place of the house,
without the sanctuary.

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> And on the second day thou shalt offer
a kid of the goats without blemish for a sin-offering; and they shall
cleanse the altar, as they cleansed it with the bullock.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> When thou hast made an end of cleansing
it, thou shalt offer a young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of
the flock without blemish.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> And thou shalt offer them before the
LORD, and the priests shall cast salt upon them, and they shall offer
them for a burnt-offering to the LORD.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> Seven days shalt thou prepare every day
a goat for a sin-offering: they shall also prepare a young bullock, and
a ram out of the flock, without blemish.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> Seven days shall they purge the altar
and purify it; and they shall consecrate themselves.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> And when these days have expired, it
shall be, that upon the eighth day, and so forward, the priests shall
make your burnt-offerings upon the altar, and your peace-offerings: and
I will accept you, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> Then he brought me back the way of the
gate of the outward sanctuary which looketh towards the east; and it was
shut.

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> Then said the LORD to me; This gate shall
be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it;
because the LORD the God of Israel hath entered in by it, therefore it
shall be shut.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> It is for the prince; the prince, he
shall sit in it to eat bread before the LORD; he shall enter by the way
of the porch of that gate, and shall go out by the way of the same.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> Then he brought me the way of the north
gate before the house: and I looked, and behold, the glory of the LORD
filled the house of the LORD: and I fell upon my face.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> And the LORD said to me, Son of man mark
well, and behold with thy eyes, and hear with thy ears all that I say to
thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of the LORD, and all its
laws; and mark well the entrance of the house, with every going forth of
the sanctuary;

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> And thou shalt say to the rebellious,
even to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; O ye house of
Israel, let it suffice you of all your abominations;

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> In that ye have brought into my sanctuary
strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in
my sanctuary, to pollute it, even my house, when ye offer my bread, the
fat and the blood, and they have broken my covenant because of all your
abominations.

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> And ye have not kept the charge of my
holy things: but ye have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for
yourselves.

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; No stranger,
uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my
sanctuary, of any stranger that is among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> And the Levites that have gone away far
from me, when Israel went astray, who went astray from me after their
idols; they shall even bear their iniquity.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Yet they shall be ministers in my
sanctuary, having charge at the gates of the house, and ministering to
the house: they shall slay the burnt-offering and the sacrifice for the
people, and they shall stand before them to minister to them.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> Because they ministered to them before
their idols, and caused the house of Israel to fall into iniquity;
therefore have I lifted up my hand against them, saith the Lord GOD, and
they shall bear their iniquity.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> And they shall not come near to me, to
do the office of a priest to me, nor to come near to any of my holy
things, in the most holy place: but they shall bear their shame, and
their abominations which they have committed.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> But I will make them keepers of the
charge of the house, for all its service, and for all that shall be done
therein.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> But the priests the Levites, the sons
of Zadok, that kept the charge of my sanctuary when the children of
Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me to minister to
me, and they shall stand before me to offer to me the fat and the blood,
saith the Lord GOD:

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> They shall enter into my sanctuary, and
they shall come near to my table, to minister to me, and they shall keep
my charge.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> And it shall come to pass, that when
they enter in at the gates of the inner court, they shall be clothed
with linen garments; and no wool shall come upon them, while they
minister in the gates of the inner court, and within.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> They shall have linen bonnets upon
their heads, and shall have linen breeches upon their loins; they shall
not gird themselves with any thing that causeth sweat.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> And when they go forth into the outer
court, even into the outer court to the people, they shall put off their
garments in which they ministered, and lay them in the holy chambers,
and they shall put on other garments; and they shall not sanctify the
people with their garments.

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> Neither shall they shave their heads,
nor suffer their locks to grow long; they shall only poll their heads.

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> Neither shall any priest drink wine,
when they enter into the inner court.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> Neither shall they take for their wives
a widow, nor her that is put away: but they shall take maidens of the
seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that had a priest before.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> And they shall teach my people the
difference between the holy and profane, and cause them to discern
between the unclean and the clean.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> And in controversy they shall stand in
judgment; and they shall judge it according to my judgments: and they
shall keep my laws and my statutes in all my assemblies; and they shall
hallow my sabbaths.

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> And they shall come at no dead person
to defile themselves: but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for
daughter, for brother, or for sister that hath had no husband, they may
defile themselves.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> And after he is cleansed, they shall
reckon to him seven days.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> And in the day that he goeth into the
sanctuary, to the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall
offer his sin-offering, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> And it shall be to them for an
inheritance: I am their inheritance: and ye shall give them no
possession in Israel: I am their possession.

<span id="an_44:29">44:29</span> They shall eat the meat-offering, and
the sin-offering, and the trespass-offering; and every dedicated thing
in Israel shall be theirs.

<span id="an_44:30">44:30</span> And the first of all the first-fruits
of all things, and every oblation of all, of every sort of your
oblations, shall be the priest's: ye shall also give to the priest the
first of your dough, that he may cause the blessing to rest in thy
house.

<span id="an_44:31">44:31</span> The priests shall not eat of any thing
that is dead of itself, or torn, whether of fowl or beast.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> Moreover, when ye shall divide by lot the
land for inheritance, ye shall offer an oblation to the LORD, a holy
portion of the land: the length shall be the length of five and twenty
thousand reeds, and the breadth shall be ten thousand. This shall be
holy in all its borders on every side.

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> Of this there shall be for the sanctuary
five hundred in length, with five hundred in breadth, square around; and
fifty cubits around for the suburbs of it.

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> And of this measure shalt thou measure
the length of five and twenty thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand:
and in it shall be the sanctuary and the most holy place.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> The holy portion of the land shall be for
the priests the ministers of the sanctuary, who shall come near to
minister to the LORD: and it shall be a place for their houses, and a
holy place for the sanctuary.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> And the five and twenty thousand of
length, and the ten thousand of breadth, shall also the Levites, the
ministers of the house, have for themselves, for a possession for twenty
chambers.

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> And ye shall appoint the possession of
the city five thousand broad, and five and twenty thousand long, over
against the oblation of the holy portion: it shall be for the whole
house of Israel.

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> And a portion shall be for the prince on
the one side and on the other side of the oblation of the holy portion,
and of the possession of the city, before the oblation of the holy
portion, and before the possession of the city, from the west side
westward, and from the east side eastward: and the length shall be over
against one of the portions, from the west border to the east border.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> In the land shall be his possession in
Israel: and my princes shall no more oppress my people; and the rest of
the land shall they give to the house of Israel according to their
tribes.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; Let it suffice
you, O princes of Israel: remove violence and spoil, and execute
judgment and justice, take away your exactions from my people, saith the
Lord GOD.

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> Ye shall have just balances, and a just
ephah, and a just bath.

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> The ephah and the bath shall be of one
measure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of a homer, and the
ephah the tenth part of a homer: the measure of it shall be after the
homer.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs:
twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your
maneh.

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> This is the oblation that ye shall
offer; the sixth part of an ephah of a homer of wheat, and ye shall give
the sixth part of an ephah of a homer of barley;

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> Concerning the ordinance of oil, the
bath of oil, ye shall offer the tenth part of a bath out of the cor,
which is a homer of ten baths: for ten baths are a homer:

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> And one lamb out of the flock, out of
two hundred, out of the fat pastures of Israel; for a meat-offering, and
for a burnt-offering, and for peace-offerings, to make reconciliation
for them, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> All the people of the land shall give
this oblation for the prince in Israel.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> And it shall be the prince's part to
give burnt-offerings, and meat-offerings, and drink-offerings, in the
feasts, and in the new moons, and in the sabbaths, in all solemnities of
the house of Israel: he shall prepare the sin-offering, and the
meat-offering, and the burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings, to make
reconciliation for the house of Israel.

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the first
month, in the first day of the month, thou shalt take a young bullock
without blemish, and cleanse the sanctuary:

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> And the priest shall take of the blood
of the sin-offering, and put it upon the posts of the house, and upon
the four corners of the settle of the altar, and upon the posts of the
gate of the inner court.

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> And so thou shalt do the seventh day of
the month for every one that erreth, and for him that is simple: so
shall ye reconcile the house.

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> In the first month, in the fourteenth
day of the month, ye shall have the passover, a feast of seven days;
unleavened bread shall be eaten.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> And upon that day shall the prince
prepare for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock for a
sin-offering.

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> And seven days of the feast he shall
prepare a burnt-offering to the LORD, seven bullocks and seven rams
without blemish daily the seven days; and a kid of the goats daily for a
sin-offering.

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> And he shall prepare a meat-offering of
an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and a hin of oil for an
ephah.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> In the seventh month, in the fifteenth
day of the month, shall he do the like in the feast of the seven days,
according to the sin-offering, according to the burnt-offering, and
according to the meat-offering, and according to the oil.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; The gate of the
inner court that looketh towards the east shall be shut the six working
days; but on the sabbath it shall be opened, and in the day of the new
moon it shall be opened.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> And the prince shall enter by the way of
the porch of that gate without, and shall stand by the post of the gate,
and the priest shall prepare his burnt-offering and his peace-offerings,
and he shall worship at the threshhold of the gate: then he shall go
forth; but the gate shall not be shut until the evening.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> Likewise the people of the land shall
worship at the door of this gate before the LORD in the sabbaths and in
the new moons.

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> And the burnt-offering that the prince
shall offer to the LORD in the sabbath day shall be six lambs without
blemish, and a ram without blemish.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> And the meat-offering shall be an ephah
for a ram, and the meat-offering for the lambs as he shall be able to
give, and a hin of oil to an ephah.

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> And in the day of the new moon it shall
be a young bullock without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram: they shall
be without blemish.

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> And he shall prepare a meat-offering, an
ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs according
as his hand shall be able, and a hin of oil to an ephah.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> And when the prince shall enter, he shall
go in by the way of the porch of that gate, and he shall go forth by the
way of it.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> But when the people of the land shall
come before the LORD in the solemn feasts, he that entereth in by the
way of the north gate to worship shall go out by the way of the south
gate; and he that entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth
by the way of the north gate: he shall not return by the way of the gate
by which he came in, but shall go forth over against it.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> And the prince in the midst of them,
when they go in, shall go in; and when they go forth, shall go forth.

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> And in the feasts and in the
solemnities the meat-offering shall be an ephah to a bullock, and an
ephah to a ram, and to the lambs as he is able to give, and a hin of oil
to an ephah.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> Now when the prince shall prepare a
voluntary burnt-offering or peace-offerings voluntarily to the LORD, one
shall then open to him the gate that looketh towards the east, and he
shall prepare his burnt-offering and his peace-offerings, as he did on
the sabbath-day: then he shall go forth; and after his going forth one
shall shut the gate.

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> Thou shalt daily prepare a
burnt-offering to the LORD of a lamb of the first year without blemish:
thou shalt prepare it every morning.

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> And thou shalt prepare a meat-offering
for it every morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of
a hin of oil, to temper with the fine flour; a meat-offering continually
by a perpetual ordinance to the LORD.

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and
the meat-offering, and the oil, every morning for a continual
burnt-offering.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; If the prince
shall give a gift to any of his sons, the inheritance of it shall be to
his sons; it shall be their possession by inheritance.

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> But if he shall give a gift of his
inheritance to one of his servants, then it shall be his to the year of
liberty; afterward it shall return to the prince: but his inheritance
shall be to his sons for them.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> Moreover the prince shall not take of
the people's inheritance by oppression, to thrust them out of their
possession; but he shall give his sons' inheritance out of his own
possession: that my people be not scattered every man from his
possession.

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> Afterward he brought me through the
entry, which was at the side of the gate, into the holy chambers of the
priests, which looked towards the north: and behold, there was a place
on the two sides westward.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> Then said he to me, This is the place
where the priests shall boil the trespass-offering and the sin-offering,
where they shall bake the meat-offering; that they bear them not out
into the outer court, to sanctify the people.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> Then he brought me forth into the outer
court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court; and
behold, in every corner of the court there was a court.

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> In the four corners of the court there
were courts joined of forty cubits long and thirty broad: these four
corners were of one measure.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> And there was a row of building around
in them, around them four, and it was made with boiling places under the
rows around.

<span id="an_46:24">46:24</span> Then said he to me, These are the
places of them that boil, where the ministers of the house shall boil
the sacrifice of the people.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> Afterward he brought me again to the door
of the house; and behold, waters issued out from under the threshhold of
the house eastward: for the front of the house stood towards the east,
and the waters came down from under from the right side of the house, at
the south side of the altar.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> Then he brought me out of the way of the
gate northward, and led me about the way without to the outer gate by
the way that looketh eastward; and behold, there ran out waters on the
right side.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> And when the man that had the line in his
hand went forth eastward, he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought
me through the waters; the waters were to the ankles.

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> Again he measured a thousand, and brought
me through the waters; the waters were to the knees. Again he measured a
thousand, and brought me through; the waters were to the loins.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> Afterward he measured a thousand; and it
was a river that I could not pass over: for the waters had risen, waters
to swim in, a river that could not be passed over.

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> And he said to me, Son of man, hast thou
seen this? Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the brink of
the river.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> Now when I had returned, behold, at the
bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> Then said he to me, These waters issue
out towards the east country, and go down into the desert, and go into
the sea: which being brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be
healed.

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> And it shall come to pass, that every
thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come,
shall live: and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because
these waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed; and every
thing shall live whither the river cometh.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> And it shall come to pass, that the
fishers shall stand upon it from En-gedi even to En-eglaim; they shall
be a place to spread forth nets; their fish shall be according to their
kinds, as the fish of the great sea, very numerous.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> But its miry places and its marshes
shall not be healed; they shall be given to salt.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> And by the river upon its bank, on this
side and on that side, shall grow all trees for food, whose leaf shall
not fade, neither shall its fruit be consumed: it shall bring forth new
fruit according to its months, because their waters they issued out of
the sanctuary: and its fruit shall be for food, and its leaf for
medicine.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD; This shall be
the border, by which ye shall inherit the land according to the twelve
tribes of Israel: Joseph shall have two portions.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> And ye shall inherit it, one as well as
another: concerning which I lifted up my hand to give it to your
fathers: and this land shall fall to you for inheritance.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> And this shall be the border of the
land towards the north side, from the great sea, the way of Hethlon, as
men go to Zedad;

<span id="an_47:16">47:16</span> Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is
between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazar-hatticon,
which is by the border of Hauran.

<span id="an_47:17">47:17</span> And the border from the sea shall be
Hazar-enan, the border of Damascus, and the north northward, and the
border of Hamath. And this is the north side.

<span id="an_47:18">47:18</span> And the east side ye shall measure from
Hauran, and from Damascus, and from Gilead, and from the land of Israel
by Jordan, from the border to the east sea. And this is the east side.

<span id="an_47:19">47:19</span> And the south side southward, from
Tamar even to the waters of strife in Kadesh, the river to the great
sea. And this is the south side southward.

<span id="an_47:20">47:20</span> The west side also shall be the great
sea from the border, till a man cometh over against Hamath. This is the
west side.

<span id="an_47:21">47:21</span> So shall ye divide this land to you
according to the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_47:22">47:22</span> And it shall come to pass, that ye
shall divide it by lot for an inheritance to you, and to the strangers
that sojourn among you, which shall beget children among you: and they
shall be to you as born in the country among the children of Israel;
they shall have inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_47:23">47:23</span> And it shall come to pass, that in what
tribe the stranger sojourneth, there shall ye give him his inheritance,
saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Now these are the names of the tribes.
From the north end to the border of the way of Hethlon, as one goeth to
Hamath, Hazar-enan, the border of Damascus northward, to the limit of
Hamath; for these are his sides east and west; a portion for Dan.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> And by the border of Dan, from the east
side to the west side, a portion for Asher.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> And by the border of Asher, from the east
side even to the west side, a portion for Naphtali.

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> And by the border of Naphtali, from the
east side to the west side, a portion for Manasseh.

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> And by the border of Manasseh, from the
east side to the west side, a portion for Ephraim.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> And by the border of Ephraim, from the
east side even to the west side, a portion for Reuben.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> And by the border of Reuben, from the
east side to the west side, a portion for Judah.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> And by the border of Judah, from the east
side to the west side, shall be the offering which ye shall offer of
five and twenty thousand reeds in breadth, and in length as one of the
other parts, from the east side to the west side: and the sanctuary
shall be in the midst of it.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> The oblation that ye shall offer to the
LORD shall be of five and twenty thousand in length, and of ten thousand
in breadth.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> And for them, even for the priests,
shall be this holy oblation; towards the north five and twenty thousand
in length, and towards the west ten thousand in breadth, and towards the
east ten thousand in breadth, and towards the south five and twenty
thousand in length: and the sanctuary of the LORD shall be in the midst
of it.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> It shall be for the priests that are
sanctified of the sons of Zadok; who have kept my charge, who went not
astray when the children of Israel went astray, as the Levites went
astray.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> And this oblation of the land that is
offered shall be to them a thing most holy, by the border of the
Levites.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> And over against the border of the
priests the Levites shall have five and twenty thousand in length, and
ten thousand in breadth: all the length shall be five and twenty
thousand, and the breadth ten thousand.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> And they shall not sell of it, neither
exchange, nor alienate the first-fruits of the land: for it is holy to
the LORD.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> And the five thousand, that are left in
the breadth over against the five and twenty thousand, shall be a
profane place for the city, for dwelling, and for suburbs, and the city
shall be in the midst of it.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> And these shall be the measures of it;
the north side four thousand and five hundred, and the south side four
thousand and five hundred, and on the east side four thousand and five
hundred, and the west side four thousand and five hundred.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> And the suburbs of the city shall be
towards the north two hundred and fifty, and towards the south two
hundred and fifty, and towards the east two hundred and fifty, and
towards the west two hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> And the residue in length over against
the oblation of the holy portion shall be ten thousand eastward, and ten
thousand westward: and it shall be over against the oblation of the holy
portion; and its increase shall be for food to them that serve the city.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> And they that serve the city shall
serve it out of all the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> All the oblation shall be five and
twenty thousand by five and twenty thousand: ye shall offer the holy
oblation foursquare, with the possession of the city.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> And the residue shall be for the
prince, on the one side and on the other of the holy oblation, and of
the possession of the city, over against the five and twenty thousand of
the oblation towards the east border, and westward over against the five
and twenty thousand towards the west border, over against the portions
for the prince: and it shall be the holy oblation; and the sanctuary of
the house shall be in the midst of it.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> Moreover from the possession of the
Levites, and from the possession of the city, being in the midst of that
which is the prince's, between the border of Judah and the border of
Benjamin, shall be for the prince.

<span id="an_48:23">48:23</span> As for the rest of the tribes, from the
east side to the west side, Benjamin shall have a portion.

<span id="an_48:24">48:24</span> And by the border of Benjamin, from the
east side to the west side, Simeon shall have a portion.

<span id="an_48:25">48:25</span> And by the border of Simeon, from the
east side to the west side, Issachar a portion.

<span id="an_48:26">48:26</span> And by the border of Issachar, from the
east side to the west side, Zebulun a portion.

<span id="an_48:27">48:27</span> And by the border of Zebulun, from the
east side to the west side, Gad a portion.

<span id="an_48:28">48:28</span> And by the border of Gad, at the south
side southward, the border shall be even from Tamar to the waters of
strife in Kadesh, and to the river towards the great sea.

<span id="an_48:29">48:29</span> This is the land which ye shall divide
by lot to the tribes of Israel for inheritance, and these are their
portions, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_48:30">48:30</span> And these are the goings out of the
city on the north side, four thousand and five hundred measures.

<span id="an_48:31">48:31</span> And the gates of the city shall be
after the names of the tribes of Israel: three gates northward; one gate
of Reuben, one gate of Judah, one gate of Levi.

<span id="an_48:32">48:32</span> And at the east side four thousand and
five hundred: and three gates; one gate of Joseph, one gate of Benjamin,
one gate of Dan.

<span id="an_48:33">48:33</span> And at the south side four thousand and
five hundred measures: and three gates; one gate of Simeon, one gate of
Issachar, one gate of Zebulun.

<span id="an_48:34">48:34</span> And the west side four thousand and
five hundred, with their three gates: one gate of Gad, one gate of
Asher, one gate of Naphtali.

<span id="an_48:35">48:35</span> The circuit was eighteen thousand
measures: and the name of the city from that day shall be, The LORD is
there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel](dan)
