[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nah)  [Next](zep) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Habakkuk

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The burden which Habakkuk the prophet saw.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> O LORD, how long shall I cry, and thou wilt
not hear! even cry out to thee of violence, and thou wilt not save!

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Why dost thou show me iniquity, and cause
me to behold grievance? for devastation and violence are before me: and
there are that raise strife and contention.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Therefore the law is slackened, and
judgment doth never go forth: for the wicked doth encompass the
righteous; therefore wrong judgment proceedeth.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Behold ye among the heathen, and regard,
and wonder marvelously: for I will work a work in your days, which ye
will not believe though it be told you.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that
bitter and hasty nation, which shall march through the breadth of the
land, to possess the dwelling-places that are not theirs.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> They are terrible and dreadful: their
judgment and their dignity shall proceed from themselves.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Their horses also are swifter than the
leopards, and are more fierce than the evening wolves: and their
horsemen shall spread themselves, and their horsemen shall come from
far; they shall fly as the eagle that hasteth to eat.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> They shall come all for violence: their
faces shall sup up as the east wind, and they shall gather the captivity
as the sand.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And they shall scoff at the kings, and
the princes shall be a scorn to them: they shall deride every strong
hold; for they shall heap dust, and take it.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then shall his mind change, and he shall
pass over, and offend, imputing this his power to his god.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Art thou not from everlasting, O LORD my
God, my Holy One? We shall not die. O LORD, thou hast ordained them for
judgment; and O mighty God, thou hast established them for correction.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Thou art of purer eyes than to behold
evil, and canst not look on iniquity: why lookest thou on them that deal
treacherously, and keepest silence when the wicked devoureth the man
that is more righteous than he?

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And makest men as the fishes of the sea,
as the creeping animals that have no ruler over them?

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> They take up all of them with the angle,
they catch them in their net, and gather them in their drag: therefore
they rejoice and are glad.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Therefore they sacrifice to their net,
and burn incense to their drag; because by them their portion is fat,
and their food plenteous.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Shall they therefore empty their net, and
not spare continually to slay the nations?

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I will stand upon my watch, and seat myself
upon the tower, and will watch to see what he will say to me, and what I
shall answer when I am reproved.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the LORD answered me, and said, Write
the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth
it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For the vision is yet for an appointed
time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it may tarry,
wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Behold, his soul which is lifted up, is not
upright in him: but the just shall live by his faith.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Yes also, because he transgresseth by wine,
he is a proud man, neither keepeth at home, who enlargeth his desire, as
hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth to him all
nations, and collecteth to him all people:

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Shall not all these take up a parable
against him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, Woe to him
that increaseth that which is not his! how long? and to him that ladeth
himself with thick clay!

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Shall they not rise suddenly that shall
bite thee, and awake that shall disturb thee, and thou shalt be for
booties to them?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Because thou hast laid waste many nations,
all the remnant of the people shall lay thee waste; because of men's
blood, and for the violence of the land, of the city, and of all that
dwell therein.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Woe to him that coveteth an evil
covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may
be delivered from the power of evil!

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Thou hast consulted shame to thy house by
cutting off many people, and hast sinned against thy soul.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For the stone shall cry out of the wall,
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Woe to him that buildeth a town with
blood, and establisheth a city by iniquity!

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Behold, is it not from the LORD of hosts
that the people shall labor in the very fire, and the people shall weary
themselves for very vanity?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For the earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the glory of the LORD, as the waters cover the sea.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Woe to him that giveth his neighbor
drink, that puttest thy bottle to him, and makest him drunken also, that
thou mayest look on their nakedness!

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Thou art filled with shame for glory:
drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the
LORD'S right hand shall be turned to thee, and shameful vomiting shall
be on thy glory.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For the violence of Lebanon shall cover
thee, and the spoil of beasts, which made them afraid, because of men's
blood, and for the violence of the land, of the city, and of all that
dwell therein.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> What profiteth the graven image that its
maker hath graven it; the molten image, and a teacher of lies, that the
maker of his work trusteth therein, to make dumb idols?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Woe to him that saith to the wood, Awake;
to the dumb stone, Arise, it shall teach! Behold, it is laid over with
gold and silver, and there is no breath at all in the midst of it.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But the LORD is in his holy temple: let
all the earth keep silence before him.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet upon
Shigionoth.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> O LORD, I have heard thy speech, and was
afraid: O LORD, revive thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst
of the years make known; in wrath remember mercy.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> God came from Teman, and the Holy One from
mount Paran. Selah. His glory covered the heavens, and the earth was
full of his praise.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And his brightness was as the light; he had
horns coming out of his hand; and there was the hiding of his power.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Before him went the pestilence, and burning
coals went forth at his feet.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> He stood, and measured the earth: he
beheld, and drove asunder the nations; and the everlasting mountains
were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his ways are everlasting.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction:
and the curtains of the land of Midian trembled.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Was the LORD displeased against the rivers?
was thy anger against the rivers? was thy wrath against the sea, that
thou didst ride upon thy horses, and thy chariots of salvation?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Thy bow was made quite naked, according to
the oaths of the tribes, even thy word. Selah. Thou didst cleave the
earth with rivers.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> The mountains saw thee, and they
trembled: the overflowing of the water passed by: the deep uttered his
voice, and lifted up his hands on high.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> The sun and moon stood still in their
habitation: at the light of thy arrows they went, and at the shining of
thy glittering spear.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Thou didst march through the land in
indignation, thou didst thresh the heathen in anger.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Thou wentest forth for the salvation of
thy people, even for salvation with thy anointed; thou woundedst the
head out of the house of the wicked, by uncovering the foundation to the
neck. Selah.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Thou didst strike through with his staffs
the head of his villages: they came out as a whirlwind to scatter me:
their rejoicing was as to devour the poor secretly.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Thou didst walk through the sea with thy
horses, through the mire of great waters.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> When I heard, my belly trembled; my lips
quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled
in myself, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when he cometh up to
the people, he will invade them with his troops.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Although the fig-tree shall not blossom,
neither shall fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive shall fail,
and the fields shall yield no food; the flock shall be cut off from the
fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls:

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Yet I will rejoice in the LORD, I will
joy in the God of my salvation.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> The LORD God is my strength, and he will
make my feet like hinds' feet, and he will make me to walk upon my high
places. To the chief singer on my stringed instruments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah](zep)
