[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jo3)  [Next](rev.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Jude

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and
brother of James, to them that are sanctified by God the Father, and
preserved in Jesus Christ, and called:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Mercy to you, and peace, and love, be
multiplied.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write
to you concerning the common salvation, it was needful for me to write
to you, and exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the faith,
which was once delivered to the saints.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> For certain men have crept in unawares, who
were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning
the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> I will therefore put you in remembrance,
though ye once knew this, that the Lord, having saved the people out of
the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed not.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And the angels who kept not their first
state, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness to the judgment of the great day.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities
about them in like manner, giving themselves over to impurity, and going
after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile
the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Yet Michael the archangel, when contending
with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring
against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> But these speak evil of those things
which they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in
those things they corrupt themselves.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Woe to them! for they have gone in the
way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and
perished in the gainsaying of Core.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> These are spots in your feasts of
charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear:
clouds they are without water, carried about by winds; withered autumnal
trees, without fruit, twice dead, plucked out by the roots;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Raging waves of the sea, foaming out
their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam,
prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands
of his saints,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> To execute judgment upon all, and to
convict all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which
they have impiously committed, and of all their hard speeches which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> These are murmurers, complainers, walking
after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great swelling words,
having men's persons in admiration because of advantage.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But, beloved, remember ye the words which
were spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> That they told you there would be mockers
in the last time, who would walk after their own ungodly lusts.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> These are they who separate themselves,
sensual, having not the Spirit.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But ye, beloved, building up yourselves
on your most holy faith, praying by the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Keep yourselves in the love of God,
looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And of some have compassion, making a
difference:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And others save with fear, pulling them
out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Now to him that is able to keep you from
falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory
with exceeding joy,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> To God the only wise, our Savior, be
glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation](rev.md)
