[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](isa)  [Next](lam.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Jeremiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah,
of the priests that were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To whom the word of the LORD came in the
days of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of
his reign.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the
son of Josiah king of Judah, to the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah
the son of Josiah king of Judah, to the carrying away of Jerusalem
captive in the fifth month.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Then the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Before I formed thee in embryo I knew thee;
and before thou wast born I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a
prophet to the nations.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! behold, I cannot
speak: for I am a child.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But the LORD said to me, Say not, I am a
child: for thou shalt go to all that I shall send thee, and whatever I
command thee thou shalt speak.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with
thee to deliver thee, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Then the LORD put forth his hand, and
touched my mouth. And the LORD said to me, Behold, I have put my words
in thy mouth.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> See, I have this day set thee over the
nations and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to
destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to me,
saying, Jeremiah, What seest thou? And I said, I see a rod of an
almond-tree.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then said the LORD to me, Thou hast well
seen: for I will hasten my word to perform it.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And the word of the LORD came to me the
second time, saying, What seest thou? And I said, I see a seething pot;
and its face is towards the north.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Then the LORD said to me, Out of the
north an evil shall break forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For lo, I will call all the families of
the kingdoms of the north, saith the LORD; and they shall come, and they
shall set every one his throne at the entrance of the gates of
Jerusalem, and against all its walls around, and against all the cities
of Judah.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And I will utter my judgments against
them touching all their wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have
burned incense to other gods, and worshiped the works of their own
hands.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and
arise, and speak to them all that I command thee: be not dismayed at
their faces, lest I confound thee before them.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For behold, I have made thee this day a
fortified city, and an iron pillar, and brazen walls against the whole
land, against the kings of Judah, against her princes, against her
priests, and against the people of the land.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And they shall fight against thee; but
they shall not prevail against thee; for I am with thee, saith the LORD,
to deliver thee.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Go, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem,
saying, Thus saith the LORD; I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth,
the love of thy espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness,
in a land that was not sown.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Israel was holiness to the LORD, and the
first-fruits of his increase: all that devour him shall offend; evil
shall come upon them, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Hear ye the word of the LORD, O house of
Jacob, and all the families of the house of Israel:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Thus saith the LORD, What iniquity have
your fathers found in me, that they have gone far from me, and have
walked after vanity, and have become vain?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Neither said they, Where is the LORD that
brought us out of the land of Egypt, that led us through the wilderness,
through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drouth, and of
the shades of death, through a land that no man passed through, and
where no man dwelt?

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And I brought you into a plentiful country,
to eat the fruit of it, and the goodness of it; but when ye entered, ye
defiled my land, and made my heritage an abomination.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The priests said not, Where is the LORD?
and they that handle the law knew me not: the pastors also transgressed
against me, and the prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked after things
that do not profit.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Wherefore I will yet plead with you, saith
the LORD, and with your children's children will I plead.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For pass over the isles of Chittim, and
see; and send to Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there is
such a thing.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Hath a nation changed their gods, which
are yet no gods? but my people have changed their glory for that which
doth not profit.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and
be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For my people have committed two evils;
they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed out for
themselves cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Is Israel a servant? is he a home-born
slave? why is he laid waste?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> The young lions roared upon him, and
yelled, and they made his land waste: his cities are burned without
inhabitant.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Also the children of Noph and Tahapanes
have broken the crown of thy head.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Hast thou not procured this to thyself in
that thou hast forsaken the LORD thy God, when he led thee by the way?

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And now what hast thou to do in the way
of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor? or what hast thou to do in the
way of Assyria, to drink the waters of the river?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Thy own wickedness shall correct thee,
and thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see that it
is an evil thing and bitter, that thou hast forsaken the LORD thy God,
and that my fear is not in thee, saith the Lord GOD of hosts.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For of old time I have broken thy yoke,
and burst thy bands; and thou saidst, I will not transgress; when upon
every high hill and under every green tree thou wanderest, playing the
harlot.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Yet I had planted thee a noble vine,
wholly a right seed: how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant
of a strange vine to me?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> For though thou shalt wash thee with
niter, and take thee much soap, yet thy iniquity is marked before me,
saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> How canst thou say, I am not polluted, I
have not gone after Baalim? see thy way in the valley, know what thou
hast done: thou art a swift dromedary traversing her ways;

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> A wild ass used to the wilderness, that
snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her occasion who can turn her
away? all they that seek her will not weary themselves; in her month
they shall find her.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and
thy throat from thirst: but thou saidst, There is no hope: no; for I
have loved strangers, and after them will I go.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> As the thief is ashamed when he is found,
so is the house of Israel ashamed: they, their kings, their princes, and
their priests, and their prophets,

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Saying to a stock, Thou art my father;
and to a stone, Thou hast brought me forth: for they have turned their
back to me, and not their face: but in the time of their trouble they
will say, Arise, and save us.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> But where are thy gods that thou hast
made for thyself? let them arise, if they can save thee in the time of
thy trouble: for according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O
Judah.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Why will ye plead with me? ye all have
transgressed against me, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> In vain have I smitten your children;
they have received no correction: your own sword hath devoured your
prophets, like a destroying lion.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> O generation, see ye the word of the
LORD. Have I been a wilderness to Israel? a land of darkness? why say my
people, We are lords; we will come no more to thee?

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a
bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me days without number.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love?
therefore hast thou also taught the wicked ones thy ways.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> Also in thy skirts is found the blood of
the souls of the poor innocents: I have not found it by secret search,
but upon all these.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> Yet thou sayest, Because I am innocent,
surely his anger will turn from me. Behold, I will plead with thee,
because thou sayest, I have not sinned.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> Why dost thou go about so much to change
thy way? thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of
Assyria.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> Yes, thou shalt go forth from him, and
thy hands upon thy head: for the LORD hath rejected thy confidences, and
thou shalt not prosper in them.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> They say, If a man shall put away his wife,
and she shall go from him, and become another man's, shall he return to
her again? shall not that land be greatly polluted? but thou hast played
the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Lift up thy eyes to the high places, and
see where thou hast not been lain with. In the ways hast thou sat for
them, as the Arabian in the wilderness; and thou hast polluted the land
with thy acts of lewdness, and with thy wickedness.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Therefore the showers have been withheld,
and there hath been no latter rain? and thou hadst a harlot's forehead,
thou refusedst to be ashamed.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Wilt thou not from this time cry to me, My
father, thou art the guide of my youth?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Will he retain his anger for ever? will he
keep it to the end? Behold, thou hast spoken and done evil things as
thou couldst.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> The LORD said also to me in the days of
Josiah the king, Hast thou seen that which backsliding Israel hath done?
she hath gone up upon every high mountain, and under every green tree,
and there hath played the harlot.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And I said after she had done all these
things, Turn thou to me. But she returned not. And her treacherous
sister Judah saw it.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And I saw, when for all the causes by which
backsliding Israel committed adultery I had put her away, and given her
a bill of divorce; yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went
and played the harlot also.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And it came to pass through the lightness
of her lewdness, that she defiled the land, and committed adultery with
stones and with stocks.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And yet for all this her treacherous
sister Judah hath not turned to me with her whole heart, but feignedly,
saith the LORD.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And the LORD said to me, The backsliding
Israel hath justified herself more than treacherous Judah.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Go and proclaim these words towards the
north, and say, Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the LORD; and I
will not cause my anger to fall upon you: for I am merciful, saith the
LORD, and I will not keep anger for ever.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Only acknowledge thy iniquity, that thou
hast transgressed against the LORD thy God, and hast scattered thy ways
to the strangers under every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my
voice, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Turn, O backsliding children, saith the
LORD; for I am married to you: and I will take you one of a city, and
two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion:

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And I will give you pastors according to
my heart, who shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And it shall come to pass, when ye shall
be multiplied and increased in the land, in those days, saith the LORD,
they shall say no more, The ark of the covenant of the LORD: neither
shall it come to mind: neither shall they remember it; neither shall
they visit it; neither shall that be done any more.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> At that time they shall call Jerusalem
the throne of the LORD; and all the nations shall be gathered to it, to
the name of the LORD, to Jerusalem; neither shall they walk any more
after the imagination of their evil heart.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> In those days the house of Judah shall
walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together from the
land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance to
your fathers.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> But I said, How shall I put thee among
the children, and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the
hosts of nations? and I said, Thou shalt call me, My father; and shalt
not turn away from me.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Surely as a wife treacherously departeth
from her husband, so have ye dealt treacherously with me, O house of
Israel, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> A voice was heard upon the high places,
weeping and supplications of the children of Israel: for they have
perverted their way, and they have forgotten the LORD their God.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Return, ye backsliding children, and I
will heal your backslidings. Behold, we come to thee; for thou art the
LORD our God.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from
the hills, and from the multitude of mountains: truly in the LORD our
God is the salvation of Israel.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> For shame hath devoured the labor of our
fathers from our youth; their flocks and their herds, their sons and
their daughters.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> We lie down in our shame, and our
confusion covereth us: for we have sinned against the LORD our God, we
and our fathers, from our youth even to this day, and have not obeyed
the voice of the LORD our God.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the
LORD, return to me: and if thou wilt put away thy abominations out of my
sight, then shalt thou not remove.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And thou shalt swear, The LORD liveth, in
truth, in judgment, and in righteousness; and the nations shall bless
themselves in him, and in him shall they glory.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For thus saith the LORD to the men of Judah
and Jerusalem, Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Circumcise yourselves to the LORD, and take
away the foreskins of your heart, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of
Jerusalem: lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none can
quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Declare ye in Judah, and publish in
Jerusalem; and say, Blow ye the trumpet in the land: cry, Gather
together, and say, Assemble yourselves, and let us go into the fortified
cities.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Set up the standard towards Zion: retire,
stay not: for I will bring evil from the north, and a great destruction.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> The lion is come up from his thicket, and
the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way; he is gone forth from his
place to make thy land desolate; thy cities shall be laid waste, without
an inhabitant.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For this gird you with sackcloth, lament
and howl for the fierce anger of the LORD is not turned back from us.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And it shall come to pass at that day,
saith the LORD, that the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart
of the princes; and the priests shall be astonished, and the prophets
shall wonder.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! surely thou
hast greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall have
peace; whereas the sword reacheth to the soul.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> At that time shall it be said to this
people and to Jerusalem, A dry wind of the high places in the wilderness
towards the daughter of my people, not to fan, nor to cleanse,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Even a full wind from those places shall
come to me: now also will I give sentence against them.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Behold, he shall come up as clouds, and
his chariots shall be as a whirlwind: his horses are swifter than
eagles. Woe to us! for we are laid waste.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from
wickedness, that thou mayest be saved. How long shall thy vain thoughts
lodge within thee?

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For a voice declareth from Dan, and
publisheth affliction from mount Ephraim.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Make ye mention to the nations; behold,
publish against Jerusalem, that watchers come from a far country, and
give out their voice against the cities of Judah.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> As keepers of a field they are against
her on all sides; because she hath been rebellious against me, saith the
LORD.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Thy way and thy doings have procured
these things to thee; this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter,
because it reacheth to thy heart.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> My bowels, my bowels! I am pained at my
very heart; my heart maketh a noise in me; I cannot hold my peace,
because thou hast heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm
of war.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Destruction upon destruction is cried;
for the whole land is laid waste; suddenly are my tents ruined, and my
curtains in a moment.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> How long shall I see the standard, and
hear the sound of the trumpet?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For my people are foolish, they have not
known me; they are sottish children, and they have no understanding:
they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> I beheld the earth, and lo, it was
without form, and void; and the heavens, and they had no light.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> I beheld the mountains, and lo, they
trembled, and all the hills moved lightly.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> I beheld, and lo, there was no man, and
all the fowls of the heavens had fled.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> I beheld, and lo, the fruitful place was
a wilderness, and all its cities were broken down at the presence of the
LORD, and by his fierce anger.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For thus hath the LORD said, The whole
land shall be desolate; yet will I not make a full end.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> For this shall the earth mourn, and the
heavens above be black: because I have spoken it, I have purposed it,
and will not repent, neither will I turn back from it.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> The whole city shall flee for the noise
of the horsemen and bowmen; they shall go into thickets, and climb up
upon the rocks: every city shall be forsaken, and not a man dwell
therein.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And when thou art laid waste, what wilt
thou do? Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest
thee with ornaments of gold, though thou rendest thy face with painting,
in vain shalt thou make thyself fair: thy lovers will despise thee, they
will seek thy life.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> For I have heard a voice as of a woman in
travail, and the anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child,
the voice of the daughter of Zion, that bewaileth herself, that
spreadeth her hands, saying, Woe is me now! for my soul is wearied
because of murderers.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Run ye to and fro through the streets of
Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in its broad places, if ye
can find a man, if there is any that executeth judgment, that seeketh
the truth; and I will pardon it.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And though they say, The LORD liveth;
surely they swear falsely.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> O LORD, are not thy eyes upon the truth?
thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou hast consumed
them, but they have refused to receive correction: they have made their
faces harder than a rock; they have refused to return.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Therefore I said, Surely these are poor;
they are foolish: for they know not the way of the LORD, nor the
judgment of their God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> I will go to the great men, and will speak
to them; for they have known the way of the LORD, and the judgment of
their God: but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the
bonds.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Wherefore a lion from the forest shall slay
them, and a wolf of the evenings shall spoil them, a leopard shall watch
over their cities: every one that goeth out thence shall be torn in
pieces: because their transgressions are many, and their backslidings
are increased.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> How shall I pardon thee for this? thy
children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods: when I
had fed them to the full, then they committed adultery, and assembled
themselves by troops in the harlots' houses.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> They were as fed horses in the morning:
every one neighed after his neighbor's wife.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Shall I not visit for these things? saith
the LORD: and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Go ye up upon her walls, and destroy; but
make not a full end: take away her battlements; for they are not the
LORD'S.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> For the house of Israel and the house of
Judah have dealt very treacherously against me, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> They have belied the LORD, and said, It
is not he; neither shall evil come upon us; neither shall we see sword
nor famine:

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And the prophets shall become wind, and
the word is not in them: thus shall it be done to them.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Wherefore thus saith the LORD God of
hosts, Because ye speak this word, Behold, I will make my words in thy
mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Lo, I will bring a nation upon you from
far, O house of Israel, saith the LORD: it is a mighty nation, it is an
ancient nation, a nation whose language thou knowest not, neither
understandest what they say.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Their quiver is as an open sepulcher,
they are all mighty men.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And they shall eat up thy harvest, and
thy bread, which thy sons and thy daughters should eat: they shall eat
up thy flocks and thy herds: they shall eat up thy vines and thy
fig-trees: they shall impoverish with the sword thy fortified cities, in
which thou hast trusted.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Nevertheless in those days, saith the
LORD, I will not make a full end with you.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And it shall come to pass, when ye shall
say, Why doeth the LORD our God all these things to us? then shalt thou
answer them, As ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your
land, so shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not yours.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Declare this in the house of Jacob, and
publish it in Judah, saying,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Hear now this, O foolish people, and
without understanding; who have eyes, and see not; who have ears, and
hear not:

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Fear ye not me? saith the LORD: will ye
not tremble at my presence, who have placed the sand for the bound of
the sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: and though its
waves toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet
can they not pass over it?

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> But this people have a revolting and a
rebellious heart; they have revolted and gone.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Neither say they in their heart, Let us
now fear the LORD our God, that giveth rain, both the former and the
latter, in its season: he reserveth to us the appointed weeks of
harvest.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Your iniquities have turned away these
things, and your sins have withheld good things from you.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For among my people are found wicked men:
they lay wait, as he that setteth snares; they set a trap, they catch
men.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> As a cage is full of birds, so are their
houses full of deceit: therefore they have become great, and have grown
rich.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> They have become fat, they shine: yes,
they surpass the deeds of the wicked: they judge not the cause, the
cause of the fatherless, yet they prosper; and the right of the needy do
they not judge.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Shall I not visit for these things? saith
the LORD: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> A wonderful and horrible thing is
committed in the land;

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> The prophets prophesy falsely, and the
priests bear rule by their means; and my people love to have it so: and
what will ye do in the end thereof?

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> O ye children of Benjamin, gather
yourselves to flee out of the midst of Jerusalem, and blow the trumpet
in Tekoa, and set up a sign of fire in Beth-haccerem: for evil appeareth
out of the north, and great destruction.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> I have likened the daughter of Zion to a
comely and delicate woman.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> The shepherds with their flocks shall come
to her; they shall pitch their tents against her on every side; they
shall feed every one in his place.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Prepare ye war against her; arise, and let
us go up at noon. Woe to us! for the day departeth, for the shadows of
the evening are lengthened.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Arise, and let us go by night, and let us
destroy her palaces.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> For thus hath the LORD of hosts said, Hew
ye down trees, and cast a mount against Jerusalem: this is the city to
be visited; she is wholly oppression in the midst of her.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> As a fountain casteth out her waters, so
she casteth out her wickedness: violence and devastation is heard in
her; before me continually are grief and wounds.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my
soul depart from thee; lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, They shall
thoroughly glean the remnant of Israel as a vine: turn back thy hand as
a grape-gatherer into the baskets.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> To whom shall I speak, and give warning,
that they may hear? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot
hearken: behold, the word of the LORD is to them a reproach; they have
no delight in it.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Therefore I am full of the fury of the
LORD; I am weary with holding in: I will pour it out upon the children
abroad, and upon the assembly of young men together: for even the
husband with the wife shall be taken, the aged with him that is full of
days.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And their houses shall be turned to
others, with their fields and wives together: for I will stretch out my
hand upon the inhabitants of the land, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For from the least of them even to the
greatest of them every one is given to covetousness; and from the
prophet even to the priest every one dealeth falsely.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> They have healed also the hurt of the
daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no
peace.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Were they ashamed when they had committed
abomination? no, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush:
therefore they shall fall among them that fall: at the time that I visit
them they shall be cast down, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Thus saith the LORD, Stand ye in the
ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and
walk in it, and ye shall find rest for your souls. But they said, We
will not walk in it.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Also I set watchmen over you, saying,
Hearken to the sound of the trumpet. But they said, We will not hearken.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Therefore hear, ye nations, and know, O
congregation, what is among them.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Hear, O earth: behold, I will bring evil
upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have
not hearkened to my words, nor to my law, but have rejected it.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> To what purpose cometh there to me
incense from Sheba, and the sweet cane from a distant country? your
burnt-offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet to me.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD, Behold, I
will lay stumbling-blocks before this people, and the fathers and the
sons together shall fall upon them; the neighbor and his friend shall
perish.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Thus saith the LORD, Behold, a people
cometh from the north country, and a great nation shall be raised from
the sides of the earth.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> They shall lay hold on bow and spear;
they are cruel, and have no mercy; their voice roareth like the sea; and
they ride upon horses, set in array as men for war against thee, O
daughter of Zion.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> We have heard the fame of it: our hands
become feeble: anguish hath taken hold of us, and pain, as of a woman in
travail.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Go not forth into the field, nor walk by
the way; for the sword of the enemy and fear is on every side.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> O daughter of my people, gird thee with
sackcloth, and wallow thyself in ashes: make thee mourning, as for an
only son, most bitter lamentation: for the spoiler shall suddenly come
upon us.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> I have set thee for a tower and a
fortress among my people, that thou mayest know and try their way.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> They are all grievous revolters, walking
with slanders: they are brass and iron; they are all corrupters.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> The bellows is burned, the lead is
consumed by the fire; the founder melteth in vain: for the wicked are
not plucked away.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Reprobate silver shall men call them,
because the LORD hath rejected them.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from the
LORD, saying,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Stand in the gate of the LORD'S house, and
proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the word of the LORD, all ye of
Judah, that enter in at these gates to worship the LORD.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel, Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell
in this place.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The
temple of the LORD, The temple of the LORD, The temple of the LORD, are
these.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For if ye thoroughly amend your ways and
your doings; if ye thoroughly execute judgment between a man and his
neighbor;

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> If ye oppress not the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place,
neither walk after other gods to your hurt:

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Then will I cause you to dwell in this
place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Behold, ye trust in lying words, that
cannot profit.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery,
and swear falsely, and burn incense to Baal, and walk after other gods
whom ye know not;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And come and stand before me in this
house, which is called by my name, and say, We are delivered to do all
these abominations?

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Is this house, which is called by my
name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I have seen it,
saith the LORD.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But go ye now to my place which was in
Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for
the wickedness of my people Israel.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And now, because ye have done all these
works, saith the LORD, and I spoke to you, rising early and speaking,
but ye heard not; and I called you, but ye answered not;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Therefore will I do to this house, which
is called by my name, in which ye trust, and to the place which I gave
to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And I will cast you out of my sight, as I
have cast out all your brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Therefore pray not thou for this people,
neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to
me: for I will not hear thee.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Seest thou not what they do in the cities
of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> The children gather wood, and the fathers
kindle the fire, and the women knead dough, to make cakes to the queen
of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings to other gods, that they may
provoke me to anger.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Do they provoke me to anger? saith the
LORD: do they not provoke themselves to the confusion of their own
faces?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, my anger and my fury shall be poured out upon this place, upon
man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit
of the ground; and it shall burn, and shall not be quenched.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel; Put your burnt-offerings to your sacrifices, and eat flesh.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For I spoke not to your fathers, nor
commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt,
concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifices:

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But this thing I commanded them, saying,
Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people: and
walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well
to you.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> But they hearkened not, nor inclined
their ear, but walked in the counsels and in the imagination of their
evil heart, and went backward, and not forward.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Since the day that your fathers came
forth from the land of Egypt to this day I have even sent to you all my
servants the prophets, daily rising early and sending them:

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Yet they hearkened not to me, nor
inclined their ear, but hardened their neck: they did worse than their
fathers.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Therefore thou shalt speak all these
words to them; but they will not hearken to thee: thou shalt also call
to them; but they will not answer thee.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> But thou shalt say to them, This is a
nation that obeyeth not the voice of the LORD their God, nor receiveth
correction: truth hath perished, and is cut off from their mouth.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Cut off thy hair, O Jerusalem, and cast
it away, and take up a lamentation on high places; for the LORD hath
rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> For the children of Judah have done evil
in my sight, saith the LORD: they have set their abominations in the
house which is called by my name, to pollute it.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And they have built the high places of
Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons
and their daughters in the fire; which I commanded them not, neither
came it into my heart.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, saith
the LORD, that it shall no more be called Tophet, nor the valley of the
son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter: for they shall bury in
Tophet, till there shall be no place.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And the carcasses of this people shall be
food for the fowls of heaven, and for the beasts of the earth; and none
shall frighten them away.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> Then will I cause to cease from the
cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth,
and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of
the bride: for the land shall be desolate.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> At that time, saith the LORD, they shall
bring the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of his princes, and
the bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones
of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves:

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And they shall spread them before the sun,
and the moon, and all the host of heaven, whom they have loved, and whom
they have served, and after whom they have walked, and whom they have
sought, and whom they have worshiped: they shall not be gathered, nor be
buried; they shall be for dung upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And death shall be chosen rather than life
by all the residue of them that remain of this evil family, who remain
in all the places whither I have driven them, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Moreover, thou shalt say to them, Thus
saith the LORD; Shall they fall, and not arise? shall he turn away, and
not return?

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Why then hath this people of Jerusalem
slidden back by a perpetual backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they
refuse to return.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not
aright: no man repented of his wickedness, saying, What have I done?
every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth to the battle.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Yes, the stork in the heaven knoweth her
appointed times; and the turtle and the crane and the swallow observe
the time of their coming; but my people know not the judgment of the
LORD.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> How do ye say, We are wise, and the law of
the LORD is with us? Lo, certainly in vain he hath made it; the pen of
the scribes is in vain.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed
and taken: lo, they have rejected the word of the LORD; and what wisdom
is in them?

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Therefore will I give their wives to
others, and their fields to them that shall inherit them: for every one
from the least even to the greatest is given to covetousness, from the
prophet even to the priest every one dealeth falsely.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> For they have healed the hurt of the
daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no
peace.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Were they ashamed when they had committed
abomination? no, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush:
therefore shall they fall among them that fall: in the time of their
visitation they shall be cast down, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> I will surely consume them, saith the
LORD: there shall be no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig-tree,
and the leaf shall fade; and the things that I have given to them shall
pass away from them.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Why do we sit still? assemble yourselves,
and let us enter into the fortified cities, and let us be silent there:
for the LORD our God hath put us to silence, and given us water of gall
to drink, because we have sinned against the LORD.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> We looked for peace, but no good came;
and for a time of health, and behold, trouble!

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> The snorting of his horses was heard from
Dan: the whole land trembled at the sound of the neighing of his strong
ones; for they have come, and have devoured the land, and all that is in
it; the city, and those that dwell therein.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For behold, I will send serpents,
cockatrices, among you, which will not be charmed, and they shall bite
you, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> When I would comfort myself against
sorrow, my heart is faint in me.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Behold the voice of the cry of the
daughter of my people because of them that dwell in a distant country:
Is not the LORD in Zion? is not her king in her? Why have they provoked
me to anger with their graven images, and with strange vanities?

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> The harvest is past, the summer is ended,
and we are not saved.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> For the hurt of the daughter of my people
am I hurt; I am black; astonishment hath taken hold on me.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Is there no balm in Gilead: is there no
physician there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my people
recovered.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Oh that my head were waters, and my eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people!

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Oh that I had in the wilderness a
lodging-place of way-faring men; that I might leave my people, and go
from them! for they are all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And they bend their tongues like their bow
for lies: but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth; for
they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Take ye heed every one of his neighbor, and
trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will utterly supplant,
and every neighbor will walk with slanders.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And they will deceive every one his
neighbor, and will not speak the truth: they have taught their tongue to
speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Thy habitation is in the midst of deceit;
through deceit they refuse to know me, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts,
Behold, I will melt them, and try them; for how shall I do for the
daughter of my people?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Their tongue is as an arrow shot out; it
speaketh deceit: one speaketh peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth,
but in heart he layeth his wait.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Shall I not visit them for these things?
saith the LORD: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> For the mountains will I take up a
weeping and wailing, and for the habitations of the wilderness a
lamentation, because they are burned up, so that none can pass through
them; neither can men hear the voice of the cattle; both the fowl of the
heavens and the beast have fled; they are gone.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And I will make Jerusalem heaps, and a
den of dragons; and I will make the cities of Judah desolate, without an
inhabitant.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Who is the wise man that may understand
this? and who is he to whom the mouth of the LORD hath spoken, that he
may declare it, for what the land perisheth and is burned up like a
wilderness, that none passeth through?

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And the LORD saith, Because they have
forsaken my law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice,
neither walked therein;

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> But have walked after the imagination of
their own heart, and after Baalim, which their fathers taught them:

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel; Behold, I will feed them, even this people, with
wormwood, and give them water of gall to drink.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> I will scatter them also among the
heathen, whom neither they nor their fathers have known: and I will send
a sword after them, till I have consumed them.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Consider
ye, and call for the mourning women, that they may come; and send for
skillful women, that they may come:

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And let them make haste, and take up a
wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids
gush out with waters.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For a voice of wailing is heard out of
Zion, How are we laid waste! we are greatly confounded, because we have
forsaken the land, because our dwellings have cast us out.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Yet hear the word of the LORD, O ye
women, and let your ear receive the word of his mouth, and teach your
daughters wailing, and every one her neighbor lamentation.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> For death hath come up into our windows,
and hath entered into our palaces, to cut off the children from without,
and the young men from the streets.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Speak, Thus saith the LORD, Even the
carcasses of men shall fall as dung upon the open field, and as the
handful after the harvest-man, and none shall gather them.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Thus saith the LORD, Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let
not the rich man glory in his riches:

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> But let him that glorieth, glory in this,
that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the LORD who exercise
loving-kindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth: for in these
things I delight, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Behold, the days come, saith the LORD,
that I will punish all them who are circumcised with the uncircumcised;

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the
children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that are in the utmost corners,
that dwell in the wilderness: for all these nations are uncircumcised,
and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Hear ye the word which the LORD speaketh
to you, O house of Israel:

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Thus saith the LORD, Learn not the way of
the heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the heathen
are dismayed at them.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For the customs of the people are vain:
for one cutteth a tree out of the forest, the work of the hands of the
workman, with the ax.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> They deck it with silver and with gold;
they fasten it with nails and with hammers, that it may not move.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> They are upright as the palm tree, but
speak not: they must needs be borne, because they cannot go. Be not
afraid of them; for they cannot do evil, neither also is it in them to
do good.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Forasmuch as there is none like to thee,
O LORD; thou art great, and thy name is great in might.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Who would not fear thee, O King of
nations? for to thee doth it appertain: forasmuch as among all the wise
men of the nations, and in all their kingdoms, there is none like to
thee.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But they are altogether brutish and
foolish: the stock is a doctrine of vanities.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Silver spread into plates is brought from
Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of the workman, and of the hands
of the founder: blue and purple is their clothing: they are all the work
of skillful men.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> But the LORD is the true God, he is the
living God, and an everlasting king: at his wrath the earth shall
tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Thus shall ye say to them, The gods
that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall perish
from the earth, and from under these heavens.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> He hath made the earth by his power, he
hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the
heavens by his discretion.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> When he uttereth his voice, there is a
multitude of waters in the heavens, and he causeth the vapors to ascend
from the ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth
forth the wind out of his treasures.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Every man is brutish in his knowledge:
every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is
falsehood, and there is no breath in them.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> They are vanity, and the work of
errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The portion of Jacob is not like them:
for he is the former of all things; and Israel is the rod of his
inheritance: The LORD of hosts is his name.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Gather up thy wares out of the land, O
inhabitant of the fortress.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> For thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will
sling out the inhabitants of the land at this once, and will distress
them that they may find it so.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Woe is me for my hurt! my wound is
grievous: but I said, Truly this is a grief, and I must bear it.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> My tabernacle is laid waste, and all my
cords are broken: my children are gone from me, and they are not: there
is none to stretch forth my tent any more, and to set up my curtains.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> For the pastors have become brutish,
and have not sought the LORD: therefore they shall not prosper, and all
their flocks shall be scattered.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Behold, the sound of the noise is come,
and a great commotion from the north country, to make the cities of
Judah desolate, and a den of dragons.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> O LORD, I know that the way of man is
not in himself: it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> O LORD, correct me, but with judgment;
not in thy anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that
know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy name: for they
have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him, and have made
his habitation desolate.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from the
LORD, saying,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Hear ye the words of this covenant, and
speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem;

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And say thou to them, Thus saith the LORD
God of Israel; Cursed be the man that obeyeth not the words of this
covenant,

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Which I commanded your fathers in the day
that I brought them forth from the land of Egypt, from the iron furnace,
saying, Obey my voice, and do them, according to all which I command
you: so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God:

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> That I may perform the oath which I have
sworn to your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey,
as it is this day. Then answered I, and said, So be it, O LORD.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Then the LORD said to me, Proclaim all
these words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem,
saying, Hear ye the words of this covenant, and do them.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> For I earnestly protested to your fathers
in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, even to this
day, rising early and protesting, saying, Obey my voice.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their
ear, but walked every one in the imagination of their evil heart:
therefore I will bring upon them all the words of this covenant, which I
commanded them to do; but they did them not.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And the LORD said to me, A conspiracy is
found among the men of Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> They have turned back to the iniquities
of their forefathers, who refused to hear my words; and they went after
other gods to serve them: the house of Israel and the house of Judah
have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD, Behold,
I will bring evil upon them which they shall not be able to escape; and
though they shall cry to me, I will not hearken to them.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Then shall the cities of Judah and
inhabitants of Jerusalem go, and cry to the gods to which they offer
incense: but they shall not save them at all in the time of their
trouble.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For according to the number of thy
cities were thy gods, O Judah; and according to the number of the
streets of Jerusalem have ye set up altars to that shameful thing, even
altars to burn incense to Baal.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Therefore pray not thou for this
people, neither lift up a cry or prayer for them: for I will not hear
them in the time when they cry to me for their trouble.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> What hath my beloved to do in my house,
seeing she hath wrought lewdness with many; and the holy flesh is passed
from thee? when thou doest evil, then thou rejoicest.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> The LORD called thy name, A green olive
tree, fair, and of goodly fruit: with the noise of a great tumult he
hath kindled fire upon it, and the branches of it are broken.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> For the LORD of hosts, that planted
thee, hath pronounced evil against thee, for the evil of the house of
Israel and of the house of Judah, which they have done against
themselves to provoke me to anger in offering incense to Baal.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And the LORD hath given me knowledge of
it, and I know it: then thou showedst me their doings.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> But I was like a lamb or an ox that is
brought to the slaughter; and I knew not that they had devised devices
against me, saying, Let us destroy the tree with its fruit, and let us
cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may be no more
remembered.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But, O LORD of hosts, that judgest
righteously, that triest the reins and the heart, let me see thy
vengeance on them: for to thee have I revealed my cause.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD
concerning the men of Anathoth, that seek thy life, saying, Prophesy not
in the name of the LORD, that thou die not by our hand:

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts,
Behold, I will punish them: the young men shall die by the sword; their
sons and their daughters shall die by famine:

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And there shall be no remnant of them:
for I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even the year of their
visitation.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Righteous art thou, O LORD, when I plead
with thee: yet let me speak with thee of thy judgments: Why doth the way
of the wicked prosper? why are they all happy that deal very
treacherously?

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Thou hast planted them, yes, they have
taken root: they grow, yes, they bring forth fruit: thou art near in
their mouth, and far from their reins.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> But thou, O LORD, knowest me: thou hast
seen me, and tried my heart towards thee: pull them out like sheep for
the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> How long shall the land mourn, and the
herbs of every field wither, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein? the beasts are consumed, and the birds; because they said, He
will not see our last end.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> If thou hast run with the footmen, and
they have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend with horses? and if
in the land of peace, in which thou hast trusted, they wearied thee,
then how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> For even thy brethren, and the house of
thy father, even they have dealt treacherously with thee; yes, they have
called a multitude after thee: believe them not, though they speak fair
words to thee.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> I have forsaken my house, I have left my
heritage; I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of
her enemies.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> My heritage is to me as a lion in the
forest; it crieth out against me: therefore have I hated it.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> My heritage is to me as a speckled bird,
the birds around are against her; come ye, assemble all the beasts of
the field, come to devour.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Many pastors have destroyed my
vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot, they have made my
pleasant portion a desolate wilderness.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> They have made it desolate, and being
desolate it mourneth to me; the whole land is made desolate, because no
man layeth it to heart.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The spoilers have come upon all high
places through the wilderness: for the sword of the LORD shall devour
from the one end of the land even to the other end of the land: no flesh
shall have peace.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> They have sown wheat, but shall reap
thorns: they have put themselves to pain, but shall not profit; and they
shall be ashamed of your revenues because of the fierce anger of the
LORD.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Thus saith the LORD against all my evil
neighbors, that touch the inheritance which I have caused my people
Israel to inherit; Behold, I will pluck them out of their land, and
pluck out the house of Judah from among them.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And it shall come to pass, after I have
plucked them out I will return, and have compassion on them, and will
bring them again, every man to his heritage, and every man to his land.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And it shall come to pass, if they will
diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, The LORD
liveth; as they taught my people to swear by Baal; then shall they be
built in the midst of my people.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> But if they will not obey, I will
utterly pluck up and destroy that nation, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Thus saith the LORD to me, Go and get for
thee a linen girdle, and put it upon thy loins, and put it not in water.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> So I procured a girdle according to the
word of the LORD, and put it on my loins.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And the word of the LORD came to me the
second time, saying,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Take the girdle that thou hast procured,
which is upon thy loins, and arise, go to Euphrates, and hide it there
in a hole of the rock.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> So I went, and hid it by Euphrates, as
the LORD commanded me.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And it came to pass after many days, that
the LORD said to me, Arise, go to Euphrates, and take the girdle from
thence, which I commanded thee to hide there.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Then I went to Euphrates, and digged, and
took the girdle from the place where I had hid it: and behold, the
girdle was marred, it was profitable for nothing.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Then the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Thus saith the LORD, After this manner
will I mar the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> This evil people, who refuse to hear my
words, who walk in the imagination of their heart, and walk after other
gods, to serve them, and to worship them, shall even be as this girdle,
which is good for nothing.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins
of a man, so have I caused to cleave to me the whole house of Israel and
the whole house of Judah, saith the LORD; that they might be to me for a
people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but they
would not hear.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Therefore thou shalt speak to them this
word; Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Every bottle shall be filled
with wine: and they shall say to thee, Do we not certainly know that
every bottle shall be filled with wine?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Then shalt thou say to them, Thus saith
the LORD, Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the
kings that sit upon David's throne, and the priests, and the prophets,
and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And I will dash them one against
another, even the fathers and the sons together, saith the LORD: I will
not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy them.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Hear ye, and give ear; be not proud:
for the LORD hath spoken.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Give glory to the LORD your God, before
he shall cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark
mountains, and while ye look for light, he shall turn it into the shades
of death, and make it gross darkness.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> But if ye will not hear it, my soul
shall weep in secret places for your pride; and my eye shall weep
bitterly, and run down with tears, because the LORD'S flock is carried
away captive.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Say to the king and to the queen,
Humble yourselves, sit down: for your principalities shall come down,
even the crown of your glory.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> The cities of the south shall be shut
up, and none shall open them; Judah shall be carried away captive all of
it, it shall be wholly carried away captive.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Lift up your eyes, and behold them that
come from the north: where is the flock that was given thee, thy
beautiful flock?

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> What wilt thou say when he shall punish
thee? for thou hast taught them to be captains, and as chief over thee:
shall not sorrows take thee, as a woman in travail?

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And if thou shalt say in thy heart, Why
come these things upon me? For the greatness of thy iniquity are thy
skirts uncovered, and thy heels made bare.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or
the leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to
do evil.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Therefore will I scatter them as the
stubble that passeth away by the wind of the wilderness.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> This is thy lot, the portion of thy
measures from me, saith the LORD; because thou hast forgotten me, and
trusted in falsehood.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Therefore will I uncover thy skirts
upon thy face, that thy shame may appear.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> I have seen thy adulteries, and thy
neighings, the enormity of thy lewdness, and thy abominations on the
hills in the fields. Woe to thee O Jerusalem! wilt thou not be made
clean? when shall it once be?

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> The word of the LORD that came to
Jeremiah concerning the dearth.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Judah mourneth, and her gates languish;
they are black to the ground; and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And their nobles have sent their little
ones to the waters: they came to the pits, and found no water; they
returned with their vessels empty; they were ashamed and confounded, and
covered their heads.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Because the ground is chapt, for there
was no rain on the earth, the plowmen were ashamed, they covered their
heads.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Yes, the hind also calved in the field,
and forsook it, because there was no grass.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And the wild asses stood in the high
places, they snuffed up the wind like dragons; their eyes failed,
because there was no grass.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> O LORD, though our iniquities testify
against us, do thou it for thy name's sake: for our backslidings are
many; we have sinned against thee.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> O the hope of Israel, his Savior in time
of trouble, why shouldst thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a
way-faring man that turneth aside to tarry for a night?

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Why shouldst thou be as a man astonished,
as a mighty man that cannot save? yet thou, O LORD, art in the midst of
us, and we are called by thy name; leave us not.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Thus saith the LORD to this people,
Thus have they loved to wander, they have not restrained their feet,
therefore the LORD doth not accept them; he will now remember their
iniquity, and visit their sins.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Then said the LORD to me, Pray not for
this people for their good.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> When they fast, I will not hear their
cry; and when they offer burnt-offering and an oblation, I will not
accept them: but I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine,
and by the pestilence.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! behold, the
prophets say to them, Ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have
famine; but I will give you assured peace in this place.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Then the LORD said to me, The prophets
prophesy lies in my name: I have not sent them, neither have I commanded
them, neither spoken to them: they prophesy to you a false vision and
divination, and a thing of naught, and the deceit of their heart.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD
concerning the prophets that prophesy in my name, and I sent them not,
yet they say, Sword and famine shall not be in this land; By sword and
famine shall those prophets be consumed.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And the people to whom they prophesy
shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem, because of the famine,
and the sword; and they shall have none to bury them, them, their wives,
nor their sons, nor their daughters: for I will pour their wickedness
upon them.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Therefore thou shalt say this word to
them; Let my eyes run down with tears night and day, and let them not
cease: for the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great
breach, with a very grievous blow.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> If I go forth into the field, then
behold the slain with the sword! and if I enter into the city, then
behold them that are sick with famine! yes, both the prophet and the
priest go about into a land that they know not.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Hast thou utterly rejected Judah? hath
thy soul loathed Zion? Why hast thou smitten us, and there is no healing
for us? we looked for peace, and there is no good; and for the time of
healing, and behold trouble!

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> We acknowledge, O LORD, our wickedness,
and the iniquity of our fathers; for we have sinned against thee.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Do not abhor us, for thy name's sake;
do not disgrace the throne of thy glory: remember, break not thy
covenant with us.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Are there any among the vanities of the
Gentiles that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? art not
thou he, O LORD our God? therefore we will wait upon thee: for thou hast
made all these things.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then said the LORD to me, Though Moses
and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be towards this
people: cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And it shall come to pass, if they say to
thee, Whither shall we go forth? then thou shalt tell them, Thus saith
the LORD; Such as are for death, to death; and such as are for the
sword, to the sword; and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and
such as are for the captivity, to the captivity.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And I will appoint over them four kinds,
saith the LORD: the sword to slay, and the dogs to tear, and the fowls
of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth, to devour and destroy.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And I will cause them to be removed into
all kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah king
of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> For who shall have pity upon thee, O
Jerusalem? or who shall bemoan thee? or who shall go aside to ask
concerning thy welfare?

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Thou hast forsaken me, saith the LORD,
thou art gone backward: therefore will I stretch out my hand against
thee, and destroy thee; I am weary with repenting.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And I will fan them with a fan in the
gates of the land; I will bereave them of children, I will destroy my
people, since they return not from their ways.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Their widows are multiplied to me above
the sand of the seas: I have brought upon them against the mother of the
young men a spoiler at noon-day: I have caused him to fall upon it
suddenly, and terrors upon the city.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> She that hath borne seven languisheth:
she hath resigned her breath; her sun is gone down while it was yet day:
she hath been ashamed and confounded: and the residue of them will I
deliver to the sword before their enemies, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast
borne me a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth! I
have neither lent on usury, nor have men lent to me on usury; yet every
one of them doth curse me.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> The LORD said, Verily it shall be well
with thy remnant; verily I will cause the enemy to treat thee well in
the time of evil and in the time of affliction.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Shall iron break the northern iron and
the steel?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Thy substance and thy treasures will I
give to the spoil without price, and that for all thy sins, even in all
thy borders.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And I will make thee to pass with thy
enemies into a land which thou knowest not: for a fire is kindled in my
anger, which shall burn upon you.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> O LORD, thou knowest: remember me, and
visit me, and avenge me of my persecutors; take me not away in thy
long-suffering: know that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Thy words were found, and I did eat
them; and thy word was to me the joy and rejoicing of my heart: for I am
called by thy name, O LORD God of hosts.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I sat not in the assembly of the
mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone because of thy hand: for thou hast
filled me with indignation.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound
incurable, which refuseth to be healed? wilt thou be altogether to me as
a liar, and as waters that fail?

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD, If thou
shalt return, then will I bring thee again, and thou shalt stand before
me: and if thou shalt separate the precious from the vile, thou shalt be
as my mouth: let them return to thee; but return not thou to them.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And I will make thee to this people a
fortified brazen wall: and they shall fight against thee, but they shall
not prevail against thee: for I am with thee to save thee and to deliver
thee, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And I will deliver thee from the hand
of the wicked, and I will redeem thee from the hand of the terrible.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> The word of the LORD came also to me,
saying,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Thou shalt not take thee a wife, neither
shalt thou have sons nor daughters in this place.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> For thus saith the LORD concerning the
sons and concerning the daughters that are born in this place, and
concerning their mothers that bore them, and concerning their fathers
that begat them in this land;

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> They shall die by grievous deaths; they
shall not be lamented; neither shall they be buried; but they shall be
as dung upon the face of the earth: and they shall be consumed by the
sword, and by famine; and their carcasses shall be food for the fowls of
heaven, and for the beasts of the earth.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> For thus saith the LORD, Enter not into
the house of mourning, neither go to lament nor bemoan them: for I have
taken away my peace from this people, saith the LORD, even
loving-kindness and mercies.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Both the great and the small shall die in
this land: they shall not be buried, neither shall men lament for them,
nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them:

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Neither shall men tear themselves for
them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither shall men give
them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for their
mother.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Also thou shalt not go into the house of
feasting, to sit with them to eat and to drink.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God
of Israel; Behold, I will cause to cease out of this place in your eyes,
and in your days, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the
voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And it shall come to pass, when thou
shalt show this people all these words, and they shall say to thee, Why
hath the LORD pronounced all this great evil against us? or what is our
iniquity? or what is our sin that we have committed against the LORD our
God?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Then shalt thou say to them, Because
your fathers have forsaken me, saith the LORD, and have walked after
other gods, and have served them, and have worshiped them, and have
forsaken me, and have not kept my law;

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And ye have done worse than your
fathers; for, behold, ye walk every one after the imagination of his
evil heart, that they may not hearken to me:

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Therefore will I cast you out of this
land into a land that ye know not, neither ye nor your fathers; and
there shall ye serve other gods day and night; where I will not show you
favor.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Therefore behold, the days come, saith
the LORD, that it shall no more be said, The LORD liveth, that brought
the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> But, The LORD liveth, that brought the
children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the lands
whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again into their land
that I gave to their fathers.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Behold, I will send for many fishers,
saith the LORD, and they shall fish them; and afterwards will I send for
many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from
every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> For my eyes are upon all their ways:
they are not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity hid from my
eyes.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And first I will recompense their
iniquity and their sin double; because they have defiled my land, they
have filled my inheritance with the carcasses of their detestable and
abominable things.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> O LORD, my strength and my fortress,
and my refuge in the day of affliction, the Gentiles shall come to thee
from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Surely our fathers have
inherited lies, vanity, and things in which there is no profit.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Shall a man make gods to himself, and
they are no gods?

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Therefore behold, I will this once
cause them to know, I will cause them to know my hand and my might; and
they shall know that my name is JEHOVAH.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> The sin of Judah is written with a pen of
iron, and with the point of a diamond: it is graven upon the table of
their heart, and upon the horns of your altars;

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Whilst their children remember their
altars and their groves by the green trees upon the high hills.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> O my mountain in the field, I will give
thy substance and all thy treasures to the spoil, and thy high places
for sin, throughout all thy borders.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And thou, even thyself, shall discontinue
from thy heritage that I gave thee; and I will cause thee to serve thy
enemies in the land which thou knowest not: for ye have kindled a fire
in my anger, which shall burn for ever.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Thus saith the LORD; Cursed be the man
that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart
departeth from the LORD.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> For he shall be like the heath in the
desert, and shall not see when good cometh; but shall inhabit the
parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land and not inhabited.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Blessed is the man that trusteth in the
LORD, and whose hope the LORD is.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> For he shall be as a tree planted by the
waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not see
when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and shall not be anxious
in the year of drouth, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> The heart is deceitful above all things,
and desperately wicked: who can know it?

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> I the LORD search the heart, I try the
reins, even to give every man according to his ways, and according to
the fruit of his doings.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and
hatcheth them not; so he that getteth riches, and not by right, shall
leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> A glorious high throne from the
beginning is the place of our sanctuary.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> O LORD, the hope of Israel, all that
forsake thee shall be ashamed, and they that depart from me shall be
written in the earth, because they have forsaken the LORD, the fountain
of living waters.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> Heal me, O LORD, and I shall be healed;
save me, and I shall be saved: for thou art my praise.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Behold, they say to me, Where is the
word of the LORD? let it come now.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> As for me, I have not hastened from
being a pastor to follow thee: neither have I desired the woeful day;
thou knowest: that which was uttered by my lips was right before thee.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Be not a terror to me: thou art my hope
in the day of evil.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Let them be confounded that persecute
me, but let not me be confounded: let them be dismayed, but let not me
be dismayed: bring upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with
double destruction.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Thus said the LORD to me; Go and stand
in the gate of the children of the people, by which the kings of Judah
come in, and by which they go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem;

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And say to them, Hear ye the word of
the LORD, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, that enter by these gates:

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> Thus saith the LORD; Take heed to
yourselves, and bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by
the gates of Jerusalem;

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Neither carry forth a burden out of
your houses on the sabbath day, neither do ye any work, but hallow ye
the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> But they obeyed not, neither inclined
their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they might not hear, nor
receive instruction.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And it shall come to pass, if ye
diligently hearken to me, saith the LORD, to bring in no burden through
the gates of this city on the sabbath day, but hallow the sabbath day,
to do no work therein;

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> Then shall there enter into the gates
of this city kings and princes sitting upon the throne of David, riding
in chariots and on horses, they and their princes, the men of Judah, and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem: and this city shall remain for ever.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And they shall come from the cities of
Judah, and from the places about Jerusalem, and from the land of
Benjamin, and from the plain, and from the mountains, and from the
south, bringing burnt-offerings, and sacrifices, and meat-offerings, and
incense, and bringing sacrifices of praise, to the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> But if ye will not hearken to me to
hallow the sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, even entering at the
gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire in its
gates, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be
quenched.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The word which came to Jeremiah from the
LORD, saying,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Arise, and go down to the potter's house,
and there I will cause thee to hear my words.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Then I went down to the potter's house,
and behold, he wrought a work on the wheels.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And the vessel that he made of clay was
marred in the hand of the potter: so he made it again another vessel, as
it seemed good to the potter to make it.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Then the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> O house of Israel, cannot I do with you
as this potter? saith the LORD. Behold, as the clay is in the potter's
hand, so are ye in my hand, O house of Israel.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> At what instant I shall speak concerning
a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and
to destroy it;

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> If that nation against which I have
pronounced, shall turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I
thought to do to them.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And at what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it;

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> If it shall do evil in my sight, that
it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good, with which I said
I would benefit them.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Now therefore come, speak to the men of
Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the LORD;
Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you:
return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your ways and your
doings good.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And they said, There is no hope: but we
will walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the
imagination of his evil heart.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD; Ask ye
now among the heathen, who hath heard such things: the virgin of Israel
hath done a very horrible thing.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon
which cometh from the rock of the field? or shall the cold flowing
waters that come from another place be forsaken?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Because my people hath forgotten me,
they have burned incense to vanity, and they have caused them to stumble
in their ways from the ancient paths, to walk in paths, in a way not
cast up;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> To make their land desolate, and a
perpetual hissing; every one that passeth by it shall be astonished, and
wag his head.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> I will scatter them as with an east
wind before the enemy; I will show them the back, and not the face, in
the day of their calamity.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Then said they, Come, and let us devise
devices against Jeremiah; for the law shall not perish from the priest,
nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let
us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his
words.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Give heed to me, O LORD, and hearken to
the voice of them that contend with me.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Shall evil be recompensed for good? for
they have digged a pit for my soul. Remember that I stood before thee to
speak good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Therefore deliver their children to the
famine, and pour out their blood by the force of the sword; and let
their wives be bereaved of their children, and be widows; and let their
men be put to death; let their young men be slain by the sword in
battle.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Let a cry be heard from their houses,
when thou shalt bring a troop suddenly upon them: for they have digged a
pit to take me, and hid snares for my feet.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Yet, LORD, thou knowest all their
counsel against me to slay me: forgive not their iniquity, neither blot
out their sin from thy sight, but let them be overthrown before thee;
deal thus with them in the time of thy anger.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Thus saith the LORD, Go and get a
potter's earthen bottle, and take of the ancients of the people, and of
the ancients of the priests;

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And go forth to the valley of the son of
Hinnom, which is by the entry of the east gate, and proclaim there the
words that I shall tell thee,

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And say, Hear ye the word of the LORD, O
kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem; Thus saith the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring evil upon this place,
which whoever heareth, his ears shall tingle.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Because they have forsaken me, and have
estranged this place, and have burned incense in it to other gods, whom
neither they nor their fathers have known, nor the kings of Judah, and
have filled this place with the blood of innocents;

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> They have built also the high places of
Baal, to burn their sons with fire for burnt-offerings to Baal, which I
commanded not, nor spoke it, neither came it into my mind:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Therefore behold, the days come, saith
the LORD, that this place shall no more be called Tophet, nor The valley
of the son of Hinnom, but The valley of slaughter.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And I will make void the counsel of Judah
and Jerusalem in this place; and I will cause them to fall by the sword
before their enemies, and by the hands of them that seek their lives:
and their carcasses will I give to be food for the fowls of the heaven,
and for the beasts of the earth.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And I will make this city desolate, and a
hissing; every one that passeth by it shall be astonished and hiss
because of all its plagues.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And I will cause them to eat the flesh of
their sons and the flesh of their daughters, and they shall eat every
one the flesh of his friend in the siege and distress with which their
enemies, and they that seek their lives, shall distress them.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Then shalt thou break the bottle in the
sight of the men that go with thee,

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And shalt say to them, Thus saith the
LORD of hosts; Even so will I break this people and this city, as one
breaketh a potter's vessel, that cannot be made whole again: and they
shall bury them in Tophet, till there be no place to bury.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Thus will I do to this place, saith the
LORD, and to its inhabitants, and even make this city as Tophet:

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And the houses of Jerusalem, and the
houses of the kings of Judah, shall be defiled as the place of Tophet,
because of all the houses upon whose roofs they have burned incense to
all the host of heaven, and have poured out drink-offerings to other
gods.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Then came Jeremiah from Tophet, whither
the LORD had sent him to prophesy; and he stood in the court of the
LORD'S house; and said to all the people,

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God
of Israel; Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon all her towns
all the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have
hardened their necks, that they might not hear my words.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Now Pashur the son of Immer the priest,
who was also chief governor in the house of the LORD, heard that
Jeremiah prophesied these things.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Then Pashur struck Jeremiah the prophet,
and put him in the stocks that were in the high gate of Benjamin, which
was by the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that
Pashur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then said Jeremiah to
him, The LORD hath not called thy name Pashur, but Magor-missabib.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will
make thee a terror to thyself, and to all thy friends: and they shall
fall by the sword of their enemies, and thy eyes shall behold it: and I
will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall
carry them captive into Babylon, and shall slay them with the sword.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Moreover I will deliver all the strength
of this city, and all its labors, and all its precious things, and all
the treasures of the kings of Judah will I give into the hand of their
enemies, who shall pillage them, and take them, and carry them to
Babylon.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And thou, Pashur, and all that dwell in
thy house shall go into captivity: and thou shalt come to Babylon, and
there thou shalt die, and shalt be buried there, thou, and all thy
friends, to whom thou hast prophesied lies.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> O LORD, thou hast deceived me, and I was
deceived: thou art stronger than I, and hast prevailed: I am in derision
daily, every one mocketh me.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> For since I spoke, I cried out, I cried
violence and spoil; because the word of the LORD was made a reproach to
me, and a derision, daily.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Then I said, I will not make mention of
him, nor speak any more in his name. But his word was in my heart as a
burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I
could not stay.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> For I heard the defaming of many, fear
on every side. Report, say they, and we will report it. All my familiars
watched for my halting, saying, Perhaps he will be enticed, and we shall
prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> But the LORD is with me as a mighty
terrible one: therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not
prevail: they shall be greatly ashamed; for they shall not prosper:
their everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> But, O LORD of hosts, that triest the
righteous, and seest the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance
on them: for to thee have I opened my cause.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Sing to the LORD, praise ye the LORD:
for he hath delivered the soul of the poor from the hand of evil-doers.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Cursed be the day in which I was born:
let not the day in which my mother bore me be blessed.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Cursed be the man who brought tidings
to my father, saying, A male child is born to thee; making him very
glad.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And let that man be as the cities which
the LORD overthrew, and repented not: and let him hear the cry in the
morning, and the shouting at noon;

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Because he slew me not at my birth; or
that my mother might have been my grave, and she had not been delivered.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Why was I brought into the world to see
labor and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame?

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The word which came to Jeremiah from the
LORD, when king Zedekiah sent to him Pashur the son of Melchiah, and
Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, saying,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Inquire, I pray thee, of the LORD for us;
for Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon maketh war against us; it may be that
the LORD will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that he
may go up from us.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Then said Jeremiah to them, Thus shall ye
say to Zedekiah:

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Thus saith the LORD God of Israel;
Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands, with
which ye fight against the king of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans,
who besiege you without the walls, and I will assemble them into the
midst of this city.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And I myself will fight against you with
an out-stretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury,
and in great wrath.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And I will smite the inhabitants of this
city, both man and beast; they shall die by a great pestilence.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And afterward, saith the LORD, I will
deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and
such as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and
from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and
into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those that seek
their life; and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword; he shall
not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And to this people thou shalt say, Thus
saith the LORD; Behold, I set before you the way of life, and the way of
death.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> He that abideth in this city shall die by
the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth
out, and falleth to the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and
his life shall be to him for a prey.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> For I have set my face against this
city for evil, and not for good, saith the LORD: it shall be given into
the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And concerning the house of the king of
Judah, say, Hear ye the word of the LORD;

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> O house of David, thus saith the LORD;
Execute judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is made desolate
out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and
burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Behold, I am against thee, O inhabitant
of the valley, and rock of the plain, saith the LORD; who say, Who shall
come down against us? or who shall enter into our habitations?

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> But I will punish you according to the
fruit of your doings, saith the LORD: and I will kindle a fire in the
forest thereof, and it shall devour all things around it.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Thus saith the LORD; Go down to the house
of the king of Judah, and speak there this word,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And say, Hear the word of the LORD, O
king of Judah, that sittest upon the throne of David, thou, and thy
servants, and thy people that enter by these gates:

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Thus saith the LORD; Execute ye judgment
and righteousness, and deliver him that is laid waste out of the hand of
the oppressor: and do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the
fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in this place.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> For if ye do this thing indeed, then
shall there enter, by the gates of this house, kings sitting upon the
throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, he, and his servants,
and his people.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> But if ye will not hear these words, I
swear by myself, saith the LORD, that this house shall become a
desolation.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> For thus saith the LORD to the king's
house of Judah; Thou art Gilead to me, and the head of Lebanon; yet
surely I will make thee a wilderness, and cities which are not
inhabited.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And I will prepare destroyers against
thee, every one with his weapons: and they shall cut down thy choice
cedars, and cast them into the fire.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And many nations shall pass by this city,
and they shall say every man to his neighbor, Why hath the LORD done
thus to this great city?

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Then they shall answer, Because they have
forsaken the covenant of the LORD their God, and worshiped other gods,
and served them.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Weep ye not for the dead, neither
bemoan him: but weep bitterly for him that goeth away: for he shall
return no more, nor see his native country.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> For thus saith the LORD concerning
Shallum the son of Josiah king of Judah, who reigned instead of Josiah
his father, who went forth from this place; He shall not return thither
any more:

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> But he shall die in the place whither
they have led him captive, and shall see this land no more.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Woe to him that buildeth his house by
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; that useth his neighbor's
service without wages, and giveth him not for his work;

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> That saith, I will build me a wide
house and large chambers, and cutteth him out windows; and it is ceiled
with cedar, and painted with vermilion.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Shalt thou reign, because thou closest
thyself in cedar? did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and
justice, and then it was well with him?

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> He judged the cause of the poor and
needy; then it was well with him: was not this to know me? saith the
LORD.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> But thy eyes and thy heart are only for
thy covetousness, and for shedding innocent blood, and for oppression,
and for violence, to do it.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD
concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah; They shall not
lament for him, saying, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! they shall not
lament for him, saying, Ah lord! or, Ah his glory!

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> He shall be buried with the burial of
an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Go up to Lebanon, and cry; and lift up
thy voice in Bashan, and cry from the passages: for all thy lovers are
destroyed.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> I spoke to thee in thy prosperity; but
thou saidest, I will not hear. This hath been thy manner from thy youth,
that thou hast not obeyed my voice.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> The wind shall eat up all thy pastors,
and thy lovers shall go into captivity: surely then shalt thou be
ashamed and confounded for all thy wickedness.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> O inhabitant of Lebanon, that makest
thy nest in the cedars, how gracious shalt thou be when pangs come upon
thee, the pain as of a woman in travail!

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> As I live, saith the LORD, though
Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon my right
hand, yet would I pluck thee thence;

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And I will give thee into the hand of
them that seek thy life, and into the hand of them whose face thou
fearest, even into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and into
the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> And I will cast thee out, and thy
mother that bore thee, into another country, where ye were not born; and
there shall ye die.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> But to the land to which they desire to
return, thither shall they not return.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Is this man Coniah a despised broken
idol? is he a vessel in which is no pleasure? why are they cast out, he
and his seed, and are cast into a land which they know not?

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of
the LORD.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> Thus saith the LORD, Write ye this man
childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days: for no man of his
seed shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any
more in Judah.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Woe be to the pastors that destroy and
scatter the sheep of my pasture! saith the LORD.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD God of
Israel against the pastors that feed my people; Ye have scattered my
flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them: behold, I will
visit upon you the evil of your doings, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And I will gather the remnant of my flock
from all countries whither I have driven them, and will bring them again
to their folds; and they shall be fruitful and increase.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And I will set shepherds over them who
shall feed them: and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither
shall they be lacking, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Behold, the days come, saith the LORD,
that I will raise to David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign
and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice upon the earth.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell in safety: and this is his name by which he shall be
called, JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, saith
the LORD, that they shall no more say, The LORD liveth, who brought the
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> But, the LORD liveth, who brought and who
led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from
all countries whither I have driven them; and they shall dwell in their
own land.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> My heart within me is broken because of
the prophets; all my bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a
man whom wine hath overcome, because of the LORD, and because of the
words of his holiness.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> For the land is full of adulterers; for
because of swearing the land mourneth; the pleasant places of the
wilderness are dried up, and their course is evil, and their force is
not right.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> For both prophet and priest are
profane; even in my house have I found their wickedness, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Wherefore their way shall be to them as
slippery ways in the darkness: they shall be driven on, and fall
therein: for I will bring evil upon them, even the year of their
visitation, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And I have seen folly in the prophets
of Samaria; they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to err.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> I have seen also in the prophets of
Jerusalem a horrible thing: they commit adultery, and walk in lies: they
strengthen also the hands of evil-doers, that none doth return from his
wickedness: they are all of them to me as Sodom, and the inhabitants of
it as Gomorrah.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts
concerning the prophets; Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and
make them drink the water of gall: for from the prophets of Jerusalem is
profaneness gone forth into all the land.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Hearken
not to the words of the prophets that prophesy to you: they make you
vain: they speak a vision of their own heart, and not from the mouth of
the LORD.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> They say still to them that despise me,
The LORD hath said, Ye shall have peace; and they say to every one that
walketh after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon
you.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> For who hath stood in the counsel of
the LORD, and hath perceived and heard his word? who hath marked his
word, and heard it?

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Behold, a whirlwind of the LORD is gone
forth in fury, even a grievous whirlwind: it shall fall grievously upon
the head of the wicked.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> The anger of the LORD shall not return,
until he shall have executed, and till he shall have performed the
thoughts of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it
perfectly.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> I have not sent these prophets, yet
they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But if they had stood in my counsel,
and had caused my people to hear my words, then they would have turned
them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Am I a God at hand, saith the LORD, and
not a God afar off.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Can any hide himself in secret places
that I shall not see him? saith the LORD. Do not I fill heaven and
earth? saith the LORD.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> I have heard what the prophets said,
that prophesy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> How long shall this be in the heart of
the prophets that prophesy lies? yes, they are prophets of the deceit of
their own heart;

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> Who think to cause my people to forget
my name by their dreams which they tell every man to his neighbor, as
their fathers have forgotten my name for Baal.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> The prophet that hath a dream, let him
tell a dream; and he that hath my word, let him speak my word
faithfully. What is the chaff to the wheat? saith the LORD?

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Is not my word like a fire? saith the
LORD? and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Therefore behold, I am against the
prophets, saith the LORD, that steal my words every one from his
neighbor.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Behold, I am against the prophets,
saith the LORD, that use their tongues, and say, He saith.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Behold, I am against them that prophesy
false dreams, saith the LORD, and do tell them, and cause my people to
err by their lies, and by their lightness; yet I sent them not, nor
commanded them: therefore they shall not profit this people at all,
saith the LORD.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> And when this people, or the prophet,
or a priest, shall ask thee, saying, What is the burden of the LORD?
thou shalt then say to them, What burden? I will even forsake you, saith
the LORD.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And as for the prophet, and the priest,
and the people that shall say, The burden of the LORD, I will even
punish that man and his house.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> Thus shall ye say every one to his
neighbor, and every one to his brother, What hath the LORD answered?
and, What hath the LORD spoken?

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> And the burden of the LORD shall ye
mention no more: for every man's word shall be his burden; for ye have
perverted the words of the living God, of the LORD of hosts our God.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> Thus shalt thou say to the prophet,
What hath the LORD answered thee? and, What hath the LORD spoken?

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> But since ye say, The burden of the
LORD; therefore thus saith the LORD; Because ye say this word, The
burden of the LORD, and I have sent to you, saying, Ye shall not say,
The burden of the LORD;

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> Therefore behold, I, even I, will
utterly forget you, and I will forsake you, and the city that I gave to
you and your fathers, and cast you out of my presence:

<span id="an_23:40">23:40</span> And I will bring an everlasting
reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> The LORD showed me, and behold, two
baskets of figs were set before the temple of the LORD, after
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had carried away captive Jeconiah the son
of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and the princes of Judah, with the
carpenters and smiths, from Jerusalem, and had brought them to Babylon.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> One basket had very good figs, even like
the figs that are first ripe: and the other basket had very poor figs,
which could not be eaten, they were so bad.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Then said the LORD to me, What seest
thou, Jeremiah? and I said, Figs; the good figs, very good; and the bad,
very bad, that cannot be eaten, they are so bad.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> Again the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel;
Like these good figs, so will I acknowledge them that are carried away
captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of
the Chaldeans for their good.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> For I will set my eyes upon them for
good, and I will bring them again to this land: and I will build them,
and not pull them down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And I will give them a heart to know me,
that I am the LORD: and they shall be my people, and I will be their
God: for they shall return to me with their whole heart.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And as the bad figs, which cannot be
eaten, they are so bad; surely thus saith the LORD, So will I give
Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his princes, and the residue of
Jerusalem, that remain in this land, and them that dwell in the land of
Egypt:

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And I will deliver them to be removed
into all the kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach and
a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places whither I shall drive
them.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And I will send the sword, the famine,
and the pestilence, among them, till they are consumed from off the land
that I gave to them and to their fathers.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah concerning
all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah king of Judah, that was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon;

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Which Jeremiah the prophet spoke to all
the people of Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying,

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> From the thirteenth year of Josiah the
son of Amon king of Judah, even to this day, that is the three and
twentieth year, the word of the LORD hath come to me, and I have spoken
to you, rising early and speaking; but ye have not hearkened.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> And the LORD hath sent to you all his
servants the prophets, rising early and sending them; but ye have not
hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> They said, Turn ye again now every one
from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the
land that the LORD hath given to you and to your fathers for ever and
ever:

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And go not after other gods to serve
them, and to worship them, and provoke me not to anger with the works of
your hands; and I will do you no hurt.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Yet ye have not hearkened to me, saith
the LORD; that ye might provoke me to anger with the works of your hands
to your own hurt.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts;
Because ye have not heard my words,

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Behold, I will send and take all the
families of the north, saith the LORD, and Nebuchadrezzar the king of
Babylon, my servant, and will bring them against this land, and against
its inhabitants, and against all these nations around, and will utterly
destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and a hissing, and
perpetual desolations.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Moreover I will take from them the
voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom,
and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and the light
of the candle.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And this whole land shall be a
desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations shall serve the king
of Babylon seventy years.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> And it shall come to pass, when seventy
years are accomplished, that I will punish the king of Babylon, and that
nation, saith the LORD, for their iniquity, and the land of the
Chaldeans, and will make it perpetual desolations.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And I will bring upon that land all my
words which I have pronounced against it, even all that is written in
this book, which Jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> For many nations and great kings shall
reduce them to subjection also: and I will recompense them according to
their deeds, and according to the works of their own hands.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> For thus saith the LORD God of Israel
to me; Take the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause all the
nations, to whom I send thee, to drink it.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> And they shall drink, and be moved, and
enraged, because of the sword that I will send among them.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Then I took the cup at the LORD'S hand,
and made all the nations to drink, to whom the LORD had sent me:

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> To wit, Jerusalem, and the cities of
Judah, and her kings, and her princes, to make them a desolation, an
astonishment, a hissing, and a curse; as it is this day;

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his
servants, and his princes, and all his people;

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And all the mingled people, and all the
kings of the land of Uz, and all the kings of the land of the
Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Azzah, and Ekron, and the remnant of
Ashdod,

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> Edom, and Moab, and the children of
Ammon,

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And all the kings of Tyre, and all the
kings of Zidon, and the kings of the isles which are beyond the sea,

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and all that
are in the utmost corners,

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And all the kings of Arabia, and all
the kings of the mingled people that dwell in the desert,

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And all the kings of Zimri, and all the
kings of Elam, and all the kings of the Medes,

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> And all the kings of the north, far and
near, one with another, and all the kingdoms of the world, which are
upon the face of the earth: and the king of Sheshach shall drink after
them.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> Therefore thou shalt say to them, Thus
saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Drink ye, and be drunken,
and vomit, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will
send among you.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> And it shall be, if they refuse to take
the cup at thy hand to drink, then shalt thou say to them, Thus saith
the LORD of hosts; Ye shall certainly drink.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> For lo, I begin to bring evil on the
city which is called by my name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye
shall not be unpunished: for I will call for a sword upon all the
inhabitants of the earth, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> Therefore prophesy thou against them
all these words, and say to them, The LORD shall roar from on high, and
utter his voice from his holy habitation; he shall mightily roar upon
his habitation; he shall give a shout, as they that tread the grapes,
against all the inhabitants of the earth.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> A noise shall come even to the ends of
the earth; for the LORD hath a controversy with the nations, he will
plead with all flesh; he will give them that are wicked to the sword,
saith the LORD.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Behold,
evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall
be raised from the borders of the earth.

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> And the slain of the LORD shall be at
that day from one end of the earth even to the other end of the earth:
they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be
dung upon the ground.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow
yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the flock: for the days of your
slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished; and ye shall fall
like a pleasant vessel.

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> And the shepherds shall have no way to
flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape.

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> A voice of the cry of the shepherds,
and a howling of the principal of the flock, shall be heard: for the
LORD hath laid waste their pasture.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> And the peaceable habitations are cut
down, because of the fierce anger of the LORD.

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> He hath forsaken his covert, as the
lion: for their land is desolate because of the fierceness of the
oppressor, and because of his fierce anger.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah came this word from the LORD,
saying,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Thus saith the LORD; Stand in the court
of the LORD'S house, and speak to all the cities of Judah, which come to
worship in the LORD'S house, all the words that I command thee to speak
to them; diminish not a word:

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> It may be they will hearken, and turn
every man from his evil way, that I may repent of the evil, which I
purpose to do to them because of the evil of their doings.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And thou shalt say to them, Thus saith
the LORD, If ye will not hearken to me to walk in my law, which I have
set before you,

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> To hearken to the words of my servants
the prophets, whom I have sent to you, both rising early, and sending
them, but ye have not hearkened;

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Then will I make this house like Shiloh,
and will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> So the priests and the prophets, and all
the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah had
made an end of speaking all that the LORD had commanded him to speak to
all the people, that the priests and the prophets and all the people
took him, saying, Thou shalt surely die.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> Why hast thou prophesied in the name of
the LORD, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall
be desolate without an inhabitant? And all the people were gathered
against Jeremiah, in the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> When the princes of Judah heard these
things, then they came up from the king's house to the house of the
LORD, and sat down in the entry of the new gate of the LORD'S house.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Then the priests and the prophets spoke
to the princes and to all the people, saying, This man is worthy to die;
for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your
ears.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Then Jeremiah spoke to all the princes,
and to all the people, saying, The LORD sent me to prophesy against this
house and against this city all the words that ye have heard.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> Therefore now amend your ways and your
doings, and obey the voice of the LORD your God; and the LORD will
repent of the evil that he hath pronounced against you.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> As for me, behold, I am in your hand:
do with me as it seemeth good and meet to you.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> But know ye for certain, that if ye put
me to death, ye will surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves, upon
this city, and upon its inhabitants: for of a truth the LORD hath sent
me to you to speak all these words in your ears.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Then said the princes and all the
people to the priests and to the prophets; This man is not worthy to
die: for he hath spoken to us in the name of the LORD our God.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Then arose certain of the elders of the
land, and spoke to all the assembly of the people, saying,

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> Micah the Morasthite prophesied in the
days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and spoke to all the people of Judah,
saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Zion shall be plowed like a field,
and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the
high places of the forest.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all
Judah put him to death? did he not fear the LORD, and beseech the LORD,
and the LORD repented of the evil which he had pronounced against them?
Thus might we procure great evil against our souls.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> And there was also a man that
prophesied in the name of the LORD, Urijah the son of Shemaiah of
Kirjath-jearim, who prophesied against this city and against this land
according to all the words of Jeremiah:

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And when Jehoiakim the king, with all
his mighty men, and all the princes, heard his words, the king sought to
put him to death: but when Urijah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and
went into Egypt;

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And Jehoiakim the king sent men into
Egypt, namely, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and certain men with him into
Egypt.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And they brought forth Urijah from
Egypt, and brought him to Jehoiakim the king; who slew him with the
sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> Nevertheless the hand of Ahikam the son
of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the
hand of the people to put him to death.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, came this word to Jeremiah
from the LORD, saying,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Thus saith the LORD to me; Make for thee
bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy neck,

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And send them to the king of Edom, and to
the king of Moab, and to the king of the Ammonites, and to the king of
Tyre, and to the king of Zidon, by the hand of the messengers who come
to Jerusalem to Zedekiah king of Judah;

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And command them to say to their masters,
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Thus shall ye say to
your masters;

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> I have made the earth, the man and the
beast that are upon the ground, by my great power and by my
out-stretched arm, and have given it to whom it seemed meet to me.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And now have I given all these lands into
the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant; and the
beasts of the field have I given him also to serve him.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And all nations shall serve him, and his
son, and his son's son, until the very time of his land shall come: and
then many nations and great kings shall bring him into subjection.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> And it shall come to pass, that the
nation and kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar, king of
Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of
Babylon, that nation will I punish, saith the LORD, with the sword, and
with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by
his hand.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Therefore hearken ye not to your
prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreamers, nor to your
enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, who speak to you, saying, Ye shall
not serve the king of Babylon:

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> For they prophesy a lie to you, to
remove you far from your land; and that I should drive you out, and ye
should perish.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> But the nations that bring their neck
under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, those will I let
remain still in their own land, saith the LORD; and they shall till it,
and dwell in it.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> I spoke also to Zedekiah king of Judah
according to all these words, saying, Bring your necks under the yoke of
the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Why will ye die, thou and thy people,
by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as the LORD hath
spoken against the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> Therefore hearken not to the words of
the prophets that speak to you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of
Babylon; for they prophesy a lie to you.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> For I have not sent them, saith the
LORD, yet they prophesy a lie in my name; that I might drive you out,
and that ye might perish, ye, and the prophets that prophesy to you.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Also I spoke to the priests and to all
this people, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Hearken not to the words of
your prophets that prophesy to you, saying, Behold, the vessels of the
LORD'S house shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon: for they
prophesy a lie to you.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Hearken not to them; serve the king of
Babylon, and live: why should this city be laid waste?

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> But if they are prophets, and if the
word of the LORD is with them, let them now make intercession to the
LORD of hosts, that the vessels which are left in the house of the LORD,
and in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to
Babylon.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> For thus saith the LORD of hosts
concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the
bases, and concerning the residue of the vessels that remain in this
city,

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
took not, when he carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim
king of Judah from Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and
Jerusalem;

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Yes, thus saith the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel, concerning the vessels that remain in the house of the
LORD, and in the house of the king of Judah and of Jerusalem;

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> They shall be carried to Babylon, and
there shall they be until the day that I visit them, saith the LORD;
then will I bring them up, and restore them to this place.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And it came to pass the same year, in the
beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year,
and in the fifth month, that Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet, who
was of Gibeon, spoke to me in the house of the LORD, in the presence of
the priests, and of all the people, saying,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, the God
of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Within two full years will I bring again
into this place all the vessels of the LORD'S house, that Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon took away from this place, and carried them to Babylon:

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And I will bring again to this place
Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, with all the captives of
Judah, that went into Babylon, saith the LORD; for I will break the yoke
of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Then the prophet Jeremiah said to the
prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of
all the people that stood in the house of the LORD,

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Even the prophet Jeremiah said, Amen: the
LORD do so: the LORD perform thy words which thou hast prophesied, to
bring again the vessels of the LORD'S house, and all that is carried
away captive, from Babylon into this place.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Nevertheless, now hear thou this word
that I speak in thy ears, and in the ears of all the people:

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The prophets that have been before me and
before thee of old prophesied both against many countries, and against
great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of pestilence.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> The prophet who prophesieth of peace,
when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet
be known, that the LORD hath truly sent him.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke
from off the prophet Jeremiah's neck, and broke it.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And Hananiah spoke in the presence of
all the people, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Even so will I break the
yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon from the neck of all nations
within the space of two full years. And the prophet Jeremiah went his
way.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Then the word of the LORD came to
Jeremiah, after Hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke from off the
neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Go and tell Hananiah, saying, Thus
saith the LORD; Thou hast broken the yokes of wood; but thou shalt make
for them yokes of iron.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel; I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these
nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they
shall serve him: and I have given him the beasts of the field also.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> Then said the prophet Jeremiah to
Hananiah the prophet, Hear now, Hananiah; The LORD hath not sent thee;
but thou makest this people to trust in a lie.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold,
I will cast thee from off the face of the earth: this year thou shalt
die, because thou hast taught rebellion against the LORD.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> So Hananiah the prophet died the same
year in the seventh month.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Now these are the words of the letter
that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem to the residue of the
elders who were carried away captives, and to the priests, and to the
prophets, and to all the people whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away
captive from Jerusalem to Babylon;

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> (After Jeconiah the king, and the queen,
and the eunuchs, the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the carpenters,
and the smiths, had departed from Jerusalem;)

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> By the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan,
and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent to
Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon) saying,

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel, to all that are carried away captives, whom I have caused to be
carried away from Jerusalem to Babylon;

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> Build ye houses, and dwell in them; and
plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them;

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> Take ye wives, and beget sons and
daughters; and take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to
husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters; that ye may be
increased there, and not diminished.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And seek the peace of the city whither I
have caused you to be carried away captives, and pray to the LORD for
it: for in the peace of it ye shall have peace.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God
of Israel; Let not your prophets and your diviners, that are in the
midst of you, deceive you, neither hearken to your dreams which ye cause
to be dreamed.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> For they prophesy falsely to you in my
name: I have not sent them, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> For thus saith the LORD, That after
seventy years shall be accomplished at Babylon I will visit you, and
perform my good word towards you, in causing you to return to this
place.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> For I know the thoughts that I think
towards you, saith the LORD, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give
you an expected end.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> Then shall ye call upon me, and ye
shall go and pray to me, and I will hearken to you.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And ye shall seek me, and find me, when
ye shall search for me with all your heart.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> And I will be found by you, saith the
LORD: and I will turn away your captivity, and I will gather you from
all the nations, and from all the places whither I have driven you,
saith the LORD: and I will bring you again into the place whence I
caused you to be carried away captive.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Because ye have said, The LORD hath
raised up for us prophets in Babylon;

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> Know that thus saith the LORD
concerning the king that sitteth upon the throne of David, and
concerning all the people that dwelleth in this city, and concerning
your brethren that are not gone forth with you into captivity;

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Behold, I
will send upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will
make them like vile figs, that cannot be eaten, they are so bad.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And I will persecute them with the
sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will deliver them
to be removed to all the kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an
astonishment, and a hissing, and a reproach, among all the nations
whither I have driven them:

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> Because they have not hearkened to my
words, saith the LORD, which I sent to them by my servants the prophets,
rising early and sending them; but ye would not hear, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Hear ye therefore the word of the LORD,
all ye of the captivity, whom I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon:

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God
of Israel, concerning Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and concerning Zedekiah
the son of Maaseiah, who prophesy a lie to you in my name; Behold, I
will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and
he shall slay them before your eyes;

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> And concerning them shall be taken up a
curse by all the captivity of Judah who are in Babylon, saying, The LORD
make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted
in the fire;

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> Because they have committed villainy in
Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbor's wives, and
have spoken lying words in my name, which I have not commanded them;
even I know, and am a witness, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> Thus shalt thou also speak to Shemaiah
the Nehelamite, saying,

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel, saying, Because thou hast sent letters in thy name to all
the people that are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah
the priest, and to all the priests, saying,

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> The LORD hath made thee priest in the
stead of Jehoiada the priest, that ye should be officers in the house of
the LORD, for every man that is mad, and maketh himself a prophet, that
thou shouldest put him in prison, and in the stocks.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> Now therefore why hast thou not
reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth, who maketh himself a prophet to you?

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> For therefore he sent to us in Babylon,
saying, This captivity is long: build ye houses, and dwell in them; and
plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> And Zephaniah the priest read this
letter in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> Then came the word of the LORD to
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> Send to all them of the captivity,
saying, Thus saith the LORD concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite; Because
Shemaiah hath prophesied to you, and I sent him not, and he caused you
to trust in a lie:

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold,
I will punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and his seed: he shall not have a
man to dwell among this people; neither shall he behold the good that I
will do for my people, saith the LORD; because he hath taught rebellion
against the LORD.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from the
LORD, saying,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Thus speaketh the LORD God of Israel,
saying, Write for thee all the words that I have spoken to thee in a
book.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For lo, the days come, saith the LORD;
that I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah,
saith the LORD: and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave
to their fathers, and they shall possess it.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And these are the words that the LORD
spoke concerning Israel and concerning Judah.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> For thus saith the LORD; We have heard a
voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth
travail with child? Why do I see every man with his hands on his loins,
as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Alas! for that day is great, so that none
is like it: it is even the time of Jacob's trouble, but he shall be
saved out of it.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> For it shall come to pass in that day,
saith the LORD of hosts, that I will break his yoke from off thy neck,
and will burst thy bonds, and strangers shall no more bring him into
subjection:

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> But they shall serve the LORD their God,
and David their king, whom I will raise up to them.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Therefore fear thou not, O my servant
Jacob, saith the LORD; neither be dismayed, O Israel: for lo, I will
save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and
Jacob shall return, and shall be in rest, and quiet, and none shall make
him afraid.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For I am with thee, saith the LORD, to
save thee: though I make a full end of all nations whither I have
scattered thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee: but I will
correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> For thus saith the LORD, Thy bruise is
incurable, and thy wound is grievous.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> There is none to plead thy cause, that
thou mayest be bound up: thou hast no healing medicines.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> All thy lovers have forgotten thee;
they seek thee not; for I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy,
with the chastisements of a cruel one, for the multitude of thy
iniquity; because thy sins were increased.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> Why criest thou for thy affliction? thy
sorrow is incurable for the multitude of thy iniquity: because thy sins
were increased, I have done these things to thee.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> Therefore all they that devour thee
shall be devoured; and all thy adversaries, every one of them shall go
into captivity; and they that plunder thee shall be a spoil, and all
that prey upon thee will I give for a prey.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> For I will restore health to thee, and
I will heal thee of thy wounds, saith the LORD; because they called thee
an Outcast, saying, This is Zion, whom no man seeketh after.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will
bring again the captivity of Jacob's tents, and have mercy on his
dwelling places; and the city shall be built upon her own heap, and the
palace shall remain after its manner.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> And out of them shall proceed
thanksgiving and the voice of them that make merry: and I will multiply
them, and they shall not be few; I will also glorify them, and they
shall not be small.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> Their children also shall be as in
former time, and their congregation shall be established before me, and
I will punish all that oppress them.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> And their nobles shall be from
themselves, and their governor shall proceed from the midst of them; and
I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach time: for who is
this that engaged his heart to approach to me? saith the LORD.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> And ye shall be my people, and I will
be your God.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> Behold, the whirlwind of the LORD goeth
forth with fury, a continuing whirlwind: it shall fall with pain upon
the head of the wicked.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> The fierce anger of the LORD shall not
return, until he hath done it, and until he hath performed the intents
of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> At the same time, saith the LORD, I will
be the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Thus saith the LORD, The people who were
left by the sword found grace in the wilderness; even Israel, when I
went to cause him to rest.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> The LORD appeared of old to me, saying, I
have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with loving-kindness
have I drawn thee.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Again I will build thee, and thou shalt
be built, O virgin of Israel; thou shalt again be adorned with thy
tabrets, and shalt go forth in the dances of them that make merry.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the
mountains of Samaria: the planters shall plant, and shall eat them as
common things.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> For there shall be a day, that the
watchmen upon the mount Ephraim shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to
Zion to the LORD our God.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> For thus saith the LORD; Sing with
gladness for Jacob, and shout among the chief of the nations: publish
ye, praise ye, and say, O LORD, save thy people, the remnant of Israel.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Behold, I will bring them from the north
country, and gather them from the borders of the earth, and with them
the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her that travaileth
with child together: a great company shall return thither.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> They shall come with weeping, and with
supplications will I lead them: I will cause them to walk by the rivers
of waters in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a
father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first-born.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Hear the word of the LORD, O ye
nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, He that
scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd doth his
flock.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> For the LORD hath redeemed Jacob, and
ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> Therefore they shall come and sing in
the hight of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the LORD,
for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and
of the herd: and their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall
not sorrow any more at all.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Then shall the virgin rejoice in the
dance, both young men and old together: for I will turn their mourning
into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their
sorrow.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> And I will satiate the soul of the
priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness,
saith the LORD.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Thus saith the LORD; A voice was heard
in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping; Rachel weeping for her
children refused to be comforted for her children, because they were
not.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> Thus saith the LORD; Refrain thy voice
from weeping, and thy eyes from tears: for thy work shall be rewarded,
saith the LORD; and they shall come again from the land of the enemy.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> And there is hope in thy end, saith the
LORD, that thy children shall come again to their own border.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself thus; Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou
art the LORD my God.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> Surely after I was turned, I repented;
and after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, and
even confounded, because I bore the reproach of my youth.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a
pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember
him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have
mercy upon him, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> Set thee up way-marks, make thee high
heaps: set thy heart towards the highway, even the way which thou
wentest; turn again, O virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy cities.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> How long wilt thou wander about, O thou
backsliding daughter? for the LORD hath created a new thing in the
earth, A woman shall compass a man.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God
of Israel; As yet they shall use this speech in the land of Judah and in
her cities, when I shall bring again their captivity; The LORD bless
thee, O habitation of justice, mountain of holiness.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> And there shall dwell in Judah itself,
and in all her cities together, husbandmen, and they that go forth with
flocks.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> For I have satiated the weary soul, and
I have replenished every sorrowful soul.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> Upon this I awaked, and beheld; and my
sleep was sweet to me.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> Behold, the days come saith the LORD,
that I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed
of man, and with the seed of beast.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> And it shall come to pass, that as I
have watched over them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw
down, and to destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them, to
build and to plant, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> In those days they shall say no more,
The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children's teeth are set on
edge.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> But every one shall die for his own
iniquity: every man that eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be set
on edge.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Behold, the days come, saith the LORD,
that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the
house of Judah:

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> Not according to the covenant that I
made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring
them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they broke, although I
was a husband to them, saith the LORD:

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> But this shall be the covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the LORD, I
will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and
will be their God, and they shall be my people.

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> And they shall teach no more every man
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the LORD: for they
shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, saith
the LORD: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their
sin no more.

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> Thus saith the LORD, who giveth the sun
for a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for
a light by night, who divideth the sea when its waves roar; The LORD of
hosts is his name:

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> If those ordinances depart from before
me, saith the LORD, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being
a nation before me for ever.

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> Thus saith the LORD; If heaven above
can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath,
I will also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they have done,
saith the LORD.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> Behold, the days come, saith the LORD,
that the city shall be built to the LORD from the tower of Hananeel to
the gate of the corner.

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> And the measuring line shall yet go
forth over against it upon the hill Gareb, and shall compass about to
Goath.

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> And the whole valley of the dead
bodies, and of the ashes, and all the fields to the brook of Kidron, to
the corner of the horse-gate towards the east, shall be holy to the
LORD; it shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any more for ever.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from the
LORD in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the
eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> For then the king of Babylon's army
besieged Jerusalem: and Jeremiah the prophet was confined in the court
of the prison, which was in the king of Judah's house.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> For Zedekiah king of Judah had confined
him, saying, Why dost thou prophesy, and say, Thus saith the LORD,
Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and
he shall take it;

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And Zedekiah king of Judah shall not
escape from the hand of the Chaldeans, but shall surely be delivered
into the hand of the king of Babylon, and shall speak with him mouth to
mouth, and his eyes shall behold his eyes;

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon,
and there shall he be until I visit him, saith the LORD: though ye fight
with the Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And Jeremiah said, The word of the LORD
came to me, saying,

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Behold, Hanameel the son of Shallum thy
uncle shall come to thee, saying, Buy for thee my field that is in
Anathoth: for the right of redemption is thine to buy it.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> So Hanameel my uncle's son came to me in
the court of the prison, according to the word of the LORD, and said to
me, Buy my field, I pray thee, that is in Anathoth, which is in the
country of Benjamin: for the right of inheritance is thine, and the
redemption is thine; buy it for thyself. Then I knew that this was the
word of the LORD.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> And I bought the field of Hanameel my
uncle's son, that was in Anathoth, and weighed him the money, even
seventeen shekels of silver.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> And I subscribed the contract, and
sealed it, and took witnesses, and weighed him the money in the
balances.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> So I took the evidence of the purchase,
both that which was sealed according to the law and custom, and that
which was open:

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> And I gave the evidence of the purchase
to Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, in the sight of
Hanameel my uncle's son, and in the presence of the witnesses that
subscribed the book of the purchase, before all the Jews that sat in the
court of the prison.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> And I charged Baruch before them,
saying,

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God
of Israel; Take these evidences, this evidence of the purchase, both
that which is sealed, and this evidence which is open; and put them in
an earthen vessel, that they may continue many days.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel; Houses and fields and vineyards shall be possessed again
in this land.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> Now when I had delivered the evidence
of the purchase to Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed to the LORD,
saying,

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> Ah Lord GOD! behold, thou hast made the
heaven and the earth by thy great power and out-stretched arm, and there
is nothing too hard for thee:

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Thou showest loving-kindness to
thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom
of their children after them: the Great, the Mighty God, JEHOVAH of
hosts, is his name,

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> Great in counsel, and mighty in work:
for thy eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men: to give
every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his
doings:

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> Who hast set signs and wonders in the
land of Egypt, even to this day, and in Israel, and among other men; and
hast made thee a name, as at this day;

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> And hast brought forth thy people
Israel from the land of Egypt with signs, and with wonders, and with a
strong hand, and with an out-stretched arm, and with great terror;

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> And hast given them this land, which
thou didst swear to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk
and honey;

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> And they came in, and possessed it; but
they obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy law; they have done
nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do: therefore thou hast
caused all this evil to come upon them:

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> Behold the mounts, they are come to the
city to take it; and the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans,
that fight against it, because of the sword, and of the famine, and of
the pestilence: and what thou hast spoken is come to pass; and behold,
thou seest it.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> And thou hast said to me, O Lord GOD,
Buy thee the field for money, and take witnesses; for the city is given
into the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> Then came the word of the LORD to
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> Behold, I am the LORD, the God of all
flesh: is there any thing too hard for me?

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold,
I will give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand
of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he shall take it:

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> And the Chaldeans, that fight against
this city, shall come and set fire on this city, and burn it with the
houses, upon whose roofs they have offered incense to Baal, and poured
out drink-offerings to other gods, to provoke me to anger.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> For the children of Israel and the
children of Judah have done evil only before me from their youth: for
the children of Israel have only provoked me to anger with the work of
their hands, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> For this city hath been to me as a
provocation of my anger and of my fury from the day that they built it
even to this day; that I should remove it from before my face,

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> Because of all the evil of the children
of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to provoke
me to anger, they, their kings, their princes, their priests, and their
prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> And they have turned to me the back,
and not the face: though I taught them, rising early and teaching them,
yet they have not hearkened to receive instruction.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> But they set their abominations in the
house, which is called by my name, to defile it.

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> And they built the high places of Baal,
which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and
their daughters to pass through the fire to Molech; which I commanded
them not, neither came it into my mind, that they should do this
abomination, to cause Judah to sin.

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> And now therefore thus saith the LORD,
the God of Israel, concerning this city, of which ye say, It shall be
delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, and by the
famine, and by the pestilence;

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> Behold, I will gather them out of all
countries, whither I have driven them in my anger, and in my fury, and
in great wrath; and I will bring them again to this place, and I will
cause them to dwell in safety.

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> And they shall be my people, and I will
be their God:

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> And I will give them one heart, and one
way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their
children after them:

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> And I will make an everlasting covenant
with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> Yes, I will rejoice over them to do
them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole
heart and with my whole soul.

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> For thus saith the LORD; As I have
brought all this great evil upon this people, so will I bring upon them
all the good that I have promised them.

<span id="an_32:43">32:43</span> And fields shall be bought in this
land, of which ye say, It is desolate without man or beast; it is given
into the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_32:44">32:44</span> Men shall buy fields for money, and
subscribe evidences, and seal them, and take witnesses in the land of
Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah,
and in the cities of the mountains, and in the cities of the valley, and
in the cities of the south: for I will cause their captivity to return,
saith the LORD.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to
Jeremiah the second time, while he was yet confined in the court of the
prison, saying,

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Thus saith the LORD the maker of this,
the LORD that formed it, to establish it; the LORD is his name;

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> Call to me, and I will answer thee, and
show thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest not.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> For thus saith the LORD, the God of
Israel, concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of
the kings of Judah, which are thrown down by the mounts, and by the
sword;

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> They come to fight with the Chaldeans,
but it is to fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom I have slain in
my anger and in my fury, and for all whose wickedness I have hid my face
from this city.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Behold, I will bring it health and cure,
and I will cure them, and will reveal to them the abundance of peace and
truth.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And I will cause the captivity of Judah
and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them, as at the
first.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And I will cleanse them from all their
iniquity, by which they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all
their iniquities, by which they have sinned, and by which they have
transgressed against me.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> And it shall be to me a name of joy, a
praise, and an honor before all the nations of the earth, which shall
hear all the good that I do to them: and they shall fear and tremble for
all the goodness and for all the prosperity that I procure to it.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Thus saith the LORD; Again there shall
be heard in this place, which ye say shall be desolate without man and
without beast, even in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man, and without inhabitant, and
without beast,

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> The voice of joy, and the voice of
gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the
voice of them that shall say, Praise the LORD of hosts: for the LORD is
good; for his mercy endureth for ever: and of them that shall bring the
sacrifice of praise into the house of the LORD. For I will cause to
return the captivity of the land, as at the first, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Again in
this place, which is desolate without man and without beast, and in all
its cities, shall be a habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to
lie down.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> In the cities of the mountains, in the
cities of the vale, and in the cities of the south, and in the land of
Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah,
shall the flocks pass again under the hands of him that counteth them,
saith the LORD.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> Behold, the days come, saith the LORD,
that I will perform that good thing which I have promised to the house
of Israel and to the house of Judah.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> In those days, and at that time, will I
cause the branch of righteousness to grow up to David; and he shall
execute judgment and righteousness in the land.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> In those days shall Judah be saved, and
Jerusalem shall dwell in safety: and this is the name by which she shall
be called, JEHOVAH our righteousness.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> For thus saith the LORD; David shall
never want a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel;

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> Neither shall the priests the Levites
want a man before me to offer burnt-offerings, and to kindle
meat-offerings, and to do sacrifice continually.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And the word of the LORD came to
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Thus saith the LORD; If ye can break my
covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, so that there should
not be day and night in their season;

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> Then also may my covenant be broken
with David my servant, that he should not have a son to reign upon his
throne; and with the Levites the priests, my ministers.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> As the host of heaven cannot be
numbered, neither the sand of the sea measured: so will I multiply the
seed of David my servant, and the Levites that minister to me.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Considerest thou not what this people
have spoken, saying, The two families which the LORD hath chosen, he
hath even cast them off? thus they have despised my people, that they
should be no more a nation before them.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Thus saith the LORD; If my covenant is
not with day and night, and if I have not appointed the ordinances of
heaven and earth;

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> Then will I cast away the seed of
Jacob, and David my servant, so that I will not take any of his seed to
be rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; for I will cause
their captivity to return, and have mercy on them.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> The word which came to Jeremiah from the
LORD, when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and all his army, and all the
kingdoms of the earth of his dominion, and all the people fought against
Jerusalem, and against all its cities, saying,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel;
Go and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and tell him, Thus saith the
LORD; Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of
Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire:

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> And thou shalt not escape from his hand,
but shalt surely be taken, and delivered into his hand; and thy eyes
shall behold the eyes of the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with
thee mouth to mouth, and thou shalt go to Babylon.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> Yet hear the word of the LORD, O Zedekiah
king of Judah; Thus saith the LORD concerning thee, Thou shalt not die
by the sword:

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> But thou shalt die in peace: and with the
burnings of thy fathers, the former kings who were before thee, so shall
they burn odors for thee; and they will lament thee, saying, Ah lord!
for I have pronounced the word, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke all these
words to Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem,

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> When the king of Babylon's army fought
against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah that were left,
against Lachish, and against Azekah: for these fortified cities remained
of the cities of Judah.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> This is the word that came to Jeremiah
from the LORD, after king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the
people who were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty to them;

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> That every man should liberate his
man-servant, and every man his maid-servant, being a Hebrew or a
Hebrewess; that none should retain them in service, to wit, a Jew his
brother.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> Now when all the princes, and all the
people who had entered into the covenant, heard that every one should
liberate his man-servant, and every one his maid-servant, that none
should retain them in service any more, then they obeyed, and let them
go.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> But afterwards they turned, and caused
the servants and the handmaids, whom they had liberated, to return, and
brought them into subjection for servants and for handmaids.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> Therefore the word of the LORD came to
Jeremiah from the LORD, saying,

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel;
I made a covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them forth
from the land of Egypt, out of the house of bond-men, saying,

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> At the end of seven years dismiss ye
every man his brother a Hebrew, who hath been sold to thee; and when he
hath served thee six years, thou shalt let him go free from thee: but
your fathers hearkened not to me, neither inclined their ear.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> And ye had now turned, and had done
right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbor; and
ye had made a covenant before me in the house which is called by my
name:

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> But ye turned and profaned my name, and
caused every man his servant, and every man his handmaid, whom he had
set at liberty at their pleasure, to return, and brought them into
subjection, to be to you for servants and for handmaids.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD; Ye have
not hearkened to me, in proclaiming liberty, every one to his brother,
and every man to his neighbor: behold, I proclaim a liberty for you,
saith the LORD, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine; and
I will make you to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> And I will give the men that have
transgressed my covenant, who have not performed the words of the
covenant which they had made before me, when they cut the calf in two,
and passed between the parts of it,

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> The princes of Judah, and the princes
of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the priests, and all the people of the
land, who passed between the parts of the calf;

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> I will even give them into the hand of
their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life: and their
dead bodies shall be for food to the fowls of the heaven, and to the
beasts of the earth.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> And Zedekiah king of Judah and his
princes I will give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of
them that seek their life, and into the hand of the king of Babylon's
army, which are gone up from you.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> Behold, I will command, saith the LORD,
and cause them to return to this city; and they shall fight against it,
and take it, and burn it with fire: and I will make the cities of Judah
a desolation without an inhabitant.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> The word which came to Jeremiah from the
LORD in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, saying,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Go to the house of the Rechabites, and
speak to them, and bring them into the house of the LORD, into one of
the chambers, and give them wine to drink.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> Then I took Jaazaniah the son of
Jeremiah, the son of Habaziniah, and his brethren, and all his sons, and
the whole house of the Rechabites;

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> And I brought them into the house of the
LORD, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan, the son of Igdaliah, a man
of God, who was by the chamber of the princes, which was above the
chamber of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the door:

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> And I set before the sons of the house of
the Rechabites pots full of wine, and cups, and I said to them, Drink ye
wine.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> But they said, We will drink no wine: for
Jonadab the son of Rechab our father commanded us, saying, Ye shall
drink no wine, neither ye, nor your sons for ever:

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> Neither shall ye build house, nor sow
seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have any: but all your days ye shall dwell
in tents; that ye may live many days in the land where ye are strangers.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> Thus have we obeyed the voice of Jonadab
the son of Rechab our father in all that he hath charged us, to drink no
wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, nor our daughters;

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> Nor to build houses for us to dwell in:
neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor seed:

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> But we have dwelt in tents, and have
obeyed, and done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us.

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> But it came to pass, when
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came up into the land, that we said,
Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldeans,
and for fear of the army of the Syrians: so we dwell at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> Then came the word of the LORD to
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God
of Israel; Go and tell the men of Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Will ye not receive instruction to hearken to my words? saith
the LORD.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab,
that he commanded his sons not to drink wine, are performed; for to this
day they drink none, but obey their father's commandment:
notwithstanding I have spoken to you, rising early and speaking; but ye
hearkened not to me.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> I have sent also to you all my servants
the prophets, rising early and sending them, saying, Return ye now every
man from his evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other
gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to
you and to your fathers: but ye have not inclined your ear, nor
hearkened to me.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> Because the sons of Jonadab the son of
Rechab have performed the commandment of their father, which he
commanded them; but this people hath not hearkened to me:

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD God of
hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring upon Judah and upon all
the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against
them; because I have spoken to them, but they have not heard; and I have
called to them, but they have not answered.

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> And Jeremiah said to the house of the
Rechabites, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Because ye
have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his
precepts, and done according to all that he hath commanded you:

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel; Jonadab the son of Rechab shall not want a man to
stand before me for ever.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And it came to pass in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, that this word came to
Jeremiah from the LORD, saying,

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Take thee a roll of a book, and write in
it all the words that I have spoken to thee against Israel, and against
Judah, and against all the nations, from the day I spoke to thee, from
the days of Josiah, even to this day.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> It may be that the house of Judah will
hear all the evil which I purpose to do to them; that they may return
every man from his evil way; that I may forgive their iniquity and their
sin.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of
Neriah: and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the
LORD, which he had spoken to him, upon a roll of a book.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I
am confined, I cannot go into the house of the LORD:

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Therefore go thou and read in the roll,
which thou hast written from my mouth, the words of the LORD in the ears
of the people in the LORD'S house upon the day of fasting: and also thou
shalt read them in the ears of all Judah that come out of their cities.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> It may be they will present their
supplication before the LORD, and will return every one from his evil
way: for great is the anger and the fury that the LORD hath pronounced
against this people.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And Baruch the son of Neriah did
according to all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, reading in the
book the words of the LORD in the LORD'S house.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> And it came to pass in the fifth year of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, in the ninth month, that they
proclaimed a fast before the LORD to all the people in Jerusalem, and to
all the people that came from the cities of Judah to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> Then Baruch read in the book the words
of Jeremiah in the house of the LORD, in the chamber of Gemariah the son
of Shaphan the scribe, in the higher court, at the entry of the new gate
of the LORD'S house, in the ears of all the people.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> When Michaiah the son of Gemariah, the
son of Shaphan, had heard out of the book all the words of the LORD,

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> Then he went down into the king's
house, into the scribe's chamber: and lo, all the princes sat there,
even Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan
the son of Achbor, and Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah the son
of Hananiah, and all the princes.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Then Michaiah declared to them all the
words that he had heard, when Baruch read the book in the ears of the
people.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi
the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, to Baruch,
saying, Take in thy hand the roll in which thou hast read in the ears of
the people, and come. So Baruch the son of Neriah took the roll in his
hand, and came to them.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> And they said to him, Sit down now, and
read it in our ears. So Baruch read it in their ears.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Now it came to pass when they had heard
all the words, they were afraid both one and another, and said to
Baruch, We will surely tell the king of all these words.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> And they asked Baruch, saying, Tell us
now, How didst thou write all these words at his mouth?

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Then Baruch answered them, He
pronounced all these words to me with his mouth, and I wrote them with
ink in the book.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> Then said the princes to Baruch, Go,
hide thyself, thou and Jeremiah; and let no man know where ye are.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> And they went in to the king into the
court, but they laid up the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe,
and told all the words in the ears of the king.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> So the king sent Jehudi to bring the
roll: and he took it out of the chamber of Elishama, the scribe. And
Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the
princes who stood beside the king.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Now the king sat in the winter-house in
the ninth month: and there was a fire on the hearth burning before him.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> And it came to pass, that when Jehudi
had read three or four leaves, he cut it with the scribe's pen-knife,
and cast it into the fire that was on the hearth, until all the roll was
consumed in the fire that was on the hearth.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> Yet they were not afraid, nor rent
their garments, neither the king, nor any of his servants that heard all
these words.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> Nevertheless Elnathan and Delaiah and
Gemariah had made intercession to the king that he would not burn the
roll: but he would not hear them.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> But the king commanded Jerahmeel the
son of Hammelech, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son
of Abdeel, to take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet: but the
LORD hid them.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> Then the word of the LORD came to
Jeremiah, after that the king had burned the roll, and the words which
Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> Take thee again another roll, and write
in it all the former words that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim
king of Judah hath burned.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> And thou shalt say to Jehoiakim king of
Judah, Thus saith the LORD; Thou hast burned this roll, saying, Why hast
thou written therein, saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly come
and destroy this land, and shall cause to cease from thence man and
beast?

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD
concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah; He shall have none to sit upon the
throne of David: and his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the
heat, and in the night to the frost.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> And I will punish him and his seed and
his servants for their iniquity; and I will bring upon them, and upon
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil
that I have pronounced against them; but they hearkened not.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> Then Jeremiah took another roll, and
gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah; who wrote therein from
the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of
Judah had burned in the fire: and there were besides added to them many
like words.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And king Zedekiah the son of Josiah
reigned instead of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadrezzar king
of Babylon made king in the land of Judah.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> But neither he, nor his servants, nor the
people of the land, hearkened to the words of the LORD, which he spoke
by the prophet Jeremiah.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the
son of Shelemiah and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest to the
prophet Jeremiah, saying, Pray now to the LORD our God for us.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> Now Jeremiah came in and went out among
the people: for they had not put him into prison.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> Then Pharaoh's army had come from Egypt:
and when the Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings of them,
they departed from Jerusalem.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> Then came the word of the LORD to the
prophet Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel;
Thus shall ye say to the king of Judah, that sent you to me to inquire
of me; Behold, Pharaoh's army, which hath come forth to help you, shall
return to Egypt into their own land.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> And the Chaldeans shall come again, and
fight against this city, and take it, and burn it with fire.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> Thus saith the LORD; Deceive not
yourselves, saying, The Chaldeans will surely depart from us: for they
will not depart.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> For though ye had smitten the whole
army of the Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained but
wounded men among them, yet would they rise up every man in his tent,
and burn this city with fire.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> And it came to pass, that when the army
of the Chaldeans was broken up from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's
army,

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Then Jeremiah went out of Jerusalem to
go into the land of Benjamin, to separate himself thence in the midst of
the people.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And when he was in the gate of
Benjamin, a captain of the ward was there, whose name was Irijah, the
son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he took Jeremiah the prophet,
saying, Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> Then said Jeremiah, It is false; I fall
not away to the Chaldeans. But he hearkened not to him: so Irijah took
Jeremiah, and brought him to the princes.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> Wherefore the princes were wroth with
Jeremiah, and beat him, and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan
the scribe: for they had made that the prison.

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> When Jeremiah had entered into the
dungeon, and into the cabins, and Jeremiah had remained there many days;

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took
him out: and the king asked him secretly in his house, and said, Is
there any word from the LORD? And Jeremiah said, There is: for, said he,
thou shalt be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> Moreover Jeremiah said to king
Zedekiah, In what have I offended against thee, or against thy servants,
or against this people, that ye have put me in prison?

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Where are now your prophets who
prophesied to you, saying, The king of Babylon shall not come against
you, nor against this land?

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> Therefore hear now, I pray thee, O my
lord the king: let my supplication, I pray thee, be accepted before
thee; that thou cause me not to return to the house of Jonathan the
scribe, lest I die there.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> Then Zedekiah the king commanded that
they should commit Jeremiah into the court of the prison, and that they
should give him daily a piece of bread out of the baker's street, until
all the bread in the city should be consumed. Thus Jeremiah remained in
the court of the prison.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> Then Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and
Gedaliah the son of Pashur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashur
the son of Malchiah, heard the words that Jeremiah had spoken to all the
people, saying,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Thus saith the LORD, He that remaineth in
this city shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence:
but he that goeth forth to the Chaldeans shall live; for he shall have
his life for a prey, and shall live.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> Thus saith the LORD, This city shall
surely be given into the hand of the king of Babylon's army, which shall
take it.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> Therefore the princes said to the king,
We beseech thee, let this man be put to death: for thus he weakeneth the
hands of the men of war that remain in this city, and the hands of all
the people, in speaking such words to them: for this man seeketh not the
welfare of this people, but the hurt.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Then Zedekiah the king said, Behold, he
is in your hand: for the king is not he that can do any thing against
you.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> Then they took Jeremiah, and cast him
into the dungeon of Malchiah the son of Hammelech, that was in the court
of the prison: and they let down Jeremiah with cords. And in the dungeon
there was no water, but mire: so Jeremiah sunk in the mire.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> Now when Ebed-melech the Cushite, one of
the eunuchs who was in the king's house, heard that they had put
Jeremiah in the dungeon; the king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin;

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> Ebed-melech went out of the king's house,
and spoke to the king, saying,

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> My lord the king, these men have done
evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have
cast into the dungeon; and he is like to die by hunger in the place
where he is: for there is no more bread in the city.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> Then the king commanded Ebed-melech the
Cushite, saying, Take from hence thirty men with thee, and take up
Jeremiah the prophet out of the dungeon, before he dieth.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> So Ebed-melech took the men with him,
and went into the house of the king under the treasury, and took thence
old cast clouts and old decayed rags, and let them down by cords into
the dungeon to Jeremiah.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> And Ebed-melech the Cushite said to
Jeremiah, Put now these old cast clouts and decayed rags under thy
arm-holes under the cords. And Jeremiah did so.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> So they drew up Jeremiah with cords,
and took him out of the dungeon: and Jeremiah remained in the court of
the prison.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took
Jeremiah the prophet to him into the third entry that is in the house of
the LORD: and the king said to Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing; hide
nothing from me.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, If I
declare it to thee, wilt thou not surely put me to death? and if I give
thee counsel, wilt thou not hearken to me?

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> So Zedekiah the king swore secretly to
Jeremiah, saying, As the LORD liveth, that made us this soul, I will not
put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hand of these men
that seek thy life.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Then said Jeremiah to Zedekiah, Thus
saith the LORD, the God of hosts, the God of Israel; If thou wilt
assuredly go forth to the king of Babylon's princes, then thy soul shall
live, and this city shall not be burned with fire; and thou shalt live,
and thy house:

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> But if thou wilt not go forth to the
king of Babylon's princes, then shall this city be given into the hand
of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt not
escape from their hand.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> And Zedekiah the king said to Jeremiah,
I am afraid of the Jews that have fallen to the Chaldeans, lest they
deliver me into their hand, and they mock me.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> But Jeremiah said, They shall not
deliver thee. Obey, I beseech thee, the voice of the LORD, which I speak
to thee: so it shall be well to thee, and thy soul shall live.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> But if thou shalt refuse to go forth,
this is the word that the LORD hath shown me:

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> And behold, all the women that are left
in the king of Judah's house shall be brought forth to the king of
Babylon's princes, and those women shall say, Thy friends have set thee
on, and have prevailed against thee: thy feet are sunk in the mire, and
they are turned away back.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> So they shall bring out all thy wives
and thy children to the Chaldeans: and thou shalt not escape out of
their hand, but shalt be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon: and
thou shalt cause this city to be burned with fire.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> Then said Zedekiah to Jeremiah, Let no
man know of these words, and thou shalt not die.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> But if the princes hear that I have
talked with thee, and they come to thee, and say to thee, Declare to us
now what thou hast said to the king, hide it not from us, and we will
not put thee to death; also what the king said to thee:

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> Then thou shalt say to them, I
presented my supplication before the king, that he would not cause me to
return to Jonathan's house, to die there.

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> Then came all the princes to Jeremiah,
and asked him: and he told them according to all these words that the
king had commanded. So they left off speaking with him; for the matter
was not perceived.

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> So Jeremiah abode in the court of the
prison until the day that Jerusalem was taken: and he was there when
Jerusalem was taken.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of
Judah, in the tenth month, came Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all
his army against Jerusalem, and they besieged it.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in
the fourth month, the ninth day of the month, the city was broken up.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> And all the princes of the king of
Babylon came in, and sat in the middle gate, even Nergal-sharezer,
Samgar-nebo, Sarsechim, Rab-saris, Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag, with all
the residue of the princes of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> And it came to pass, when Zedekiah the
king of Judah saw them, and all the men of war, then they fled, and went
out of the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, by the gate
betwixt the two walls: and he went out the way of the plain.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> But the Chaldeans' army pursued them, and
overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho: and when they had taken him,
they brought him to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land
of Hamath, where he gave judgment upon him.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of
Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes: also the king of Babylon slew all
the nobles of Judah.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and
bound him with chains, to carry him to Babylon.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> And the Chaldeans burned the king's
house, and the houses of the people, with fire, and broke down the walls
of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> Then Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
guard carried away captive into Babylon the remnant of the people that
remained in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to him, with
the rest of the people that remained.

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> But Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
guard left of the poor of the people, who had nothing, in the land of
Judah, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave
charge concerning Jeremiah to Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard,
saying,

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> Take him, and look well to him, and do
him no harm; but do to him even as he shall say to thee.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> So Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
guard sent, and Nebushasban, Rab-saris, and Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag,
and all the king of Babylon's princes;

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> Even they sent, and took Jeremiah out
of the court of the prison, and committed him to Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam the son of Shaphan, that he should carry him home: so he dwelt
among the people.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> Now the word of the LORD came to
Jeremiah, while he was confined in the court of the prison, saying,

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> Go and speak to Ebed-melech the
Cushite, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel;
Behold, I will bring my words upon this city for evil, and not for good;
and they shall be accomplished in that day before thee.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> But I will deliver thee in that day,
saith the LORD: and thou shalt not be given into the hand of the men of
whom thou art afraid.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> For I will surely deliver thee, and
thou shalt not fall by the sword, but thy life shall be for a prey to
thee: because thou hast put thy trust in me, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> The word which came to Jeremiah from the
LORD, after that Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard had let him go
from Ramah, when he had taken him being bound in chains among all that
were carried away captive of Jerusalem and Judah, who were carried away
captive to Babylon.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> And the captain of the guard took
Jeremiah, and said to him, The LORD thy God hath pronounced this evil
upon this place.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> Now the LORD hath brought it, and done
according as he hath said: because ye have sinned against the LORD, and
have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing is come upon you.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And now, behold, I loose thee this day
from the chains which were upon thy hand. If it seemeth good to thee to
come with me into Babylon, come; and I will look well to thee: but if it
seemeth ill to thee to come with me into Babylon, forbear: behold, all
the land is before thee: whither it seemeth good and convenient for thee
to go, thither go.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> Now while he had not yet gone back, he
said, Go back also to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan,
whom the king of Babylon had made governor over the cities of Judah, and
dwell with him among the people: or go wherever it seemeth convenient to
thee to go. So the captain of the guard gave him provisions and a
reward, and let him go.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> Then Jeremiah went to Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam to Mizpah; and dwelt with him among the people that were left in
the land.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> Now when all the captains of the forces
who were in the fields, even they and their men, heard that the king of
Babylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and
had committed to him men, and women, and children, and of the poor of
the land, of them that were not carried away captive to Babylon;

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> Then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah,
even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of
Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the
Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of
Shaphan, swore to them and to their men, saying, Fear not to serve the
Chaldeans: dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it
shall be well with you.

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> As for me, behold, I will dwell at
Mizpah, to serve the Chaldeans, who will come to us: but ye, gather ye
wine, and summer fruits, and oil, and put them in your vessels, and
dwell in your cities that ye have taken.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> Likewise when all the Jews that were in
Moab, and among the Ammonites, and in Edom, and that were in all the
countries, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah,
and that he had set over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of
Shaphan;

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> Even all the Jews returned out of all
places whither they were driven, and came to the land of Judah, to
Gedaliah, to Mizpah, and gathered wine and summer fruits in abundance.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and
all the captains of the forces, that were in the fields, came to
Gedaliah to Mizpah,

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> And said to him, Dost thou certainly
know that Baalis the king of the Ammonites hath sent Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah to slay thee? But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed them
not.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> Then Johanan the son of Kareah spoke to
Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying, Let me go, I pray thee, and I will
slay Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and no man shall know it: why should
he slay thee, that all the Jews who are gathered to thee should be
scattered, and the remnant of Judah perish?

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said to
Johanan the son of Kareah, Thou shalt not do this thing: for thou
speakest falsely of Ishmael.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> Now it came to pass in the seventh month,
that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah the son of Elishama, of the seed
royal, and the princes of the king, even ten men with him, came to
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and there they ate bread together
in Mizpah.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah,
and the ten men that were with him, and smote Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam, the son of Shaphan with the sword, and slew him, whom the king
of Babylon had made governor over the land.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were
with him, even with Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were
found there, and the men of war.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> And it came to pass the second day after
he had slain Gedaliah, and no man knew it,

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> That there came men from Shechem, from
Shiloh, and from Samaria, even eighty men, having their beards shaven,
and their clothes rent, and having cut themselves, with offerings and
incense in their hand, to bring them to the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went
forth from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as he went: and it
came to pass, as he met them, he said to them, Come to Gedaliah the son
of Ahikam.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> And it was so, when they came into the
midst of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them, and cast
them into the midst of the pit, he, and the men that were with him.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> But ten men were found among them that
said to Ishmael, Slay us not: for we have treasures in the field, of
wheat, and of barley, and of oil, and of honey. So he forbore, and slew
them not among their brethren.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> Now the pit into which Ishmael had cast
all the dead bodies of the men, whom he had slain because of Gedaliah,
was that which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel:
and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with them that were slain.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> Then Ishmael carried away captive all
the residue of the people that were in Mizpah, even the king's
daughters, and all the people that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzar-adan
the captain of the guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam:
and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed
to go over to the Ammonites.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and
all the captains of the forces that were with him, heard of all the evil
that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> Then they took all the men, and went to
fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the great
waters that are in Gibeon.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> Now it came to pass, that when all the
people who were with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the
captains of the forces that were with him, then they were glad.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> So all the people that Ishmael had
carried away captive from Mizpah cast about and returned, and went to
Johanan the son of Kareah.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah
escaped from Johanan with eight men, and went to the Ammonites.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> Then Johanan the son of Kareah, and all
the captains of the forces that were with him, took all the remnant of
the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from
Mizpeh, after that he had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, even mighty
men of war, and the women, and the children, and the eunuchs, whom he
had brought again from Gibeon.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> And they departed, and dwelt in the
habitation of Chimham, which is by Beth-lehem, to go to enter into
Egypt,

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> Because of the Chaldeans: for they were
afraid of them, because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah
the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor in the land.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> Then all the captains of the forces, and
Johanan the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the
people from the least even to the greatest, came near.

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> And said to Jeremiah the prophet, We
beseech thee, let our supplication be accepted before thee, and pray for
us to the LORD thy God, even for all this remnant; (for we are left but
a few of many, as thy eyes do behold us:)

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> That the LORD thy God may show us the way
in which we may walk, and the thing that we may do.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> Then Jeremiah the prophet said to them, I
have heard you; behold, I will pray to the LORD your God according to
your words; and it shall come to pass, that whatever thing the LORD
shall answer you, I will declare it to you; I will keep nothing back
from you.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> Then they said to Jeremiah, The LORD be a
true and faithful witness between us, if we do not even according to all
things for which the LORD thy God shall send thee to us.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> Whether it be good, or whether it be
evil, we will obey the voice of the LORD our God, to whom we send thee;
that it may be well with us, when we obey the voice of the LORD our God.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And it came to pass after ten days, that
the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> Then called he Johanan the son of Kareah,
and all the captains of the forces who were with him, and all the people
from the least even to the greatest,

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> And said to them, Thus saith the LORD,
the God of Israel, to whom ye sent me to present your supplication
before him;

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> If ye will still abide in this land,
then will I build you, and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and
not pluck you up: for I repent of the evil that I have done to you.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> Be not afraid of the king of Babylon,
of whom ye are afraid; be not afraid of him, saith the LORD; for I am
with you, to save you, and to deliver you from his hand.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And I will show mercies to you, that he
may have mercy upon you, and cause you to return to your own land.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> But if ye say, We will not dwell in
this land, neither obey the voice of the LORD your God,

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> Saying, No; but we will go into the
land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the
trumpet, nor hunger for bread; and there will we dwell:

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> And now therefore hear the word of the
LORD, ye remnant of Judah; Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel; If ye wholly set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to
sojourn there;

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> Then it shall come to pass, that the
sword, which ye feared, shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt,
and the famine of which ye were afraid, shall follow close after you
there in Egypt; and there ye shall die.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> So shall it be with all the men that
set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there; they shall die by the
sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: and none of them shall
remain or escape from the evil that I will bring upon them.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel; As my anger and my fury hath been poured forth upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem: so shall my fury be poured forth upon you,
when ye shall enter into Egypt: and ye shall be an execration, and an
astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see this place
no more.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> The LORD hath said concerning you, O ye
remnant of Judah; Go ye not into Egypt: know certainly that I have
admonished you this day.

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> For ye dissembled in your hearts, when
ye sent me to the LORD your God, saying, Pray for us to the LORD our
God; and according to all that the LORD our God shall say, so declare to
us, and we will do it.

<span id="an_42:21">42:21</span> And now I have this day declared it to
you; but ye have not obeyed the voice of the LORD your God, nor any
thing for which he hath sent me to you.

<span id="an_42:22">42:22</span> Now therefore know certainly that ye
shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, in the
place whither ye desire to go and to sojourn.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> And it came to pass, that when Jeremiah
had made an end of speaking to all the people all the words of the LORD
their God, for which the LORD their God had sent him to them, even all
these words.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> Then spoke Azariah the son of Hoshaiah,
and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the proud men, saying to
Jeremiah, Thou speakest falsely: the LORD our God hath not sent thee to
say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there:

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> But Baruch the son of Neriah setteth thee
on against us, to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that they
may put us to death, and carry us away captives into Babylon.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the
captains of the forces, and all the people, obeyed not the voice of the
LORD, to dwell in the land of Judah.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> But Johanan the son of Kareah, and all
the captains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah, that had
returned from all nations, whither they had been driven, to dwell in the
land of Judah;

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> Even men, and women, and children, and
the king's daughters, and every person that Nebuzar-adan the captain of
the guard had left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan,
and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah.

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> So they came into the land of Egypt: for
they obeyed not the voice of the LORD: thus they came even to Tahpanhes.

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> Then came the word of the LORD to
Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying,

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Take great stones in thy hand, and hide
them in the clay in the brick-kiln, which is at the entry of Pharaoh's
house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah;

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> And say to them, Thus saith the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel, Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadrezzar
the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne upon these
stones that I have hid; and he shall spread his royal pavilion over
them.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> And when he cometh, he shall smite the
land of Egypt, and deliver such as are for death to death; and such as
are for captivity to captivity; and such as are for the sword to the
sword.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> And I will kindle a fire in the houses
of the gods of Egypt; and he shall burn them, and carry them away
captives: and he shall array himself with the land of Egypt, as a
shepherd putteth on his garment; and he shall go forth from thence in
peace.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> He shall break also the images of
Beth-shemesh, that is in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods
of the Egyptians shall he burn with fire.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah concerning
all the Jews who dwell in the land of Egypt, who dwell at Migdol, and at
Tahpanhes, and at Noph, and in the country of Pathros, saying,

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel; Ye have seen all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem,
and upon all the cities of Judah; and behold, this day they are a
desolation, and no man dwelleth in them.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> Because of their wickedness which they
have committed to provoke me to anger, in that they went to burn
incense, and to serve other gods, whom they knew not, neither they, ye,
nor your fathers.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> Yet I sent to you all my servants the
prophets, rising early and sending them, saying, Oh, do not this
abominable thing that I hate.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> But they hearkened not, nor inclined
their ear to turn from their wickedness, to burn no incense to other
gods.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> Wherefore my fury and my anger was poured
forth, and was kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets of
Jerusalem; and they are wasted and desolate, as at this day.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> Therefore now thus saith the LORD, the
God of hosts, the God of Israel; Why do ye commit this great evil
against your souls, to cut off from you man and woman, child and
suckling, out of Judah, to leave you none to remain;

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> In that ye provoke me to wrath with the
works of your hands, burning incense to other gods in the land of Egypt,
whither ye are gone to dwell, that ye may cut yourselves off, and that
ye may be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your
fathers, and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness of
their wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives,
which they have committed in the land of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem?

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> They are not humbled even to this day,
neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that
I set before you and before your fathers.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel; Behold, I will set my face against you for evil, and
to cut off all Judah.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> And I will take the remnant of Judah,
that have set their faces to go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there,
and they shall all be consumed, and fall in the land of Egypt; they
shall even be consumed by the sword and by the famine: they shall die,
from the least even to the greatest, by the sword and by the famine: and
they shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a
reproach.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> For I will punish them that dwell in
the land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the
famine, and by the pestilence:

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> So that none of the remnant of Judah,
who have gone into the land of Egypt, to sojourn there, shall escape or
remain, that they should return into the land of Judah, to which they
have a desire to return to dwell there: for none shall return but such
as shall escape.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> Then all the men who knew that their
wives had burned incense to other gods, and all the women that stood by,
a great multitude, even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt,
in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> As for the word that thou hast spoken
to us in the name of the LORD, we will not hearken to thee.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> But we will certainly do whatever thing
proceedeth from our own mouth, to burn incense to the queen of heaven,
and to pour out drink-offerings to her, as we have done, we, and our
fathers, our kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the
streets of Jerusalem: for then we had plenty of provisions, and were
well, and saw no evil.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> But since we ceased to burn incense to
the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings to her, we have
wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword and by the
famine.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> And when we burned incense to the queen
of heaven, and poured out drink-offerings to her, did we make for her
cakes to worship her, and pour out drink-offerings to her, without our
men?

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> Then Jeremiah said to all the people,
to the men, and to the women, and to all the people who had given him
that answer, saying,

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> The incense that ye burned in the
cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye and your fathers,
your kings and your princes, and the people of the land, did not the
LORD remember them, and came it not into his mind?

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> So that the LORD could no longer bear,
because of the evil of your doings, and because of the abominations
which ye have committed; therefore is your land a desolation, and an
astonishment, and a curse, without an inhabitant, as at this day.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> Because ye have burned incense, and
because ye have sinned against the LORD, and have not obeyed the voice
of the LORD, nor walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his
testimonies; therefore this evil hath happened to you, as at this day.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> Moreover, Jeremiah said to all the
people, and to all the women, Hear the word of the LORD, all Judah that
are in the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God
of Israel, saying; Ye and your wives have both spoken with your mouths,
and fulfilled with your hand, saying, We will surely perform our vows
that we have vowed, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour
out drink-offerings to her: ye will surely accomplish your vows, and
surely perform your vows.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> Therefore hear ye the word of the LORD,
all Judah that dwell in the land of Egypt; Behold, I have sworn by my
great name, saith the LORD, that my name shall no more be named in the
mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, The Lord GOD
liveth.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> Behold, I will watch over them for
evil, and not for good: and all the men of Judah that are in the land of
Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine, until there
shall be an end of them.

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> Yet a small number that escape the
sword shall return from the land of Egypt into the land of Judah, and
all the remnant of Judah, that have gone into the land of Egypt to
sojourn there, shall know whose words shall stand, mine, or theirs.

<span id="an_44:29">44:29</span> And this shall be a sign to you, saith
the LORD, that I will punish you in this place, that ye may know that my
words shall surely stand against you for evil:

<span id="an_44:30">44:30</span> Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will
give Pharaoh-hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into
the hand of them that seek his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah
into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, and that
sought his life.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> The word that Jeremiah the prophet spoke
to Baruch the son of Neriah, when he had written these words in a book
from the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah king of Judah, saying,

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel,
to thee, O Baruch;

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> Thou didst say, Woe is me now! for the
LORD hath added grief to my sorrow; I fainted in my sighing, and I find
no rest.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> Thus shalt thou say to him, The LORD
saith thus; Behold, that which I have built I will break down, and that
which I have planted I will pluck up, even this whole land.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> And seekest thou great things for
thyself? seek them not: for behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh,
saith the LORD: but thy life will I give to thee for a prey in all
places whither thou goest.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> The word of the LORD which came to
Jeremiah the prophet against the Gentiles;

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> Against Egypt, against the army of
Pharaoh-necho king of Egypt, who was by the river Euphrates in
Carshemish, whom Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth year
of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> Order ye the buckler and shield, and draw
near to battle.

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> Harness the horses; and mount, ye
horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets; furbish the spears, and put
on the coats of mail.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> Why have I seen them dismayed and turned
away back? and their mighty ones are beaten down, and have fled apace,
and look not back: for fear was on all sides, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> Let not the swift flee away, nor the
mighty man escape! they shall stumble, and fall towards the north by the
river Euphrates.

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> Who is this that cometh up as a flood,
whose waters are moved as the rivers?

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> Egypt riseth up like a flood, and his
waters are moved like the rivers; and he saith, I will go up, and will
cover the earth; I will destroy the city and its inhabitants.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> Come up, ye horses; and rage, ye
chariots; and let the mighty men come forth: the Cushites and the
Libyans, that handle the shield; and the Lydians that handle and bend
the bow.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> For this is the day of the Lord GOD of
hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his adversaries:
and the sword shall devour, and it shall be satiated and made drunk with
their blood: for the Lord GOD of hosts hath a sacrifice in the north
country by the river Euphrates.

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> Go up into Gilead, and take balm, O
virgin, the daughter of Egypt: in vain shalt thou use many medicines;
for thou shalt not be cured.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> The nations have heard of thy shame,
and thy cry hath filled the land: for the mighty man hath stumbled
against the mighty, and they have fallen both together.

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> The word that the LORD spoke to
Jeremiah the prophet, how Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon should come and
smite the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> Declare ye in Egypt, and publish in
Migdol, and publish in Noph and in Tahpanhes: say ye, Stand fast, and
prepare thee; for the sword shall devour around thee.

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> Why are thy valiant men swept away?
they stood not, because the LORD did drive them.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> He made many to fall, yes, one fell
upon another: and they said, Arise, and let us go again to our own
people, and to the land of our nativity, from the oppressing sword.

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> They cried there, Pharaoh king of Egypt
is but a noise; he hath passed the time appointed.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> As I live, saith the king, whose name
is the LORD of hosts, Surely as Tabor is among the mountains, and as
Carmel by the sea, so shall he come.

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> O thou daughter dwelling in Egypt,
furnish thyself to go into captivity: for Noph shall be waste and
desolate without an inhabitant.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> Egypt is like a very fair heifer, but
destruction cometh; it cometh out of the north.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> Also her hired men are in the midst of
her like fatted bullocks; for they also have turned back, and have fled
away together: they did not stand, because the day of their calamity had
come upon them, and the time of their visitation.

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> The voice thereof shall go like a
serpent; for they shall march with an army, and come against her with
axes, as hewers of wood.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> They shall cut down her forest, saith
the LORD, though it cannot be searched; because they are more than the
grasshoppers, and are innumerable.

<span id="an_46:24">46:24</span> The daughter of Egypt shall be
confounded; she shall be delivered into the hand of the people of the
north.

<span id="an_46:25">46:25</span> The LORD of hosts, the God of Israel
saith: Behold, I will punish the multitude of No, and Pharaoh, and
Egypt, with their gods, and their kings; even Pharaoh, and all them that
trust in him:

<span id="an_46:26">46:26</span> And I will deliver them into the hand
of those that seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king
of Babylon, and into the hand of his servants: and afterward it shall be
inhabited, as in the days of old, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_46:27">46:27</span> But fear not thou, O my servant Jacob,
and be not dismayed, O Israel: for behold, I will save thee from afar,
and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return,
and be in rest and at ease, and none shall make him afraid.

<span id="an_46:28">46:28</span> Fear thou not, O Jacob my servant,
saith the LORD: for I am with thee; for I will make a full end of all
the nations whither I have driven thee: but I will not make a full end
of thee, but correct thee in measure; yet will I not leave thee wholly
unpunished.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> The word of the LORD that came to
Jeremiah the prophet against the Philistines, before Pharaoh smote Gaza.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> Thus saith the LORD; Behold, waters rise
out of the north, and shall be an overflowing flood, and shall overflow
the land, and all that is in it; the city, and them that dwell therein:
then the men shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the land shall howl.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs
of his strong horses, at the rushing of his chariots, and at the
rumbling of his wheels, the fathers shall not look back to their
children for feebleness of hands:

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> Because of the day that cometh to lay
waste all the Philistines, and to cut off from Tyre and Zidon every
helper that remaineth: for the LORD will lay waste the Philistines, the
remnant of the country of Caphtor.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> Baldness is come upon Gaza; Ashkelon is
cut off with the remnant of their valley: how long wilt thou cut
thyself?

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> O thou sword of the LORD, how long will
it be ere thou be quiet? put up thyself into thy scabbard, rest, and be
still.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> How can it be quiet, seeing the LORD hath
given it a charge against Ashkelon, and against the sea shore? there
hath he appointed it.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Against Moab thus saith the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel; Woe to Nebo! for it is laid waste: Kiriathaim
is confounded and taken: Misgab is confounded and dismayed.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> There shall be no more praise of Moab: in
Heshbon they have devised evil against it; come, and let us cut it off
from being a nation. Also thou shalt be cut down, O Madmen; the sword
shall pursue thee.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> A voice of crying shall be from Horonaim,
devastation and great destruction.

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> Moab is destroyed; her little ones have
caused a cry to be heard.

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> For in the ascent of Luhith continual
weeping shall go up; for in the descent of Horonaim the enemies have
heard a cry of destruction.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> Flee, save your lives, and be like the
heath in the wilderness.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> For because thou hast trusted in thy
works and in thy treasures, thou also shalt be taken: and Chemosh shall
go forth into captivity with his priests and his princes together.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> And the spoiler shall come upon every
city, and no city shall escape: the valley also shall perish, and the
plain shall be destroyed, as the LORD hath spoken.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> Give wings to Moab, that it may flee and
get away: for its cities shall be desolate, without any to dwell in
them.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> Cursed be he that doeth the work of the
LORD deceitfully, and cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from
blood.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> Moab hath been at ease from his youth,
and he hath settled on his lees, and hath not been emptied from vessel
to vessel, neither hath he gone into captivity: therefore his taste
remained in him, and his scent is not changed.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, saith
the LORD, that I will send to him wanderers that shall cause him to
wander, and shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh,
as the house of Israel was ashamed of Beth-el their confidence.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> How say ye, We are mighty and strong
men for the war?

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> Moab is laid waste, and gone up out of
her cities, and his chosen young men are gone down to the slaughter,
saith the king, whose name is the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> The calamity of Moab is near to come,
and his affliction hasteth fast.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> All ye that are about him bemoan him;
and all ye that know his name, say, How is the strong staff broken, and
the beautiful rod!

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> Thou daughter that dost inhabit Dibon,
come down from thy glory, and sit in thirst; for the spoiler of Moab
shall come upon thee, and he shall destroy thy strong holds.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the
way, and espy; ask him that fleeth, and her that escapeth, and say, What
is done?

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> Moab is confounded; for it is broken
down: howl and cry; tell ye it in Arnon, that Moab is laid waste.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> And judgment is come upon the plain
country; upon Holon, and upon Jahazah, and upon Mephaath,

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon
Beth-diblathaim,

<span id="an_48:23">48:23</span> And upon Kiriathaim, and upon
Beth-gamul, and upon Beth-meon,

<span id="an_48:24">48:24</span> And upon Kerioth, and upon Bozrah, and
upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near.

<span id="an_48:25">48:25</span> The horn of Moab is cut off, and his
arm is broken, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_48:26">48:26</span> Make ye him drunken; for he magnified
himself against the LORD: Moab also shall wallow in his vomit, and he
also shall be in derision.

<span id="an_48:27">48:27</span> For was not Israel a derision to thee?
was he found among thieves? for since thou hast spoken of him, thou hast
leaped for joy.

<span id="an_48:28">48:28</span> O ye that dwell in Moab, leave the
cities, and dwell in the rock, and be like the dove that maketh her nest
in the sides of the hole's mouth.

<span id="an_48:29">48:29</span> We have heard the pride of Moab, (he is
exceeding proud) his loftiness, and his arrogance, and his pride, and
the haughtiness of his heart.

<span id="an_48:30">48:30</span> I know his wrath, saith the LORD; but
it shall not be so; his lies shall not so effect it.

<span id="an_48:31">48:31</span> Therefore will I howl for Moab, and I
will cry out for all Moab; my heart shall mourn for the men of Kirheres.

<span id="an_48:32">48:32</span> O vine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee
with the weeping of Jazer: thy plants have gone over the sea, they reach
even to the sea of Jazer: the spoiler hath fallen upon thy summer fruits
and upon thy vintage.

<span id="an_48:33">48:33</span> And joy and gladness is taken from the
plentiful field, and from the land of Moab; and I have caused wine to
fail from the wine-presses: none shall tread with shouting; their
shouting shall be no shouting.

<span id="an_48:34">48:34</span> From the cry of Heshbon even to
Elealeh, and even to Jahaz, have they uttered their voice, from Zoar
even to Horonaim, as a heifer of three years old: for the waters also of
Nimrim shall be desolate.

<span id="an_48:35">48:35</span> Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab,
saith the LORD, him that offereth in the high places, and him that
burneth incense to his gods.

<span id="an_48:36">48:36</span> Therefore my heart shall sound for Moab
like pipes, and my heart shall sound like pipes for the men of Kirheres:
because the riches that he hath gotten have perished.

<span id="an_48:37">48:37</span> For every head shall be bald, and every
beard clipped: upon all the hands shall be cuttings, and upon the loins
sackcloth.

<span id="an_48:38">48:38</span> There shall be lamentation generally
upon all the house-tops of Moab, and in its streets: for I have broken
Moab like a vessel in which is no pleasure, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_48:39">48:39</span> They shall howl, saying, How is it
broken down! how hath Moab turned the back with shame! so shall Moab be
a derision and a dismaying to all them about him.

<span id="an_48:40">48:40</span> For thus saith the LORD; Behold, he
shall fly as an eagle, and shall spread his wings over Moab.

<span id="an_48:41">48:41</span> Kerioth is taken, and the strong holds
are surprised, and the mighty men's hearts in Moab at that day shall be
as the heart of a woman in her pangs.

<span id="an_48:42">48:42</span> And Moab shall be destroyed from being
a people, because he hath magnified himself against the LORD.

<span id="an_48:43">48:43</span> Fear, and the pit, and the snare, shall
be upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_48:44">48:44</span> He that fleeth from the fear, shall
fall into the pit; and he that getteth out of the pit, shall be taken in
the snare: for I will bring upon it, even upon Moab, the year of their
visitation, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_48:45">48:45</span> They that fled stood under the shade of
Heshbon because of the force: but a fire shall come out of Heshbon, and
a flame from the midst of Sihon, and shall devour the corner of Moab,
and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones.

<span id="an_48:46">48:46</span> Woe be to thee, O Moab! the people of
Chemosh perisheth: for thy sons are taken captives, and thy daughters
captives.

<span id="an_48:47">48:47</span> Yet will I bring again the captivity of
Moab in the latter days, saith the LORD. Thus far is the judgment of
Moab.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> Concerning the Ammonites, thus saith the
LORD; Hath Israel no sons? hath he no heir? why then doth their king
inherit Gad, and his people dwell in his cities?

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> Therefore behold, the days come, saith
the LORD, that I will cause an alarm of war to be heard in Rabbah of the
Ammonites; and it shall be a desolate heap, and her daughters shall be
burned with fire: then shall Israel be heir to them that were his heirs,
saith the LORD.

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> Howl, O Heshbon, for Ai is laid waste:
cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, gird you with sackcloth; lament, and run to
and fro by the hedges; for their king shall go into captivity, and his
priests and his princes together.

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> Why gloriest thou in the valleys, thy
flowing valley, O backsliding daughter? that trusted in her treasures,
saying, Who shall come to me?

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee,
saith the Lord GOD of hosts, from all those that are about thee; and ye
shall be driven out every man right forth; and none shall gather up him
that wandereth.

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> And afterward I will bring again the
captivity of the children of Ammon, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> Concerning Edom, thus saith the LORD of
hosts; Is wisdom no more in Teman? hath counsel perished from the
prudent? hath their wisdom vanished?

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> Flee ye, turn back, dwell deep, O
inhabitants of Dedan; for I will bring the calamity of Esau upon him,
the time that I will visit him.

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> If grape-gatherers come to thee, would
they not leave some gleaning grapes? if thieves by night, they will
destroy till they have enough.

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> But I have made Esau bare, I have
uncovered his secret places, and he shall not be able to hide himself:
his seed is laid waste, and his brethren, and his neighbors, and he is
not.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> Leave thy fatherless children, I will
preserve them alive; and let thy widows trust in me.

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> For thus saith the LORD; Behold, they
whose judgment was not to drink of the cup have assuredly drank; and art
thou he that shall altogether go unpunished? thou shalt not go
unpunished, but thou shalt surely drink of it.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> For I have sworn by myself, saith the
LORD, that Bozrah shall become a desolation, a reproach, a waste, and a
curse; and all her cities shall be perpetual wastes.

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> I have heard a rumor from the LORD, and
an embassador is sent to the heathen, saying, Assemble, and come against
her, and rise up to the battle.

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> For lo, I will make thee small among
the heathen, and despised among men.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> Thy terribleness hath deceived thee,
and the pride of thy heart, O thou that dwellest in the clefts of the
rock, that holdest the hight of the hill: though thou shouldst make thy
nest as high as the eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, saith the
LORD.

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> Also Edom shall be a desolation: every
one that goeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss at all her
plagues.

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> As in the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrah and the neighboring cities, saith the LORD, no man shall abide
there, neither shall a son of man dwell in it.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> Behold, he shall come up like a lion
from the swelling of Jordan against the habitation of the strong: but I
will suddenly make him run away from her: and who is a chosen man, that
I may appoint over her? for who is like me? and who will appoint me the
time? and who is that shepherd that will stand before me?

<span id="an_49:20">49:20</span> Therefore hear the counsel of the LORD,
that he hath taken against Edom; and his purposes, that he hath purposed
against the inhabitants of Teman: surely the least of the flock shall
draw them out: surely he shall make their habitations desolate with
them.

<span id="an_49:21">49:21</span> The earth is moved at the noise of
their fall, at the cry the noise of it was heard in the Red sea.

<span id="an_49:22">49:22</span> Behold, he shall come up and fly as the
eagle, and spread his wings over Bozrah: and at that day shall the heart
of the mighty men of Edom be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.

<span id="an_49:23">49:23</span> Concerning Damascus. Hamath is
confounded, and Arpad: for they have heard evil tidings: they are
faint-hearted; there is sorrow on the sea; it cannot be quiet.

<span id="an_49:24">49:24</span> Damascus hath become feeble, and
turneth herself to flee, and fear hath seized on her: anguish and
sorrows have taken her, as a woman in travail.

<span id="an_49:25">49:25</span> How is the city of praise not left, the
city of my joy!

<span id="an_49:26">49:26</span> Therefore her young men shall fall in
her streets, and all the men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith
the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_49:27">49:27</span> And I will kindle a fire in the wall of
Damascus, and it shall consume the palaces of Ben-hadad.

<span id="an_49:28">49:28</span> Concerning Kedar, and concerning the
kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon shall smite,
thus saith the LORD; Arise ye, go up to Kedar, and lay waste the men of
the east.

<span id="an_49:29">49:29</span> Their tents and their flocks shall they
take away: they shall take to themselves their curtains, and all their
vessels, and their camels; and they shall cry to them, Fear is on every
side.

<span id="an_49:30">49:30</span> Flee, get you far off, dwell deep, O ye
inhabitants of Hazor, saith the LORD; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon
hath taken counsel against you, and hath conceived a purpose against
you.

<span id="an_49:31">49:31</span> Arise, go up to the wealthy nation,
that dwelleth without care, saith the LORD, which have neither gates nor
bars, which dwell alone.

<span id="an_49:32">49:32</span> And their camels shall be a booty, and
the multitude of their cattle a spoil: and I will scatter into all winds
them that are in the utmost corners; and I will bring their calamity
from all sides of it, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_49:33">49:33</span> And Hazor shall be a dwelling for
dragons, and a desolation for ever: there shall no man abide there, nor
any son of man dwell in it.

<span id="an_49:34">49:34</span> The word of the LORD that came to
Jeremiah the prophet against Elam in the beginning of the reign of
Zedekiah king of Judah, saying,

<span id="an_49:35">49:35</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Behold, I
will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might.

<span id="an_49:36">49:36</span> And upon Elam will I bring the four
winds from the four quarters of heaven, and will scatter them towards
all those winds; and there shall be no nation whither the outcasts of
Elam shall not come.

<span id="an_49:37">49:37</span> For I will cause Elam to be dismayed
before their enemies, and before them that seek their life: and I will
bring evil upon them, even my fierce anger, saith the LORD; and I will
send the sword after them, till I have consumed them:

<span id="an_49:38">49:38</span> And I will set my throne in Elam, and
will destroy from thence the king and the princes, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_49:39">49:39</span> But it shall come to pass in the latter
days, that I will bring again the captivity of Elam, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> The word that the LORD spoke against
Babylon and against the land of the Chaldeans by Jeremiah the prophet.

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> Declare ye among the nations, and
publish, and set up a standard; publish, and conceal not: say, Babylon
is taken, Bel is confounded, Merodach is broken in pieces; her idols are
confounded, her images are broken in pieces.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> For out of the north there cometh a
nation against her, which shall make her land desolate, and none shall
dwell in it, they shall remove, they shall depart, both man and beast.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> In those days, and in that time, saith
the LORD, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of
Judah together, going and weeping; they shall go, and seek the LORD
their God.

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> They shall ask the way to Zion with their
faces towards it, saying, Come, and let us join ourselves to the LORD in
a perpetual covenant that shall not be forgotten.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> My people have been lost sheep: their
shepherds have caused them to go astray, they have turned them away on
the mountains: they have gone from mountain to hill, they have forgotten
their resting-place.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> All that found them have devoured them:
and their adversaries said, We offend not, because they have sinned
against the LORD, the habitation of justice, even the LORD, the hope of
their fathers.

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> Remove out of the midst of Babylon, and
go forth from the land of the Chaldeans, and be as the he-goats before
the flocks.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> For lo, I will raise and cause to come
against Babylon an assembly of great nations from the north country: and
they shall set themselves in array against her; from thence she shall be
taken: their arrows shall be as of a mighty expert man; none shall
return in vain.

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> And Chaldea shall be a spoil: all that
spoil her shall be satisfied, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> Because ye were glad, because ye
rejoiced, O ye destroyers of my heritage, because ye are grown fat as
the heifer at grass, and bellow as bulls;

<span id="an_50:12">50:12</span> Your mother shall be greatly
confounded; she that bore you shall be ashamed: behold, the hindermost
of the nations shall be a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert.

<span id="an_50:13">50:13</span> Because of the wrath of the LORD it
shall not be inhabited, but it shall be wholly desolate: every one that
goeth by Babylon shall be astonished, and hiss at all her plagues.

<span id="an_50:14">50:14</span> Put yourselves in array against Babylon
on every side: all ye that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows:
for she hath sinned against the LORD.

<span id="an_50:15">50:15</span> Shout against her on every side; she
hath given her hand: her foundations are fallen, her walls are thrown
down: for it is the vengeance of the LORD: take vengeance upon her; as
she hath done, do to her.

<span id="an_50:16">50:16</span> Cut off the sower from Babylon, and him
that handleth the sickle in the time of harvest: for fear of the
oppressing sword they shall turn every one to his people, and they shall
flee every one to his own land.

<span id="an_50:17">50:17</span> Israel is a scattered sheep; the lions
have driven him away: first the king of Assyria hath devoured him; and
last this Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath broken his bones.

<span id="an_50:18">50:18</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel; Behold, I will punish the king of Babylon and his
land, as I have punished the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_50:19">50:19</span> And I will bring Israel again to his
habitation, and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall
be satisfied upon mount Ephraim and Gilead.

<span id="an_50:20">50:20</span> In those days, and in that time, saith
the LORD, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be
none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will
pardon them whom I reserve.

<span id="an_50:21">50:21</span> Go up against the land of Merathaim,
even against it, and against the inhabitants of Pekod: waste and utterly
destroy after them, saith the LORD, and do according to all that I have
commanded thee.

<span id="an_50:22">50:22</span> A sound of battle is in the land, and
of great destruction.

<span id="an_50:23">50:23</span> How is the hammer of the whole earth
cut asunder and broken! how is Babylon become a desolation among the
nations!

<span id="an_50:24">50:24</span> I have laid a snare for thee, and thou
art also taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not aware: thou art found, and
also caught, because thou hast striven against the LORD.

<span id="an_50:25">50:25</span> The LORD hath opened his armory, and
hath brought forth the weapons of his indignation: for this is the work
of the Lord GOD of hosts in the land of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_50:26">50:26</span> Come against her from the utmost
border, open her store-houses: cast her up as heaps, and destroy her
utterly: let nothing of her be left.

<span id="an_50:27">50:27</span> Slay all her bullocks; let them go down
to the slaughter: woe to them! for their day is come, the time of their
visitation.

<span id="an_50:28">50:28</span> The voice of them that flee and escape
from the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of the LORD
our God, the vengeance of his temple.

<span id="an_50:29">50:29</span> Call together the archers against
Babylon: all ye that bend the bow, encamp against it on every side; let
none thereof escape: recompense her according to her work; according to
all that she hath done, do to her: for she hath been proud against the
LORD, against the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_50:30">50:30</span> Therefore her young men shall fall in
the streets, and all her men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith
the LORD.

<span id="an_50:31">50:31</span> Behold, I am against thee, O thou most
proud, saith the Lord GOD of hosts: for thy day is come, the time that I
will visit thee.

<span id="an_50:32">50:32</span> And the most proud shall stumble and
fall, and none shall raise him up: and I will kindle a fire in his
cities, and it shall devour all around him.

<span id="an_50:33">50:33</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The
children of Israel and the children of Judah were oppressed together:
and all that took them captives held them fast; they refused to let them
go.

<span id="an_50:34">50:34</span> Their Redeemer is strong; the LORD of
hosts is his name: he will thoroughly plead their cause, that he may
give rest to the land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.

<span id="an_50:35">50:35</span> A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith
the LORD, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and
upon her wise men.

<span id="an_50:36">50:36</span> A sword is upon the liars; and they
shall be sottish: a sword is upon her mighty men; and they shall be
dismayed.

<span id="an_50:37">50:37</span> A sword is upon their horses, and upon
their chariots, and upon all the mingled people that are in the midst of
her; and they shall become as women: a sword is upon her treasures; and
they shall be robbed.

<span id="an_50:38">50:38</span> A drouth is upon her waters; and they
shall be dried up: for it is the land of graven images, and they are mad
upon their idols.

<span id="an_50:39">50:39</span> Therefore the wild beasts of the desert
with the wild beasts of the isles, shall dwell there, and the owls shall
dwell therein: and it shall be no more inhabited for ever; neither shall
it be dwelt in from generation to generation.

<span id="an_50:40">50:40</span> As God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and
the neighboring cities, saith the LORD; so shall no man abide there,
neither shall any son of man dwell therein.

<span id="an_50:41">50:41</span> Behold, a people shall come from the
north, and a great nation, and many kings shall be raised up from the
borders of the earth.

<span id="an_50:42">50:42</span> They shall hold the bow and the lance:
they are cruel, and will not show mercy: their voice shall roar like the
sea, and they shall ride upon horses, every one put in array, like a man
to the battle, against thee, O daughter of Babylon.

<span id="an_50:43">50:43</span> The king of Babylon hath heard the
report of them, and his hands became feeble: anguish took hold of him,
and pangs as of a woman in travail.

<span id="an_50:44">50:44</span> Behold, he shall come up like a lion
from the swelling of Jordan to the habitation of the strong: but I will
make them suddenly run away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I
may appoint over her? for who is like me? and who will appoint me the
time? and who is that shepherd that will stand before me?

<span id="an_50:45">50:45</span> Therefore hear ye the counsel of the
LORD, that he hath taken against Babylon; and his purposes, that he hath
purposed against the land of the Chaldeans: Surely the least of the
flock shall draw them out: surely he shall make their habitation
desolate with them.

<span id="an_50:46">50:46</span> At the noise of the taking of Babylon
the earth is moved, and the cry is heard among the nations.

<span id="an_51:1">51:1</span> Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will raise
up against Babylon, and against them that dwell in the midst of them
that rise against me, a destroying wind;

<span id="an_51:2">51:2</span> And will send to Babylon fanners, that
shall fan her, and shall empty her land: for in the day of trouble they
shall be against her on all sides.

<span id="an_51:3">51:3</span> Against him that bendeth let the archer
bend his bow, and against him that lifteth himself up in his coat of
mail: and spare ye not her young men; destroy ye utterly all her host.

<span id="an_51:4">51:4</span> Thus the slain shall fall in the land of
the Chaldeans, and they that are thrust through in her streets.

<span id="an_51:5">51:5</span> For Israel hath not been forsaken, nor
Judah by his God, by the LORD of hosts; though their land was filled
with sin against the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_51:6">51:6</span> Flee from the midst of Babylon, and
deliver every man his soul: be not cut off in her iniquity; for this is
the time of the LORD'S vengeance; he will render to her a recompense.

<span id="an_51:7">51:7</span> Babylon hath been a golden cup in the
LORD'S hand, that made all the earth drunken: the nations have drank of
her wine; therefore the nations are mad.

<span id="an_51:8">51:8</span> Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed:
howl for her; take balm for her pain, it may be she may be healed.

<span id="an_51:9">51:9</span> We would have healed Babylon, but she is
not healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own country:
for her judgment reacheth to heaven, and is lifted even to the skies.

<span id="an_51:10">51:10</span> The LORD hath brought forth our
righteousness: come, and let us declare in Zion the work of the LORD our
God.

<span id="an_51:11">51:11</span> Make bright the arrows; gather the
shields: the LORD hath raised up the spirit of the kings of the Medes:
for his purpose is against Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the
vengeance of the LORD, the vengeance of his temple.

<span id="an_51:12">51:12</span> Set up the standard upon the walls of
Babylon, make the watch strong, set up the watchmen, prepare the
ambushes: for the LORD hath both devised and done that which he spoke
against the inhabitants of Babylon.

<span id="an_51:13">51:13</span> O thou that dwellest upon many waters,
abundant in treasures, thy end is come, and the measure of thy
covetousness.

<span id="an_51:14">51:14</span> The LORD of hosts hath sworn by
himself, saying, Surely I will fill thee with men, as with caterpillars;
and they shall raise a shout against thee.

<span id="an_51:15">51:15</span> He hath made the earth by his power, he
hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the
heaven by his understanding.

<span id="an_51:16">51:16</span> When he uttereth his voice, there is a
multitude of waters in the heavens; and he causeth the vapors to ascend
from the ends of the earth: he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth
forth the wind out of his treasures.

<span id="an_51:17">51:17</span> Every man is brutish by his knowledge;
every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is
falsehood, and there is no breath in them.

<span id="an_51:18">51:18</span> They are vanity, the work of errors: in
the time of their visitation they shall perish.

<span id="an_51:19">51:19</span> The portion of Jacob is not like them;
for he is the former of all things: and Israel is the rod of his
inheritance: the LORD of hosts is his name.

<span id="an_51:20">51:20</span> Thou art my battle-ax and weapons of
war: for with thee will I break in pieces the nations, and with thee
will I destroy kingdoms;

<span id="an_51:21">51:21</span> And with thee will I break in pieces
the horse and his rider; and with thee will I break in pieces the
chariot and its rider;

<span id="an_51:22">51:22</span> With thee also will I break in pieces
man and woman; and with thee will I break in pieces old and young; and
with thee will I break in pieces the young man and the maid;

<span id="an_51:23">51:23</span> I will also break in pieces with thee
the shepherd and his flock; and with thee will I break in pieces the
husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and with thee will I break in pieces
captains and rulers.

<span id="an_51:24">51:24</span> And I will render to Babylon and to all
the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion in
your sight, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_51:25">51:25</span> Behold, I am against thee, O destroying
mountain, saith the LORD, which destroyest all the earth: and I will
stretch out my hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and
will make thee a burnt mountain.

<span id="an_51:26">51:26</span> And they shall not take of thee a stone
for a corner, nor a stone for foundations; but thou shalt be desolate
for ever, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_51:27">51:27</span> Set ye up a standard in the land, blow
the trumpet among the nations, prepare the nations against her, call
together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz;
appoint a captain against her; cause the horses to come up as the rough
caterpillars.

<span id="an_51:28">51:28</span> Prepare against her the nations with
the kings of Media, her captains, and all her rulers, and all the land
of his dominion.

<span id="an_51:29">51:29</span> And the land shall tremble and sorrow:
for every purpose of the LORD shall be performed against Babylon, to
make the land of Babylon a desolation without an inhabitant.

<span id="an_51:30">51:30</span> The mighty men of Babylon have forborne
to fight, they have remained in their holds: their might hath failed;
they became as women: they have burned her dwelling-places; her bars are
broken.

<span id="an_51:31">51:31</span> One post shall run to meet another, and
one messenger to meet another, to show the king of Babylon that his city
is taken at one end,

<span id="an_51:32">51:32</span> And that the passages are stopped, and
the reeds they have burned with fire, and the men of war are affrighted.

<span id="an_51:33">51:33</span> For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel; The daughter of Babylon is like a threshing-floor, it is
time to thresh her: yet a little while, and the time of her harvest
shall come.

<span id="an_51:34">51:34</span> Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath
devoured me, he hath crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he
hath swallowed me up like a dragon, he hath filled his belly with my
delicates, he hath cast me out.

<span id="an_51:35">51:35</span> The violence done to me and to my flesh
be upon Babylon, shall the inhabitant of Zion say; and my blood upon the
inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say.

<span id="an_51:36">51:36</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold,
I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee; and I will dry up
her sea, and make her springs dry.

<span id="an_51:37">51:37</span> And Babylon shall become heaps, a
dwelling-place for dragons, an astonishment, and a hissing, without an
inhabitant.

<span id="an_51:38">51:38</span> They shall roar together like lions:
they shall yell as lions' whelps.

<span id="an_51:39">51:39</span> In their heat I will make their feasts,
and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a
perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_51:40">51:40</span> I will bring them down like lambs to
the slaughter, like rams with he-goats.

<span id="an_51:41">51:41</span> How is Sheshach taken! and how is the
praise of the whole earth surprised! how is Babylon become an
astonishment among the nations!

<span id="an_51:42">51:42</span> The sea is come up upon Babylon: she is
covered with the multitude of its waves.

<span id="an_51:43">51:43</span> Her cities are a desolation, a dry
land, and a wilderness, a land in which no man dwelleth, neither doth
any son of man pass by it.

<span id="an_51:44">51:44</span> And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I
will bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed: and the
nations shall not flow together any more to him: even the wall of
Babylon shall fall.

<span id="an_51:45">51:45</span> My people, depart from the midst of
her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the
LORD.

<span id="an_51:46">51:46</span> And lest your heart should faint, and
ye should fear for the rumor that shall be heard in the land; a rumor
shall both come one year, and after that in another year shall come a
rumor, and violence in the land, ruler against ruler.

<span id="an_51:47">51:47</span> Therefore behold, the days come, that I
will do judgment upon the graven images of Babylon: and her whole land
shall be confounded, and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.

<span id="an_51:48">51:48</span> Then the heaven and the earth, and all
that is in them, shall sing for Babylon: for the spoilers shall come to
her from the north, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_51:49">51:49</span> As Babylon hath caused the slain of
Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.

<span id="an_51:50">51:50</span> Ye that have escaped the sword, go
away, stand not still: remember the LORD afar off, and let Jerusalem
come into your mind.

<span id="an_51:51">51:51</span> We are confounded, because we have
heard reproach: shame hath covered our faces: for strangers are come
into the sanctuaries of the LORD'S house.

<span id="an_51:52">51:52</span> Wherefore, behold, the days come, saith
the LORD, that I will do judgment upon her graven images: and through
all her land the wounded shall groan.

<span id="an_51:53">51:53</span> Though Babylon should mount up to
heaven, and though she should fortify the hight of her strength, yet
from me shall spoilers come to her, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_51:54">51:54</span> A sound of a cry cometh from Babylon,
and great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans:

<span id="an_51:55">51:55</span> Because the LORD hath laid waste
Babylon, and destroyed out of her the great voice; when her waves roar
like great waters, a noise of their voice is uttered:

<span id="an_51:56">51:56</span> Because the spoiler is come upon her,
even upon Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, every one of their bows
is broken: for the LORD God of recompenses shall surely requite.

<span id="an_51:57">51:57</span> And I will make drunk her princes, and
her wise men, her captains, and her rulers, and her mighty men: and they
shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the king, whose name
is the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_51:58">51:58</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The broad
walls of Babylon shall be utterly broken, and her high gates shall be
burned with fire; and the people shall labor in vain, and the people in
the fire, and they shall be weary.

<span id="an_51:59">51:59</span> The word which Jeremiah the prophet
commanded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, when he went
with Zedekiah the king of Judah into Babylon in the fourth year of his
reign. And this Seraiah was a quiet prince.

<span id="an_51:60">51:60</span> So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the
evil that should come upon Babylon, even all these words that are
written against Babylon.

<span id="an_51:61">51:61</span> And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou
shalt come to Babylon, and shalt see, and shalt read all these words;

<span id="an_51:62">51:62</span> Then shalt thou say, O LORD, thou hast
spoken against this place, to cut it off, that none shall remain in it,
neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate for ever.

<span id="an_51:63">51:63</span> And it shall be, when thou hast made an
end of reading this book, that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast
it into the midst of Euphrates:

<span id="an_51:64">51:64</span> And thou shalt say, Thus shall Babylon
sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her: and
they shall be weary. Thus far are the words of Jeremiah.

<span id="an_52:1">52:1</span> Zedekiah was one and twenty years old
when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And
his mother's name was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

<span id="an_52:2">52:2</span> And he did that which was evil in the
eyes of the LORD, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.

<span id="an_52:3">52:3</span> For through the anger of the LORD it came
to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, till he had cast them out from his
presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_52:4">52:4</span> And it came to pass in the ninth year of
his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against
Jerusalem, and encamped against it, and built forts against it on every
side.

<span id="an_52:5">52:5</span> So the city was besieged to the eleventh
year of king Zedekiah.

<span id="an_52:6">52:6</span> And in the fourth month, in the ninth day
of the month, the famine was severe in the city, so that there was no
bread for the people of the land.

<span id="an_52:7">52:7</span> Then the city was broken up, and all the
men of war fled, and went forth from the city by night by the way of the
gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden; (now the
Chaldeans were by the city on all sides:) and they went by the way of
the plain.

<span id="an_52:8">52:8</span> But the army of the Chaldeans pursued the
king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all his army
was scattered from him.

<span id="an_52:9">52:9</span> Then they took the king, and carried him
to the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; where he gave
judgment upon him.

<span id="an_52:10">52:10</span> And the king of Babylon slew the sons
of Zedekiah before his eyes: he slew also all the princes of Judah in
Riblah.

<span id="an_52:11">52:11</span> Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah;
and the king of Babylon bound him in chains, and carried him to Babylon,
and put him in prison till the day of his death.

<span id="an_52:12">52:12</span> Now in the fifth month, in the tenth
day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar king
of Babylon, came Nebuzar-adan, captain of the guard, who served the king
of Babylon, into Jerusalem,

<span id="an_52:13">52:13</span> And burned the house of the LORD, and
the king's house; and all the houses of Jerusalem, and all the houses of
the great men he burned with fire:

<span id="an_52:14">52:14</span> And all the army of the Chaldeans, that
were with the captain of the guard, broke down all the walls of
Jerusalem on every side.

<span id="an_52:15">52:15</span> Then Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
guard carried away captive certain of the poor of the people, and the
residue of the people that remained in the city, and those that fell
away, that fell to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude.

<span id="an_52:16">52:16</span> But Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
guard left certain of the poor of the land for vine-dressers and for
husbandmen.

<span id="an_52:17">52:17</span> Also the pillars of brass that were in
the house of the LORD, and the bases, and the brazen sea that was in the
house of the LORD, the Chaldeans broke, and carried all the brass of
them to Babylon.

<span id="an_52:18">52:18</span> The caldrons also, and the shovels, and
the snuffers, and the bowls, and the spoons, and all the vessels of
brass with which they ministered, they took away.

<span id="an_52:19">52:19</span> And the basins, and the fire-pans, and
the bowls, and the caldrons, and the candlesticks, and the spoons, and
the cups; that which was of gold in gold, and that which was of silver
in silver, the captain of the guard took away.

<span id="an_52:20">52:20</span> The two pillars, one sea, and twelve
brazen bulls that were under the bases, which king Solomon had made in
the house of the LORD: the brass of all these vessels was without
weight.

<span id="an_52:21">52:21</span> And concerning the pillars, the hight
of one pillar was eighteen cubits; and a fillet of twelve cubits
encompassed it; and the thickness of it was four fingers: it was hollow.

<span id="an_52:22">52:22</span> And a capital of brass was upon it; and
the hight of one capital was five cubits, with net-work and pomegranates
upon the capitals around, all of brass. The second pillar also and the
pomegranates were like to these.

<span id="an_52:23">52:23</span> And there were ninety and six
pomegranates on a side; and all the pomegranates upon the net-work were
a hundred on all sides.

<span id="an_52:24">52:24</span> And the captain of the guard took
Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three
keepers of the door:

<span id="an_52:25">52:25</span> He took also out of the city a eunuch,
who had the charge of the men of war; and seven men of them that were
near the king's person, who were found in the city; and the principal
scribe of the host, who mustered the people of the land; and sixty men
of the people of the land, that were found in the midst of the city.

<span id="an_52:26">52:26</span> So Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.

<span id="an_52:27">52:27</span> And the king of Babylon smote them, and
put them to death in Riblah, in the land of Hamath. Thus Judah was
carried away captive out of his own land.

<span id="an_52:28">52:28</span> This is the people whom Nebuchadrezzar
carried away captive: in the seventh year three thousand Jews and three
and twenty:

<span id="an_52:29">52:29</span> In the eighteenth year of
Nebuchadrezzar he carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred
thirty and two persons:

<span id="an_52:30">52:30</span> In the three and twentieth year of
Nebuchadrezzar, Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard carried away
captive of the Jews seven hundred forty and five persons: all the
persons were four thousand and six hundred.

<span id="an_52:31">52:31</span> And it came to pass in the seven and
thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the
twelfth month, in the five and twentieth day of the month, that
Evil-merodach king of Babylon in the first year of his reign lifted up
the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought him out of prison,

<span id="an_52:32">52:32</span> And spoke kindly to him, and set his
throne above the throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon,

<span id="an_52:33">52:33</span> And changed his prison garments: and he
continually ate bread before him all the days of his life.

<span id="an_52:34">52:34</span> And for his food there was a continual
diet given him of the king of Babylon, every day a portion until the day
of his death, all the days of his life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations](lam.md)
