[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe2)  [Next](jo2.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: 1 John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> That which was from the beginning, which we
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon,
and our hands have handled, of the word of life;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> (For the life was manifested, and we have
seen it, and testify, and show to you that eternal life which was with
the Father, and was manifested to us;)

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> That which we have seen and heard we
declare to you, that ye also may have fellowship with us: and truly our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And these things we write to you, that your
joy may be full.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> This then is the message which we have
heard from him, and declare to you, that God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> If we say that we have fellowship with him,
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But if we walk in the light, as he is in
the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> If we say that we have not sinned, we
make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My little children, these things I write to
you, that ye sin not. And if any man sinneth, we have an advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And he is the propitiation for our sins:
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And by this we do know that we know him, if
we keep his commandments.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not
his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But whoever keepeth his word, in him verily
is the love of God perfected: by this we know that we are in him.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> He that saith he abideth in him, ought
himself also so to walk, even as he walked.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Brethren, I write no new commandment to
you, but an old commandment which ye had from the beginning: The old
commandment is the word which ye have heard from the beginning.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Again, a new commandment I write to you,
which thing is true in him and in you: because the darkness is past, and
the true light now shineth.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> He that saith he is in the light, and
hateth his brother, is in darkness even until now.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> He that loveth his brother abideth in the
light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> But he that hateth his brother is in
darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth,
because darkness hath blinded his eyes.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I write to you, little children, because
your sins are forgiven you for his name's sake.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I write to you, fathers, because ye have
known him that is from the beginning. I write to you, young men, because
ye have overcome the wicked one. I write to you, little children,
because ye have known the Father.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> I have written to you, fathers, because
ye have known him that is from the beginning. I have written to you,
young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you,
and ye have overcome the wicked one.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Love not the world, neither the things
that are in the world. If any man loveth the world, the love of the
Father is not in him.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For all that is in the world, the lust of
the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not from
the Father, but is from the world.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the world passeth away, and the lust
of it: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Little children, it is the last time: and
as ye have heard that antichrist cometh, even now are there many
antichrists; by which we know that it is the last time.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> They went out from us, but they were not
of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued
with us: but they went out, that they might be made manifest that they
were not all of us.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But ye have an unction from the Holy One,
and ye know all things.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I have not written to you because ye know
not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Who is a liar but he that denieth that
Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the
Son.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Whoever denieth the Son, the same hath
not the Father: but he that acknowledgeth the Son hath the Father also.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Let that therefore abide in you, which ye
have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the
beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in
the Father.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And this is the promise that he hath
promised us, even eternal life.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> These things have I written to you
concerning them that seduce you.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> But the anointing which ye have received
from him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man should teach you:
but as the same anointing teacheth you concerning all things, and is
truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in
him.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And now, little children, abide in him;
that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed
before him at his coming.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> If ye know that he is righteous ye know
that every one that doeth righteousness is born of him.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Behold, what manner of love the Father hath
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: therefore
the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it
doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall
appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And every man that hath this hope in him
purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Whoever committeth sin transgresseth also
the law; for sin is the transgression of the law.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And ye know that he was manifested to take
away our sins; and in him is no sin.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Whoever abideth in him sinneth not: whoever
sinneth hath not seen him, neither known him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Little children, let no man deceive you: he
that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> He that committeth sin is of the devil; for
the devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God
was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Whoever is born of God doth not commit sin;
for his seed remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of
God.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> In this the children of God are manifest,
and the children of the devil: whoever doeth not righteousness is not of
God, neither he that loveth not his brother.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For this is the message that ye have
heard from the beginning, that we should love one another.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one,
and slew his brother. And why did he slay him? Because his own works
were evil, and his brother's righteous.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Marvel not, my brethren, if the world
hate you.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> We know that we have passed from death to
life, because we love the brethren. He that loveth not his brother,
abideth in death.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Whoever hateth his brother, is a
murderer: and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> By this we perceive the love of God,
because he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our lives
for the brethren.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> But he who hath this world's good, and
seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion
from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> My little children, let us not love in
word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And by this we know that we are of the
truth, and shall assure our hearts before him.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> For if our heart condemneth us, God is
greater than our heart, and knoweth all things.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Beloved, if our heart doth not condemn
us, then have we confidence towards God.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And whatever we ask, we receive from him,
because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing
in his sight.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And this is his commandment; That we
should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one
another, as he gave us commandment.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And he that keepeth his commandments,
dwelleth in him, and he in him. And by this we know that he abideth in
us, by the Spirit which he hath given us.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try
the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets have
gone out into the world.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> By this ye know the Spirit of God: Every
spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ hath come in the flesh, is from
God:

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And every spirit that confesseth not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not from God. And this is that
spirit of antichrist, of which ye have heard that it should come; and
even now already it is in the world.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Ye are of God, little children, and have
overcome them: because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in
the world.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> They are of the world: therefore they speak
from the world, and the world heareth them.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> We are of God. He that knoweth God, heareth
us; he that is not of God, heareth not us. By this we know the spirit of
truth, and the spirit of error.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Beloved, let us love one another: for love
is from God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for
God is love.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> In this was manifested the love of God
towards us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world,
that we might live through him.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> In this is love, not that we loved God,
but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our
sins.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought
also to love one another.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> No man hath seen God at any time. If we
love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> By this we know that we dwell in him, and
he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And we have seen and do testify, that the
Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Whoever shall confess that Jesus is the
Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And we have known and believed the love
that God hath to us. God is love: and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth
in God, and God in him.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> In this is our love made perfect, that we
may have boldness in the day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in
this world.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> There is no fear in love; but perfect
love casteth out fear: because fear hath torment. He that feareth, is
not made perfect in love.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> We love him, because he first loved us.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> If a man sayeth, I love God, and hateth
his brother, he is a liar. For he that loveth not his brother, whom he
hath seen, how can he love God, whom he hath not seen?

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And this commandment have we from him,
That he who loveth God, love his brother also.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Whoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ,
is born of God: and every one that loveth him that begat, loveth him
also that is begotten by him.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> By this we know that we love the children
of God, when we love God, and keep his commandments.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For this is the love of God, that we keep
his commandments; and his commandments are not grievous.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For whatever is born of God, overcometh the
world: and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our
faith.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Who is he that overcometh the world, but he
that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> This is he that came by water and blood,
even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is
the Spirit that beareth testimony, because the Spirit is truth.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For there are three that bear testimony in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, and these three are
one.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And there are three that bear testimony on
earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these three agree
in one.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> If we receive the testimony of men, the
testimony of God is greater: for this is the testimony of God which he
hath testified of his Son.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> He that believeth on the Son of God hath
the witness in himself: he that believeth not God, hath made him a liar,
because he hath not believed the testimony that God gave of his Son.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And this is the testimony, that God hath
given to us eternal life: and this life is in his Son.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> He that hath the Son, hath life; and he
that hath not the Son of God, hath not life.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> These things have I written to you that
believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have
eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And this is the confidence that we have
in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth us:

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And if we know that he heareth us,
whatever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired from
him.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If any man shall see his brother sin a
sin which is not to death, he shall ask, and he will give him life for
them that sin not to death. There is a sin to death: I do not say that
he shall pray for it.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> All unrighteousness is sin: and there is
a sin not to death.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> We know that whoever is born of God,
sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God, keepeth himself, and that
wicked one toucheth him not.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And we know that we are of God, and the
whole world lieth in wickedness.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And we know that the Son of God hath
come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is
true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This
is the true God, and eternal life.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Little children, keep yourselves from
idols. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 John](jo2.md)
