[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](est)  [Next](psa) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Job

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> There was a man in the land of Uz, whose
name was Job; and that man was perfect and upright, and one that feared
God, and shunned evil.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And there were born to him seven sons and
three daughters.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> His substance also was seven thousand
sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and
five hundred she-asses, and a very great household; so that this man was
the greatest of all the men of the east.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And his sons went and feasted in their
houses, every one his day; and sent and called for their three sisters
to eat and to drink with them.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And it was so, when the days of their
feasting were ended, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose early
in the morning, and offered burnt-offerings according to the number of
them all; for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed
God in their hearts. Thus did Job continually.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Now there was a day when the sons of God
came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among
them.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And the LORD said to Satan, Whence comest
thou? Then Satan answered the LORD, and said, From going to and fro on
the earth, and from walking up and down upon it.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And the LORD said to Satan, Hast thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him on the earth, a
perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and shunneth evil?

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Then Satan answered the LORD, and said,
Doth Job fear God for naught?

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Hast not thou made a hedge about him, and
about his house, and about all that he hath on every side? thou hast
blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the
land.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> But put forth thy hand now, and touch all
that he hath, and he will curse thee to thy face.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And the LORD said to Satan, Behold, all
that he hath is in thy power; only upon himself put not forth thy hand.
So Satan went forth from the presence of the LORD.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And there was a day when his sons and his
daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And there came a messenger to Job, and
said, The oxen were plowing, and the asses feeding beside them:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And the Sabeans fell upon them, and took
them away; yes, they have slain the servants with the edge of the sword;
and I only have escaped alone to tell thee.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> While he was yet speaking, there came
also another, and said, The fire of God hath fallen from heaven, and
hath burned up the sheep and the servants, and consumed them; and I only
have escaped alone to tell thee.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> While he was yet speaking, there came
also another, and said, The Chaldeans made three bands, and fell upon
the camels, and have carried them away, yes, and slain the servants with
the edge of the sword; and I only have escaped alone to tell thee.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> While he was yet speaking, there came
also another, and said, Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and
drinking wine in their eldest brother's house:

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And behold, there came a great wind from
the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell
upon the young men, and they are dead; and I only have escaped alone to
tell thee.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and
shaved his head, and fell upon the ground, and worshiped,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And said, Naked came I from my mother's
womb, and naked shall I return thither: The LORD gave, and the LORD hath
taken away; blessed be the name of the LORD.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> In all this Job sinned not, nor charged
God foolishly.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Again there was a day when the sons of God
came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among
them to present himself before the LORD.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the LORD said to Satan, Whence comest
thou? and Satan answered the LORD, and said, From going to and fro on
the earth, and from walking up and down upon it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And the LORD said to Satan, Hast thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him on the earth, a
perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and shunneth evil? and
still he holdeth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against
him, to destroy him without cause.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And Satan answered the LORD, and said, Skin
for skin, even, all that a man hath will he give for his life.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But put forth thy hand now, and touch his
bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And the LORD said to Satan, Behold, he is
in thy hand; but save his life.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> So Satan went forth from the presence of
the LORD, and smote Job with sore boils from the sole of his foot to his
crown.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And he took him a potsherd to scrape
himself with it; and he sat down among the ashes.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Then said his wife to him, Dost thou still
retain thy integrity? curse God, and die.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But he said to her, Thou speakest as one
of the foolish women speaketh. What? shall we receive good at the hand
of God, and shall we not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with
his lips.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Now when Job's three friends heard of all
this evil that had come upon him, they came every one from his own
place; Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the
Naamathite; for they had made an appointment together to come to mourn
with him, and to comfort him.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And when they lifted up their eyes afar
off, and knew him not, they raised their voice, and wept; and they rent
every one his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads towards
heaven.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> So they sat down with him upon the ground
seven days and seven nights, and none spoke a word to him: for they saw
that his grief was very great.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> After this Job opened his mouth, and cursed
his day.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And Job spoke, and said,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Let the day perish in which I was born, and
the night in which it was said, There is a mail child conceived.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Let that day be darkness; let not God
regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon it.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Let darkness and the shades of death stain
it; let a cloud dwell upon it; let the blackness of the day terrify it.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> As for that night, let darkness seize upon
it; let it not be joined to the days of the year, let it not come into
the number of the months.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Lo, let that night be solitary, let no
joyful voice come therein.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Let them curse it that curse the day, who
are ready to raise up their mourning.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Let the stars of its twilight be dark; let
it look for light, but have none; neither let it see the dawning of the
day:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Because it prevented not my birth, nor
hid sorrow from my eyes.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Why died I not from the womb? why did I
not expire at the time of my birth?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Why did the knees receive me? or why the
breasts that I should be nursed?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For now should I have lain still and been
quiet, I should have slept: then had I been at rest,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> With kings and counselors of the earth,
who built desolate places for themselves;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Or with princes that had gold, who filled
their houses with silver:

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Or as a hidden untimely birth I had not
been; as infants which never saw light.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> There the wicked cease from troubling;
and there the weary are at rest.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> There the prisoners rest together; they
hear not the voice of the oppressor.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> The small and great are there; and the
servant is free from his master.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Why is light given to him that is in
misery, and life to the bitter in soul;

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Who long for death, but it cometh not;
and dig for it more than for hid treasures;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Who rejoice exceedingly, and are glad,
when they can find the grave?

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Why is light given to a man whose way is
hid, and whom God hath hedged in?

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> For my sighing cometh before I eat, and
my roarings are poured out like the waters.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> For the thing which I greatly feared hath
come upon me, and that which I dreaded hath come to me.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> I was not in safety, neither had I rest,
neither was I quiet; yet trouble came.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and
said,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> If we essay to commune with thee, wilt thou
be grieved? but who can refrain from speaking?

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Behold, thou hast instructed many, and thou
hast strengthened the weak hands.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Thy words have upheld him that was falling,
and thou hast strengthened the feeble knees.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But now it hath come upon thee, and thou
faintest; it toucheth thee, and thou art troubled.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy
hope, and the uprightness of thy ways?

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished,
being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Even as I have seen, they that plow
iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> By the blast of God they perish, and by the
breath of his nostrils are they consumed.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> The roaring of the lion, and the voice of
the fierce lion, and the teeth of the young lions, are broken.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The old lion perisheth for lack of prey,
and the stout lion's whelps are scattered abroad.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Now a thing was secretly brought to me,
and my ear received a small sound of it.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> In thoughts from the visions of the
night, when deep sleep falleth on men.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Fear came upon me, and trembling, which
made all my bones to shake.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Then a spirit passed before my face; the
hair of my flesh stood up:

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> It stood still, but I could not discern
its form: an image was before my eyes, there was silence, and I heard a
voice, saying,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Shall mortal man be more just than God?
shall a man be more pure than his maker?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Behold, he put no trust in his servants;
and his angels he charged with folly:

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> How much less in them that dwell in
houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, who are crushed before
the moth?

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> They are destroyed from morning to
evening: they perish for ever without any regarding it.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Doth not their excellence which is in
them depart? they die, even without wisdom.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Call now, if there is any that will answer
thee; and to which of the saints wilt thou turn?

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For wrath killeth the foolish man, and envy
slayeth the silly one.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I have seen the foolish taking root: but
suddenly I cursed his habitation.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> His children are far from safety, and they
are crushed in the gate, neither is there any to deliver them.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Whose harvest the hungry eateth up, and
taketh it even out of the thorns, and the robber swalloweth up their
substance.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Although affliction cometh not forth from
the dust, neither doth trouble spring out of the ground;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Yet man is born to trouble, as the sparks
fly upward.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> I would seek to God, and to God would I
commit my cause:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Who doeth great things and unsearchable;
wonderful things without number:

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Who giveth rain upon the earth, and
sendeth waters upon the fields:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> To set on high those that are low: that
those who mourn may be exalted to safety.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> He disappointeth the devices of the
crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> He taketh the wise in their own
craftiness: and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> They meet with darkness in the day-time,
and grope in the noon-day as in the night.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But he saveth the poor from the sword,
from their mouth, and from the hand of the mighty.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> So the poor hath hope, and iniquity
stoppeth her mouth.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Behold, happy is the man whom God
correcteth: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty:

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For he maketh sore, and bindeth up: he
woundeth, and his hands make whole.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> He will deliver thee in six troubles:
yea, in seven there shall no evil touch thee.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> In famine he will redeem thee from death:
and in war from the power of the sword.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the
tongue: neither shalt thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> At destruction and famine thou shalt
laugh: neither shalt thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> For thou shalt be in league with the
stones of the field: and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with
thee.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle
will be in peace; and thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not
sin.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Thou shalt know also that thy seed will
be great, and thy offspring as the grass of the earth.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full
age, as a shock of corn cometh in in its season.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Lo this, we have searched it, so it is;
hear it, and know thou it for thy good.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> But Job answered and said,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Oh that my grief were thoroughly weighed,
and my calamity laid in the balances together!

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> For now it would be heavier than the sand
of the sea: therefore my words are swallowed up.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For the arrows of the Almighty are within
me, the poison of which drinketh up my spirit: the terrors of God set
themselves in array against me.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass?
or loweth the ox over his fodder?

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Can that which is unsavory be eaten without
salt? or is there any taste in the white of an egg?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> The things that my soul refused to touch
are as my sorrowful food.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Oh that I might have my request; and that
God would grant me the thing that I long for!

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Even that it would please God to destroy
me; that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off!

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Then should I yet have comfort; yes, I
would harden myself in sorrow: let him not spare; for I have not
concealed the words of the Holy One.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> What is my strength, that I should hope?
and what is my end, that I should prolong my life?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Is my strength the strength of stones? or
is my flesh of brass?

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Is not my help in me? and is wisdom
driven quite from me?

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> To him that is afflicted pity should be
shown from his friend; but he forsaketh the fear of the Almighty.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a
brook, and as the stream of brooks they pass away;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Which are blackish by reason of the ice,
and in which the snow is hid:

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> In the time when they become warm, they
vanish: when it is hot, they are consumed out of their place.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> The paths of their way are turned aside;
they go to nothing, and perish.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> The troops of Tema looked, the companies
of Sheba waited for them.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> They were confounded because they had
hoped; they came thither, and were ashamed.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> For now ye are nothing: ye see my casting
down, and are afraid.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Did I say, Bring to me? or Give a reward
for me of your substance?

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Or, Deliver me from the enemy's hand? or,
Redeem me from the hand of the mighty?

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Teach me, and I will hold my tongue: and
cause me to understand in what I have erred.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> How forcible are right words! but what
doth your arguing reprove?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the
speeches of one that is desperate, which are as wind?

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Yes, ye overwhelm the fatherless, and ye
dig a pit for your friend.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Now therefore be content, look upon me;
for it is evident to you if I lie.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> Return, I pray you, let it not be
iniquity; yes, return again, my righteousness is in it.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my
taste discern perverse things?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Is there not an appointed time to man upon
earth? are not his days also like the days of a hireling?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> As a servant earnestly desireth the shadow,
and as a hireling looketh for the reward of his work;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> So am I made to possess months of vanity,
and wearisome nights are appointed to me.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise,
and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro to the
dawning of the day.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of
dust; my skin is broken and become lothsome.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> My days are swifter than a weaver's
shuttle, and are spent without hope.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> O remember that my life is wind: my eye
will no more see good.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> The eye of him that hath seen me shall see
me no more: thy eyes are upon me, and I am not.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth
away: so he that goeth down to the grave shall come up no more.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> He shall return no more to his house,
neither shall his place know him any more.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Therefore I will not restrain my mouth; I
will speak in the anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the
bitterness of my soul.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest
a watch over me?

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my
couch shall ease my complaint;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Then thou scarest me with dreams, and
terrifiest me through visions:

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> So that my soul chooseth strangling, and
death rather than my life.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I lothe it; I would not live always: let
me alone; for my days are vanity.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> What is man, that thou shouldst magnify
him? and that thou shouldst set thy heart upon him?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And that thou shouldst visit him every
morning, and try him every moment?

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> How long wilt thou not depart from me,
nor let me alone till I swallow my spittle?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> I have sinned; what shall I do to thee, O
thou preserver of men? why hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so
that I am a burden to myself?

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And why dost thou not pardon my
transgression, and take away my iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the
dust; and thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I shall not be.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> How long wilt thou speak these things? and
how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind?

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Doth God pervert judgment; or doth the
Almighty pervert justice?

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> If thy children have sinned against him,
and he hath cast them away for their transgression;

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> If thou wouldst seek to God betimes, and
make thy supplication to the Almighty;

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> If thou wert pure and upright; surely now
he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness
prosperous.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Though thy beginning was small, yet thy
latter end would greatly increase.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> For inquire, I pray thee, of the former
age, and prepare thyself to the search of their fathers:

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> (For we are but of yesterday, and know
nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow:)

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Will they not teach thee, and tell thee,
and utter words out of their heart?

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Can the rush grow without mire? can the
flag grow without water?

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Whilst it is yet in its greenness, and
not cut down, it withereth before any other herb.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> So are the paths of all that forget God;
and the hypocrite's hope shall perish:

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose
trust shall be a spider's web.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> He shall lean upon his house, but it
shall not stand: he shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> He is green before the sun, and his
branch shooteth forth in his garden.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> His roots are wrapped about the heap, and
seeth the place of stones.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> If he shall destroy him from his place,
then it shall deny him, saying, I have not seen thee.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Behold, this is the joy of his way, and
out of the earth shall others grow.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Behold, God will not cast away a perfect
man, neither will he help the evil doers:

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Till he shall fill thy mouth with
laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> They that hate thee shall be clothed with
shame; and the dwelling place of the wicked shall come to naught.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Then Job answered and said,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> I know it to be so of a truth: but how
should man be just with God?

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> If he will contend with him, he cannot
answer him one of a thousand.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> He is wise in heart, and mighty in
strength: who hath hardened himself against him, and hath prospered?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Who removeth the mountains, and they know
not: who overturneth them in his anger.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Who shaketh the earth out of her place, and
its pillars tremble.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Who commandeth the sun, and it riseth not;
and sealeth up the stars.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Who alone spreadeth out the heavens, and
treadeth upon the waves of the sea.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Who maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades,
and the chambers of the south.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Who doeth great things past finding out;
yes, and wonders without number.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not: he
passeth on also, but I perceive him not.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Behold, he taketh away, who can hinder
him? who will say to him, What doest thou?

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> If God will not withdraw his anger, the
proud helpers do stoop under him.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> How much less shall I answer him, and
choose out my words to reason with him?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Whom, though I were righteous, yet would
I not answer, but I would make supplication to my judge.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> If I had called, and he had answered me;
yet I would not believe that he had hearkened to my voice.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For he breaketh me with a tempest, and
multiplieth my wounds without cause.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> He will not suffer me to take my breath,
but filleth me with bitterness.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong:
and if of judgment, who shall set me a time to plead?

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> If I justify myself, my own mouth will
condemn me: if I say, I am perfect, that also will prove me perverse.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Though I were perfect, yet would I not
know my soul: I would despise my life.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> This is one thing, therefore I said it,
he destroyeth the perfect and the wicked.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> If the scourge shall slay suddenly, he
will laugh at the trial of the innocent.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> The earth is given into the hand of the
wicked: he covereth the faces of its judges; if not, where, and who is
he?

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Now my days are swifter than a post: they
flee away, they see no good.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> They are passed away as the swift ships:
as the eagle that hasteth to the prey.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> If I say, I will forget my complaint, I
will leave off my heaviness, and comfort myself:

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> I am afraid of all my sorrows, I know
that thou wilt not hold me innocent.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> If I am wicked, why then do I labor in
vain?

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> If I wash myself with snow water, and
make my hands never so clean;

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> Yet wilt thou plunge me in the ditch, and
my own clothes shall abhor me.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> For he is not a man, as I am, that I
should answer him, and we should come together in judgment.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> Neither is there any judge between us,
that might lay his hand upon us both.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> Let him take away his rod from me, and
let not his fear terrify me:

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> Then would I speak, and not fear him; but
it is not so with me.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> My soul is weary of my life; I will leave
my complaint upon myself; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> I will say to God, Do not condemn me;
show me why thou contendest with me.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Is it good to thee that thou shouldst
oppress, that thou shouldst despise the work of thy hands, and shine
upon the counsel of the wicked?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Hast thou eyes of flesh? or seest thou as
man seeth?

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Are thy days as the days of man? are thy
years as man's days,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> That thou inquirest after my iniquity,
and searchest after my sin?

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Thou knowest that I am not wicked; and
there is none that can deliver out of thy hand.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Thy hands have made me and fashioned me
in all my parts; yet thou dost destroy me.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast
made me as the clay; and wilt thou bring me into dust again?

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Hast thou not poured me out as milk,
and curdled me like cheese?

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Thou hast clothed me with skin and
flesh, and hast fenced me with bones and sinews.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Thou hast granted me life and favor,
and thy visitation hath preserved my spirit.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And these things hast thou hid in thy
heart: I know that this is with thee.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> If I sin, then thou markest me, and
thou wilt not acquit me from my iniquity.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> If I be wicked, woe to me; and if I be
righteous, yet will I not lift up my head. I am full of confusion;
therefore see thou my affliction;

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> For it increaseth. Thou huntest me as a
fierce lion: and again thou showest thyself wonderful upon me.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Thou renewest thy witnesses against me,
and increasest thy indignation upon me; changes and war are against me.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Why then hast thou brought me forth
from the womb? O that I had expired, and no eye had seen me!

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> I should have been as though I had not
been; I should have been carried from the womb to the grave.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Are not my days few? cease then, and
let me alone, that I may take comfort a little,

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Before I go whence I shall not return,
even to the land of darkness, and the shades of death;

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> A land of darkness, as darkness itself;
and of the shades of death, without any order, and where the light is as
darkness.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and
said,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Should not the multitude of words be
answered? and should a man full of talk be justified?

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Should thy falsehoods make men hold their
peace? and when thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For thou hast said, My doctrine is pure,
and I am clean in thy eyes.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> But Oh that God would speak, and open his
lips against thee;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And that he would show thee the secrets
of wisdom, that they are double to that which is! Know therefore that
God exacteth of thee less than thy iniquity deserveth.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Canst thou by searching find out God?
canst thou find out the Almighty to perfection?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> It is as high as heaven; what canst thou
do? deeper than hell; what canst thou know?

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> The measure of it is longer than the
earth, and broader than the sea.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> If he shall cut off, and shut up, or
gather together, then who can hinder him?

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> For he knoweth vain men: he seeth
wickedness also; will he not then consider it?

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> For vain man would be wise, though man
is born like a wild ass's colt.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> If thou preparest thy heart, and
stretchest out thy hands towards him;

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> If iniquity is in thy hand, put it far
away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> For then shalt thou lift up thy face
without spot; yes, thou shalt be steadfast, and shalt not fear:

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Because thou shalt forget thy misery,
and remember it as waters that pass away:

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And thy age shall be clearer than the
noon-day: thou shalt shine forth, thou shalt be as the morning.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And thou shalt be secure, because there
is hope; yes, thou shalt dig about thee, and thou shalt take thy rest in
safety.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Also thou shalt lie down, and none
shall make thee afraid; yes, many shall make suit to thee.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But the eyes of the wicked shall fail,
and they shall not escape, and their hope shall be as the expiration of
the breath.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And Job answered and said,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> No doubt but ye are the people, and
wisdom shall die with you.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> But I have understanding as well as you;
I am not inferior to you: yes, who knoweth not such things as these?

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> I am as one mocked by his neighbor, who
calleth upon God, and he answereth him: the just upright man is derided.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> He that is ready to slip with his feet is
as a lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> The tabernacles of robbers prosper, and
they that provoke God are secure; into whose hand God bringeth
abundantly.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But ask now the beasts, and they shall
teach thee; and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee:

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach
thee: and the fishes of the sea shall declare to thee.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Who knoweth not in all these that the
hand of the LORD hath wrought this?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> In whose hand is the soul of every
living thing, and the breath of all mankind.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Doth not the ear try words? and the
mouth taste its food?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> With the ancient is wisdom; and in
length of days understanding.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> With him is wisdom and strength, he
hath counsel and understanding.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Behold, he breaketh down, and it cannot
be built again: he shutteth up a man, and there can be no opening.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and
they dry up: also he sendeth them out, and they overturn the earth.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> With him is strength and wisdom: the
deceived and the deceiver are his.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> He leadeth counselors away spoiled, and
maketh the judges fools.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> He looseth the bond of kings, and
girdeth their loins with a girdle.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> He leadeth princes away spoiled, and
overthroweth the mighty.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> He removeth away the speech of the
trusty, and taketh away the understanding of the aged.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> He poureth contempt upon princes, and
weakeneth the strength of the mighty.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> He revealeth deep things out of
darkness, and bringeth to light the shades of death.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> He increaseth nations, and destroyeth
them: he enlargeth nations, and straiteneth them again.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> He taketh away the heart of the chief
of the people of the earth, and causeth them to wander in a wilderness
where there is no way.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> They grope in the dark without light,
and he maketh them to stagger like a drunken man.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Lo, my eye hath seen all this, my ear
hath heard and understood it.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> What ye know, the same do I know also: I
am not inferior to you.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and
I desire to reason with God.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all
physicians of no value.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> O that ye would altogether hold your
peace and it would be your wisdom.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the
pleadings of my lips.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Will ye speak wickedly for God? and talk
deceitfully for him?

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Will ye accept his person? will ye
contend for God?

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Is it good that he should search you out?
or as one man mocketh another, do ye so mock him?

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> He will surely reprove you, if ye do
secretly accept persons.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Shall not his excellence make you
afraid? and his dread fall upon you?

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Your remembrances are like to ashes,
your bodies to bodies of clay.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Hold your peace, let me alone, that I
may speak, and let come on me what will.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Why do I take my flesh in my teeth, and
put my life in my hand?

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Though he shall slay me, yet will I
trust in him: but I will maintain my own ways before him.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> He also shall be my salvation: for a
hypocrite shall not come before him.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Hear diligently my speech, and my
declaration with your ears.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Behold now, I have ordered my cause; I
know that I shall be justified.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Who is he that will plead with me? for
now, if I hold my tongue, I shall expire.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Only do not two things to me: then will
I not hide myself from thee.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Withdraw thy hand far from me: and let
not thy dread make me afraid.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Then call thou, and I will answer: or
let me speak, and answer thou me.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> How many are my iniquities and sins?
make me to know my transgression and my sin.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Why hidest thou thy face, and holdest
me for thy enemy?

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> Wilt thou break a leaf driven to and
fro? and wilt thou pursue the dry stubble?

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> For thou writest bitter things against
me, and makest me to possess the iniquities of my youth.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> Thou puttest my feet also in the
stocks, and lookest narrowly to all my paths; thou settest a print upon
the heels of my feet.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And he, as a rotten thing, consumeth,
as a garment that is moth-eaten.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Man that is born of a woman is of few
days, and full of trouble.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut
down: he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And dost thou open thy eyes upon such
one, and bring me into judgment with thee?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? not one.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Seeing his days are determined, the
number of his months is with thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that
he cannot pass;

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Turn from him, that he may rest, till he
shall accomplish, as a hireling, his day.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For there is hope of a tree, if it is cut
down, that it will sprout again, and that its tender branch will not
cease.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Though its root shall become old in the
earth, and its stock die in the ground;

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Yet through the scent of water it will
bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But man dieth, and wasteth away: yes,
man yieldeth his breath, and where is he?

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> As the waters fail from the sea, and
the flood decayeth and drieth up:

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So man lieth down, and riseth not: till
the heavens shall be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of
their sleep.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> O that thou wouldst hide me in the
grave, that thou wouldst keep me secret, until thy wrath is past, that
thou wouldst appoint me a set time, and remember me!

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> If a man dieth, shall he live again?
all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change shall
come.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Thou shalt call, and I will answer
thee: thou wilt have a desire to the work of thy hands.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> For now thou numberest my steps: dost
thou not watch over my sin?

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> My transgression is sealed up in a bag,
and thou sewest up my iniquity.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And surely the mountain falling cometh
to naught, and the rock is removed out of its place.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> The waters wear the stones: thou
washest away the things which grow out of the dust of the earth; and
thou destroyest the hope of man.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Thou prevailest for ever against him,
and he passeth: thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> His sons come to honor, and he knoweth
it not; and they are brought low, but he perceiveth it not of them.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> But his flesh upon him shall have pain,
and his soul within him shall mourn.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and
said,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Should a wise men utter vain knowledge,
and fill his belly with the east wind?

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Should he reason with unprofitable talk?
or with speeches with which he can do no good?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Yes, thou castest off fear, and
restrainest prayer before God.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> For thy mouth uttereth thy iniquity, and
thou choosest the tongue of the crafty.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Thy own mouth condemneth thee, and not I:
yes, thy own lips testify against thee.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Art thou the first man that was born? or
wast thou made before the hills?

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Hast thou heard the secret of God? and
dost thou restrain wisdom to thyself?

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> What knowest thou that we know not? what
understandest thou, which is not in us?

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> With us are both the gray headed and
very aged men, much older than thy father.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Are the consolations of God small with
thee? is there any secret thing with thee?

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Why doth thy heart carry thee away? and
what do thy eyes wink at,

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> That thou turnest thy spirit against
God, and lettest such words go out of thy mouth?

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> What is man, that he should be clean?
and he who is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Behold, he putteth no trust in his
saints; yes, the heavens are not clean in his sight.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> How much more abominable and filthy is
man, who drinketh iniquity like water?

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I will show thee, hear me; and that
which I have seen, I will declare;

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Which wise men have told from their
fathers, and have not hid it:

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> To whom alone the earth was given, and
no stranger passed among them.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> The wicked man travaileth with pain all
his days, and the number of years is hidden to the oppressor.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> A dreadful sound is in his ears: in
prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> He believeth not that he shall return
out of darkness, and he is waited for by the sword.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> He wandereth abroad for bread, saying,
Where is it? he knoweth that the day of darkness is ready at his hand.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Trouble and anguish shall make him
afraid; they shall prevail against him, as a king ready to the battle.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> For he stretcheth out his hand against
God, and strengtheneth himself against the Almighty.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> He runneth upon him, even on his neck,
upon the thick bosses of his bucklers:

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> Because he covereth his face with his
fatness, and maketh collops of fat on his flanks.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And he dwelleth in desolate cities, and
in houses which no man inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> He shall not be rich, neither shall his
substance continue, neither shall he prolong the perfection of it upon
the earth.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> He shall not depart out of darkness;
the flame shall dry up his branches, and by the breath of his mouth
shall he go away.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Let not him that is deceived trust in
vanity: for vanity shall be his recompense.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> It shall be accomplished before his
time, and his branch shall not be green.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> He shall shake off his unripe grape as
the vine, and shall cast off his flower as the olive.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> For the congregation of hypocrites
shall be desolate, and fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> They conceive mischief, and bring forth
vanity, and their belly prepareth deceit.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Then Job answered and said,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> I have heard many such things: miserable
comforters are ye all.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Shall vain words have an end? or what
emboldeneth thee that thou answerest?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> I also could speak as ye do: if your soul
were in my soul's stead, I could heap up words against you, and shake my
head at you.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> But I would strengthen you with my mouth
and the moving of my lips should assuage your grief.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Though I speak, my grief is not assuaged:
and though I forbear, what am I eased?

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> But now he hath made me weary: thou hast
made desolate all my company.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And thou hast filled me with wrinkles,
which is a witness against me: and my leanness rising up in me beareth
witness to my face.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> He teareth me in his wrath, who hateth
me: he gnasheth upon me with his teeth; my enemy sharpeneth his eyes
upon me.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> They have gaped upon me with their
mouth; they have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully; they have
gathered themselves against me.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> God hath delivered me to the ungodly,
and turned me over into the hands of the wicked.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> I was at ease, but he hath broken me
asunder: he hath also taken me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and
set me up for his mark.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> His archers encompass me; he cleaveth
my reins asunder, and doth not spare; he poureth out my gall upon the
ground.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> He breaketh me with breach upon breach,
he runneth upon me like a giant.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin,
and defiled my horn in the dust.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> My face is foul with weeping, and on my
eyelids are the shades of death;

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Not for any injustice in my hands: also
my prayer is pure.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> O earth, cover not thou my blood, and
let my cry have no place.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Also now, behold, my witness is in
heaven, and my record is on high.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> My friends scorn me: but my eye poureth
out tears to God.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> O that one might plead for a man with
God, as a man pleadeth for his neighbor!

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> When a few years are come, then I shall
go the way whence I shall not return.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> My breath is corrupt, my days are
extinct, the graves are ready for me.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Are there not mockers with me? and doth
not my eye continue in their provocation?

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Lay down now, put me in a surety with
thee; who is he that will strike hands with me?

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> For thou hast hid their heart from
understanding: therefore shalt thou not exalt them.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> He that speaketh flattery to his friends,
even the eyes of his children shall fail.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> He hath made me also a by-word of the
people; and in former time I was as a tabret.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> My eye also is dim by reason of sorrow,
and all my members are as a shade.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> Upright men shall be astonished at this,
and the innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> The righteous also shall hold on his way,
and he that hath clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> But as for you all, do ye return, and
come now: for I cannot find one wise man among you.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> My days are past, my purposes are
broken off, even the thoughts of my heart.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> They change the night into day: the
light is short because of darkness.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> If I wait, the grave is my house: I
have made my bed in the darkness.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> I have said to corruption, Thou art my
father: to the worm, Thou art my mother, and my sister.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And where is now my hope? as for my
hope, who will see it?

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> They shall go down to the bars of the
pit, when our rest together is in the dust.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and
said,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> How long will it be ere ye make an end of
words? mark, and afterwards we will speak.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Why are we counted as beasts, and reputed
vile in your sight?

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> He teareth himself in his anger: shall
the earth be forsaken for thee? and shall the rock be removed out of its
place?

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Yes, the light of the wicked shall be put
out, and the spark of his fire shall not shine.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> The light shall be dark in his
tabernacle, and his candle shall be put out with him.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> The steps of his strength shall be
straitened, and his own counsel shall cast him down.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> For he is cast into a net by his own
feet, and he walketh upon a snare.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> The gin shall take him by the heel, and
the robber shall prevail against him.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> The snare is laid for him in the
ground, and a trap for him in the way.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Terrors shall make him afraid on every
side, and shall drive him to his feet.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> His strength shall be hunger-bitten,
and destruction shall be ready at his side.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> It shall devour the strength of his
skin: even the first-born of death shall devour his strength.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> His confidence shall be rooted out of
his tabernacle, and it shall bring him to the king of terrors.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> It shall dwell in his tabernacle,
because it is none of his: brimstone shall be scattered upon his
habitation.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> His roots shall be dried up beneath,
and above shall his branch be cut off.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> His remembrance shall perish from the
earth, and he shall have no name in the street.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> He shall be driven from light into
darkness, and chased out of the world.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> He shall neither have son nor nephew
among his people, nor any remaining in his dwellings.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> They that come after him shall be
astonished at his day, as they that went before were affrighted.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Surely such are the dwellings of the
wicked, and this is the place of him that knoweth not God.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Then Job answered and said,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> How long will ye vex my soul, and break
me in pieces with words?

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> These ten times have ye reproached me: ye
are not ashamed that ye make yourselves strange to me.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And be it indeed that I have erred, my
error remaineth with myself.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> If indeed ye will magnify yourselves
against me, and plead against me my reproach:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Know now that God hath overthrown me, and
hath encompassed me with his net.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not
heard: I cry aloud, but there is no judgment.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He hath fenced up my way that I cannot
pass, and he hath set darkness in my paths.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> He hath stripped me of my glory, and
taken the crown from my head.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> He hath destroyed me on every side, and
I am gone: and my hope hath he removed like a tree.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> He hath also kindled his wrath against
me, and he counteth me to him as one of his enemies.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> His troops come together, and raise up
their way against me, and encamp around my tabernacle.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> He hath put my brethren far from me,
and my acquaintance are verily estranged from me.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> My kinsmen have failed, and my familiar
friends have forgotten me.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> They that dwell in my house, and my
maids, count me for a stranger: I am an alien in their sight.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> I called my servant, and he gave me no
answer; I entreated him with my mouth.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> My breath is strange to my wife, though
I entreated for the children's sake of my own body.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Yes, young children despised me; I
arose, and they spoke against me.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> All my intimate friends abhorred me:
and they whom I loved are turned against me.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> My bone cleaveth to my skin and to my
flesh, and I have escaped with the skin of my teeth.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O
ye my friends; for the hand of God hath touched me.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Why do ye persecute me as God, and are
not satisfied with my flesh?

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> Oh that my words were now written! oh
that they were printed in a book!

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> That they were graven with an iron pen
in lead, in the rock for ever!

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> For I know that my redeemer liveth, and
that he will stand at the latter day upon the earth:

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And though after my skin worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God:

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Whom I shall see for myself, and my
eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within
me.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> But ye would say, Why persecute we him,
seeing the root of the matter is found in me?

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath
bringeth the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there is a
judgment.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and
said,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Therefore do my thoughts cause me to
answer, and for this I make haste.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> I have heard the check of my reproach,
and the spirit of my understanding causeth me to answer.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Knowest thou not this of old, since man
was placed upon earth,

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> That the triumphing of the wicked is
short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment?

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Though his excellence shall mount up to
the heavens, and his head reach to the clouds;

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Yet he shall perish for ever like his own
dung: they who have seen him shall say, Where is he?

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> He shall fly away as a dream, and will
not be found: yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> The eye also which saw him shall see him
no more; neither shall his place any more behold him.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> His children shall seek to please the
poor, and his hands shall restore their goods.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> His bones are full of the sin of his
youth, which shall lie down with him in the dust.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Though wickedness may be sweet in his
mouth, though he may hide it under his tongue;

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Though he may spare it, and forsake it
not; but keep it still within his mouth:

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Yet his food in his bowels is turned,
it is the gall of asps within him.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> He hath swallowed down riches, and he
shall vomit them up again: God shall cast them out of his belly.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> He shall suck the poison of asps: the
viper's tongue shall slay him.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> He shall not see the river, the floods,
the brooks of honey and buttermilk.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> That which he labored for shall he
restore, and shall not swallow it: according to his substance shall the
restitution be, and he shall not rejoice in it.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> Because he hath oppressed and hath
forsaken the poor; because he hath violently taken away a house which he
did not build.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Surely he shall not feel quietness in
his belly, he shall not save of that which he desired.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> There shall none of his food be left;
therefore shall no man look for his goods.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> In the fullness of his sufficiency he
shall be in straits: every hand of the wicked shall come upon him.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> When he is about to fill his belly, God
shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him
while he is eating.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> He shall flee from the iron weapon, and
the bow of steel shall strike him through.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> It is drawn, and cometh out of the
body; yes, the glittering sword cometh out of his gall: terrors are upon
him.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> All darkness shall be hid in his secret
places: a fire not blown shall consume him; it shall go ill with him
that is left in his tabernacle.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> The heaven shall reveal his iniquity;
and the earth shall rise up against him.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> The increase of his house shall depart,
and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> This is the portion of a wicked man
from God, and the heritage appointed to him by God.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> But Job answered and said,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Hear diligently my speech, and let this
be your consolations.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Suffer me that I may speak; and after I
have spoken, mock on.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> As for me, is my complaint to man? and if
it were so, why should not my spirit be troubled?

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Mark me, and be astonished, and lay your
hand upon your mouth.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Even when I remember I am afraid, and
trembling taketh hold on my flesh.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Why do the wicked live, become old, and,
are mighty in power?

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Their seed is established in their sight
with them, and their offspring before their eyes.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Their houses are safe from fear, neither
is the rod of God upon them.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Their bull gendereth, and faileth not;
their cow calveth, and casteth not her calf.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> They send forth their little ones like
a flock, and their children dance.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> They take the timbrel and harp, and
rejoice at the sound of the organ.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> They spend their days in wealth, and in
a moment go down to the grave.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Therefore they say to God, Depart from
us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> What is the Almighty, that we should
serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray to him?

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Lo, their good is not in their hand:
the counsel of the wicked is far from me.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> How oft is the candle of the wicked put
out? and how oft cometh their destruction upon them? God distributeth
sorrows in his anger.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> They are as stubble before the wind,
and as chaff that the storm carrieth away.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> God layeth up his iniquity for his
children: he rewardeth him, and he shall know it.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> His eyes shall see his destruction, and
he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> For what pleasure hath he in his house
after him, when the number of his months is cut off in the midst?

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Shall any teach God knowledge? seeing
he judgeth those that are high.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> One dieth in his full strength, being
wholly at ease and quiet.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> His breasts are full of milk, and his
bones are moistened with marrow.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And another dieth in the bitterness of
his soul, and never eateth with pleasure.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> They shall lie down alike in the dust,
and the worms shall cover them.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> Behold, I know your thoughts, and the
devices which ye wrongfully imagine against me.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> For ye say, Where is the house of the
prince? and where are the dwelling places of the wicked?

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Have ye not asked them that go by the
way? and do ye not know their tokens,

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> That the wicked is reserved to the day
of destruction? they will be brought forth to the day of wrath.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Who shall declare his way to his face?
and who shall repay him what he hath done?

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> Yet he shall be brought to the grave,
and shall remain in the tomb.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> The clods of the valley will be sweet
to him, and every man will draw after him, as there are innumerable
before him.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing
in your answers there remaineth falsehood?

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and
said,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Can a man be profitable to God, as he
that is wise may be profitable to himself?

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that
thou art righteous? or is it gain to him, that thou makest thy ways
perfect?

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Will he reprove thee for fear of thee?
will he enter with thee into judgment?

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Is not thy wickedness great? and thy
iniquities infinite?

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> For thou hast taken a pledge from thy
brother for naught, and stripped the naked of their clothing.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> Thou hast not given water to the weary to
drink, and thou hast withheld bread from the hungry.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> But as for the mighty man, he had the
earth; and the honorable man dwelt in it.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Thou hast sent widows away empty, and the
arms of the fatherless have been broken.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Therefore snares are around thee, and
sudden fear troubleth thee;

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Or darkness, that thou canst not see;
and abundance of waters cover thee.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> Is not God in the hight of heaven? and
behold the hight of the stars, how high they are!

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And thou sayest, How doth God know? can
he judge through the dark cloud?

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Thick clouds are a covering to him,
that he seeth not; and he walketh in the circuit of heaven.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Hast thou marked the old way which
wicked men have trodden?

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Who were cut down out of time, whose
foundation was overflowed with a flood!

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Who said to God, depart from us: and
what can the Almighty do for them!

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Yet he filled their houses with good
things: but the counsel of the wicked is far from me.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> The righteous see it, and are glad: and
the innocent deride them.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Whereas our substance is not cut down,
but the remnant of them the fire consumeth.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Acquaint now thyself with him, and be
at peace: by this good shall come to thee.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Receive, I pray thee, the law from his
mouth, and lay up his words in thy heart.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If thou shalt return to the Almighty,
thou shalt be built up, thou shalt put away iniquity far from thy
tabernacles.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Then shalt thou lay up gold as dust,
and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defense
and thou shalt have plenty of silver.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> For then shalt thou have thy delight in
the Almighty, and shalt lift up thy face to God.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> Thou shalt make thy prayer to him, and
he shall hear thee, and thou shalt pay thy vows.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Thou shalt also decree a thing, and it
shall be established to thee: and the light shall shine upon thy ways.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> When men are cast down, then thou shalt
say, There is exaltation; and he shall save the humble person.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> He shall deliver the island of the
innocent: and it is delivered by the pureness of thy hands.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Then Job answered and said,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Even to-day is my complaint bitter: my
stroke is heavier than my groaning.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Oh that I knew where I might find him!
that I might come even to his seat!

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> I would order my cause before him, and
fill my mouth with arguments.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> I would know the words which he would
answer me, and understand what he would say to me.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Would he plead against me with his great
power? No; but he would put strength in me.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> There the righteous might dispute with
him; so should I be delivered for ever from my judge.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Behold, I go forward, but he is not
there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him:

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> On the left hand, where he doth work, but
I cannot behold him: he hideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot
see him:

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> But he knoweth the way that I take:
when he hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> My foot hath held his steps, his way
have I kept, and not declined.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Neither have I gone back from the
commandment of his lips; I have esteemed the words of his mouth more
than my necessary food.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> But he is in one mind, and who can turn
him? and what his soul desireth, even that he doeth.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> For he performeth the thing that is
appointed for me: and many such things are with him.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Therefore am I troubled at his
presence: when I consider, I am afraid of him.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> For God maketh my heart soft, and the
Almighty troubleth me:

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Because I was not cut off before the
darkness, neither hath he covered the darkness from my face.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Why, seeing times are not hid from the
Almighty, do they that know him not see his days?

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> Some remove the landmarks: they violently
take away flocks, and their feed.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> They drive away the ass of the
fatherless, they take the widow's ox for a pledge.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> They turn the needy out of the way: the
poor of the earth hide themselves together.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Behold, as wild asses in the desert, they
go forth to their work; rising betimes for a prey: the wilderness
yieldeth food for them and for their children.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> They reap every one his corn in the
field: and they gather the vintage of the wicked.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> They cause the naked to lodge without
clothing, that they have no covering in the cold.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> They are wet with the showers of the
mountains, and embrace the rock for want of a shelter.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> They pluck the fatherless from the
breast, and take a pledge of the poor.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> They cause him to go naked without
clothing, and they take away the sheaf from the hungry;

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Who make oil within their walls, and
tread their wine-presses, and suffer thirst.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> Men groan from out of the city, and the
soul of the wounded crieth out: yet God layeth not folly to them.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> They are of those that rebel against
the light; they know not its ways, nor abide in its paths.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> The murderer rising with the light
killeth the poor and needy, and in the night is as a thief.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> The eye also of the adulterer waiteth
for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me: and disguiseth his face.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> In the dark they dig through houses,
which they had marked for themselves in the day-time: they know not the
light.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> For the morning is to them even as the
shades of death: if one knoweth them, they are in the terrors of the
shades of death.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> He is swift as the waters; their
portion is cursed in the earth: he beholdeth not the way of the
vineyards.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Drouth and heat consume the
snow-waters: so doth the grave those who have sinned.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> The womb shall forget him; the worm
shall feed sweetly on him; he shall be no more remembered; and
wickedness shall be broken as a tree.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> He oppresseth the barren that beareth
not: and doeth not good to the widow.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> He draweth also the mighty with his
power: he riseth up, and no man is sure of life.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> Though it is given him to be in safety,
on which he resteth; yet his eyes are upon their ways.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> They are exalted for a little while,
but are gone and brought low; they are taken out of the way as all
others, and cut off as the tops of the ears of corn.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And if it is not so now, who will make
me a liar, and make my speech of no worth?

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and
said,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Dominion and fear are with him, he maketh
peace in his high places.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Is there any number of his armies? and
upon whom doth not his light arise?

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> How then can man be justified with God?
or how can he be clean that is born of a woman?

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Behold even to the moon, and it shineth
not; and the stars are not pure in his sight.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> How much less man, that is a worm; and
the son of man, who is a worm?

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> But Job answered and said,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> How hast thou helped him that is without
power? how savest thou the arm that hath no strength?

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> How hast thou counseled him that hath no
wisdom? and how hast thou abundantly declared the thing as it is?

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> To whom hast thou uttered words? and
whose spirit came from thee?

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Dead things are formed from under the
waters, and the inhabitants thereof.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Hell is naked before him, and destruction
hath no covering.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> He stretcheth out the north over the
empty place, and hangeth the earth upon nothing.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> He bindeth up the waters in his thick
clouds; and the cloud is not rent under them.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> He holdeth back the face of his throne,
and spreadeth his cloud upon it.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> He hath encompassed the waters with
bounds, until the day and night come to an end.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> The pillars of heaven tremble and are
astonished at his reproof.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> He divideth the sea by his power, and
by his understanding he smiteth through the proud.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> By his spirit he hath garnished the
heavens; his hand hath formed the crooked serpent.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Lo, these are parts of his ways: but
how little a portion is heard of him? but the thunder of his power who
can understand?

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Moreover, Job continued his parable, and
said,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> As God liveth, who hath taken away my
judgment; and the Almighty who hath afflicted my soul;

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> All the while my breath is in me, and the
spirit of God is in my nostrils;

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor
my tongue utter deceit.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Far be it from me that I should justify
you: till I die I will not remove my integrity from me.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> My righteousness I hold fast, and will
not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Let my enemy be as the wicked, and he
that riseth up against me as the unrighteous.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> For what is the hope of the hypocrite,
though he hath gained, when God taketh away his soul?

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Will God hear his cry when trouble cometh
upon him?

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Will he delight himself in the
Almighty? will he always call upon God?

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> I will teach you by the hand of God:
that which is with the Almighty will I not conceal.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Behold, all ye yourselves have seen it;
why then are ye thus altogether vain?

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> This is the portion of a wicked man
with God, and the heritage of oppressors, which they shall receive of
the Almighty.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> If his children are multiplied, it is
for the sword: and his offspring shall not be satisfied with bread.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Those that remain of him shall be
buried in death: and his widows shall not weep.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Though he should heap up silver as the
dust, and prepare raiment as the clay?

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> He may prepare it, but the just shall
put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> He buildeth his house as a moth, and as
a booth that the keeper maketh.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> The rich man shall lie down, but he
shall not be gathered: he openeth his eyes, and he is not.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Terrors take hold on him as waters, a
tempest stealeth him away in the night.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> The east wind carrieth him away, and he
departeth: and as a storm hurleth him out of his place.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> For God shall cast upon him, and not
spare: he would fain flee out of his hand.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Men shall clap their hands at him, and
shall hiss him out of his place.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Surely there is a vein for the silver,
and a place for gold where they fine it.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Iron is taken out of the earth, and brass
is melted out of the stone.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> He setteth an end to darkness, and
searcheth out all perfection: the stones of darkness, and the shades of
death.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> The flood breaketh out from the
inhabitant: even the waters forgotten by the foot: they are dried up,
they have gone away from men.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> As for the earth, out of it cometh bread:
and under it is turned up as it were fire.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> The stones of it are the place of
sapphires: and it hath dust of gold.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> There is a path which no fowl knoweth,
and which the vultur's eye hath not seen:

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The lion's whelps have not trodden it,
nor the fierce lion passed by it.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> He putteth forth his hand upon the rock;
he overturneth the mountains by the roots.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> He cutteth out rivers among the rocks;
and his eye seeth every precious thing.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> He bindeth the floods from overflowing;
and the thing that is hid he bringeth forth to light.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> But where shall wisdom be found? and
where is the place of understanding?

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Man knoweth not the price of it;
neither is it found in the land of the living.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> The depth saith, It is not in me: and
the sea saith, It is not with me.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> It cannot be obtained for gold, neither
shall silver be weighed for the price of it.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> It cannot be valued with the gold of
Ophir, with the precious onyx, or the sapphire.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> The gold and the crystal cannot equal
it: and the exchange of it shall not be for jewels of fine gold.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> No mention shall be made of coral, or
of pearls: for the price of wisdom is above rubies.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> The topaz of Cush shall not equal it,
neither shall it be valued with pure gold.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Whence then cometh wisdom? and where is
the place of understanding?

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all
living, and kept close from the fowls of the air.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> Destruction and death say, We have
heard the fame of it with our ears.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> God understandeth the way of it, and he
knoweth its place.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> For he looketh to the ends of the
earth, and seeth under the whole heaven;

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> To make the weight for the winds; and
he weigheth the waters by measure.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> When he made a decree for the rain, and
a way for the lightning of the thunder:

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> Then did he see it, and declare it; he
prepared it, yea, and searched it out.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> And to man he said, Behold, the fear of
the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Moreover, Job continued his parable, and
said,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> Oh that I were as in months past, as in
the days when God preserved me;

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> When his candle shined upon my head, and
when by his light I walked through darkness;

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> As I was in the days of my youth, when
the secret of God was upon my tabernacle;

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> When the Almighty was yet with me, when
my children were about me;

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> When I washed my steps with butter, and
the rock poured me out rivers of oil;

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> When I went out to the gate through the
city, when I prepared my seat in the street!

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> The young men saw me, and hid themselves:
and the aged arose, and stood up.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> The princes refrained talking, and laid
their hand on their mouth.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> The nobles held their peace, and their
tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> When the ear heard me, then it blessed
me; and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me:

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> Because I delivered the poor that
cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> The blessing of him that was ready to
perish came upon me: and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> I put on righteousness, and it clothed
me: my judgment was as a robe and a diadem.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I
to the lame.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> I was a father to the poor: and the
cause which I knew not I searched out.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And I broke the jaws of the wicked, and
plucked the spoil out of his teeth.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Then I said, I shall die in my nest,
and I shall multiply my days as the sand.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> My root was spread out by the waters,
and the dew lay all night upon my branch.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> My glory was fresh in me, and my bow
was renewed in my hand.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> To me men gave ear, and waited, and
kept silence at my counsel.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> After my words they spoke not again;
and my speech dropped upon them.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And they waited for me as for the rain;
and they opened their mouth wide as for the latter rain.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> If I laughed on them, they believed it
not; and the light of my countenance they cast not down.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> I chose out their way, and sat chief,
and dwelt as a king in the army, as one that comforteth the mourners.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> But now they that are younger than I,
have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to set with
the dogs of my flock.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Yes, to what might the strength of their
hands profit me, in whom old age had perished?

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For want and famine they were solitary;
fleeing into the wilderness in former time desolate and waste.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> Who cut up mallows by the bushes, and
juniper roots for their food.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> They were driven forth from among men,
(they cried after them, as after a thief;)

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> To dwell in the clefts of the valleys, in
caves of the earth, and in the rocks.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Among the bushes they brayed; under the
nettles they were collected.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> They were children of fools, yes,
children of base men: they were viler than the earth.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> And now I am their song, yes, I am their
by-word.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> They abhor me, they flee far from me,
and spare not to spit in my face.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> Because he hath loosed my cord, and
afflicted me, they have also let loose the bridle before me.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> Upon my right hand rise the youth; they
push away my feet, and they raise up against me the ways of their
destruction.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> They mar my path, they set forward my
calamity, they have no helper.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> They came upon me as a wide breaking in
of waters: in the desolation they rolled themselves upon me.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> Terrors are turned upon me: they pursue
my soul as the wind: and my welfare passeth away as a cloud.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And now my soul is poured out upon me;
the days of affliction have taken hold upon me.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> My bones are pierced in me in the night
season: and my sinews take no rest.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> By the great force of my disease is my
garment changed: it bindeth me about as the collar of my coat.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> He hath cast me into the mire, and I
have become like dust and ashes.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> I cry to thee, and thou dost not hear
me: I stand up, and thou regardest me not.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Thou hast become cruel to me: with thy
strong hand thou opposest thyself against me.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Thou liftest me up to the wind; thou
causest me to ride upon it, and dissolvest my substance.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> For I know that thou wilt bring me to
death, and to the house appointed for all living.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> Yet he will not stretch out his hand to
the grave, though they cry in his destruction.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> Did not I weep for him that was in
trouble? was not my soul grieved for the poor?

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> When I looked for good, then evil came:
and when I waited for light, there came darkness.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> My bowels boiled, and rested not: the
days of affliction came upon me.

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> I went mourning without the sun: I
stood up, and I cried in the congregation.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> I am a brother to dragons, and a
companion to owls.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> My skin is black upon me, and my bones
are burned with heat.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> My harp also is turned to mourning, and
my organ into the voice of them that weep.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> I Made a covenant with my eyes; why then
should I think upon a maid?

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> For what portion of God is there from
above? and what inheritance of the Almighty from on high?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Is not destruction to the wicked? and a
strange punishment to the workers of iniquity?

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Doth not he see my ways, and count all my
steps?

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> If I have walked with vanity, or if my
foot hath hasted to deceit;

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Let me be weighed in an even balance,
that God may know my integrity.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> If my step hath turned out of the way,
and my heart walked after my eyes, and if any blot hath cleaved to my
hands;

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Then let me sow, and let another eat;
yes, let my offspring be rooted out.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> If my heart hath been deceived by a
woman, or if I have laid wait at my neighbor's door;

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Then let my wife grind to another, and
let others bow down upon her.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> For this is a hainous crime; yea, it is
an iniquity to be punished by the judges.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> For it is a fire that consumeth to
destruction, and would root out all my increase.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> If I despised the cause of my
man-servant or of my maid-servant, when they contended with me;

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> What then shall I do when God riseth
up? and when he visiteth, what shall I answer him?

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Did not he that made me in the womb
make him? and did not one fashion us in the womb?

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> If I have withheld the poor from their
desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail;

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> Or have eaten my morsel myself alone,
and the fatherless hath not eaten of it;

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> (For from my youth he was brought up
with me, as with a father, and I have guided her from my mother's womb;)

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> If I have seen any perish for want of
clothing, or any poor without covering;

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> If his loins have not blessed me, and
if he hath not been warmed with the fleece of my sheep;

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> If I have lifted up my hand against the
fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate:

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> Then let my arm fall from my
shoulder-blade, and my arm be broken from the bone.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> For destruction from God was a terror
to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> If I have made gold my hope, or have
said to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence;

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> If I have rejoiced because my wealth
was great, and because my hand had gained much;

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> If I have beheld the sun when it
shined, or the moon walking in brightness;

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> And my heart hath been secretly
enticed, or my mouth hath kissed my hand:

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> This also were an iniquity to be
punished by the judge: for I should have denied the God that is above.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> If I have rejoiced at the destruction
of him that hated me, or have lifted up myself when evil found him:

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Neither have I suffered my mouth to sin
by wishing a curse to his soul.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> If the men of my tabernacle have not
said, Oh that we had of his flesh! we cannot be satisfied.

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> The stranger did not lodge in the
street: but I opened my doors to the traveler.

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> If I have covered my transgressions as
Adam, by hiding my iniquity in my bosom:

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> Did I fear a great multitude, or did
the contempt of families terrify me, that I kept silence, and went not
out of the door?

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> Oh that one would hear me! behold, my
desire is, that the Almighty would answer me, and that my adversary had
written a book.

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> Surely I would take it upon my
shoulder, and bind it as a crown to me.

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> I would declare to him the number of my
steps; as a prince would I go near to him.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> If my land crieth against me, or its
furrows likewise complain;

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> If I have eaten the fruits of it
without money, or have caused its owners to lose their life:

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> Let thistles grow instead of wheat, and
cockle instead of barley. The words of Job are ended.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> So these three men ceased to answer Job,
because he was righteous in his own eyes.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the
son of Barachel the Buzite, of the kindred of Ram: against Job was his
wrath kindled, because he justified himself rather than God.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> Also against his three friends was his
wrath kindled, because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned
Job.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken
because they were older than he.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> When Elihu saw that there was no answer
in the mouth of these three men, then his wrath was kindled.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite
answered and said, I am young, and ye are very old; wherefore I was
afraid, and durst not show you my opinion.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> I said, Days should speak, and multitude
of years should teach wisdom.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> But there is a spirit in man: and the
inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> Great men are not always wise: neither do
the aged understand judgment.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Therefore I said, Hearken to me; I also
will show my opinion.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Behold, I waited for your words; I gave
ear to your reasons, whilst ye searched out what to say.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Yes, I attended to you, and behold,
there was none of you that convinced Job, or that answered his words:

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Lest ye should say, We have found out
wisdom: God thrusteth him down, not man.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Now he hath not directed his words
against me: neither will I answer him with your speeches.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> They were amazed, they answered no
more: they left off speaking.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> When I had waited, (for they spoke not,
but stood still, and answered no more;)

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> I said, I will answer also my part, I
also will show my opinion.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> For I am full of matter, the spirit
within me constraineth me.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> Behold, my belly is as wine which hath
no vent; it is ready to burst like new bottles.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> I will speak, that I may be refreshed:
I will open my lips and answer.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> Let me not, I pray you, accept any
man's person, neither let me give flattering titles to man.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> For I know not to give flattering
titles; in so doing, my Maker would soon take me away.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Wherefore, Job, I pray thee, hear my
speeches, and hearken to all my words.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Behold, now I have opened my mouth, my
tongue hath spoken in my mouth.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> My words shall be of the uprightness of
my heart: and my lips shall utter knowledge clearly.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> The Spirit of God hath made me, and the
breath of the Almighty hath given me life.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> If thou canst answer me, set thy words in
order before me, stand up.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Behold, I am according to thy wish in
God's stead: I also am formed out of the clay.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> Behold, my terror shall not make thee
afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> Surely thou hast spoken in my hearing,
and I have heard the voice of thy words, saying,

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> I am clean without transgression, I am
innocent; neither is there iniquity in me.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Behold, he findeth occasions against
me, he counteth me for his enemy,

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> He putteth my feet in the stocks, he
marketh all my paths.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Behold, in this thou art not just: I
will answer thee, that God is greater than man.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Why dost thou strive against him? for
he giveth not account of any of his matters.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> For God speaketh once, yes twice, yet
man perceiveth it not.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> In a dream, in a vision of the night,
when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed;

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> Then he openeth the ears of men, and
sealeth their instruction,

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> That he may withdraw man from his
purpose, and hide pride from man.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> He keepeth back his soul from the pit,
and his life from perishing by the sword.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> He is chastened also with pain upon his
bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain:

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> So that his life abhorreth bread, and
his soul dainty food.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> His flesh is consumed away, that it
cannot be seen; and his bones that were not seen stick out.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> Yes, his soul draweth near to the
grave, and his life to the destroyers.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> If there is a messenger with him, an
interpreter, one among a thousand, to show to man his uprightness:

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Then he is gracious to him, and saith,
Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have found a ransom.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> His flesh shall be fresher than a
child's: he will return to the days of his youth:

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> He shall pray to God, and he will be
favorable to him: and he shall see his face with joy: for he will render
to man his righteousness.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> He looketh upon men, and if any shall
say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited
me not;

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> He will deliver his soul from going
into the pit, and his life shall see the light.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Lo, all these things God often worketh
with man,

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> To bring back his soul from the pit, to
be enlightened with the light of the living.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> Mark well, O Job, hearken to me: hold
thy peace, and I will speak.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> If thou hast any thing to say, answer
me: speak, for I desire to justify thee.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> If not, hearken to me: hold thy peace,
and I shall teach thee wisdom.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> Furthermore Elihu answered and said,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Hear my words, O ye wise men; and give
ear to me, ye that have knowledge.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> For the ear trieth words, as the mouth
tasteth food.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> Let us choose to us judgment: let us know
among ourselves what is good.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> For Job hath said, I am righteous: and
God hath taken away my judgment.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> Should I lie against my right? my wound
is incurable without transgression.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> What man is like Job, who drinketh up
scorning like water?

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> Who goeth in company with the workers of
iniquity, and walketh with wicked men.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> For he hath said, It profiteth a man
nothing that he should delight himself with God.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> Therefore hearken to me, ye men of
understanding: far be it from God, that he should do wickedness; and
from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> For the work of a man he shall render
to him, and cause every man to find according to his ways.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> Yes, surely God will not do wickedly,
neither will the Almighty pervert judgment.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> Who hath given him a charge over the
earth? or who hath disposed the whole world?

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> If he should set his heart upon man, if
he should gather to himself his spirit and his breath;

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> All flesh would perish together, and
man would turn again to dust.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> If now thou hast understanding, hear
this: hearken to the voice of my words.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> Shall even he that hateth right govern?
and wilt thou condemn him that is most just?

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Is it fit to say to a king, Thou art
wicked? and to princes, Ye are ungodly?

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> How much less to him that accepteth not
the persons of princes, nor regardeth the rich more than the poor? for
they all are the work of his hands.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> In a moment they shall die, and the
people shall be troubled at midnight, and pass away: and the mighty
shall be taken away without hand.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> For his eyes are upon the ways of man,
and he seeth all his goings.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> There is no darkness, nor shadow of
death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> For he will not lay upon man more than
right; that he should enter into judgment with God.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> He shall break in pieces mighty men
without number, and set others in their stead.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> Therefore he knoweth their works, and
he overturneth them in the night, so that they are destroyed.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> He striketh them as wicked men in the
open sight of others;

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> Because they turned back from him, and
would not consider any of his ways:

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> So that they cause the cry of the poor
to come to him, and he heareth the cry of the afflicted.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> When he giveth quietness, who then can
make trouble? and when he hideth his face, who then can behold him?
whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only:

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> That the hypocrite may not reign, lest
the people should be ensnared.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> Surely it is meet to be said to God, I
have borne chastisement, I will not offend any more:

<span id="an_34:32">34:32</span> That which I see not teach thou me: if
I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

<span id="an_34:33">34:33</span> Should it be according to thy mind? he
will recompense it, whether thou shalt refuse, or whether thou shalt
choose; and not I: therefore speak what thou knowest.

<span id="an_34:34">34:34</span> Let men of understanding tell me, and
let a wise man hearken to me.

<span id="an_34:35">34:35</span> Job hath spoken without knowledge, and
his words were without wisdom.

<span id="an_34:36">34:36</span> My desire is that Job may be tried to
the end, because of his answers for wicked men.

<span id="an_34:37">34:37</span> For he addeth rebellion to his sin, he
clappeth his hands among us, and multiplieth his words against God.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> Elihu spoke moreover, and said,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Thinkest thou this to be right, that thou
saidst, My righteousness is more than God's?

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> For thou saidst, What advantage will it
be to thee? and, What profit shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin?

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> I will answer thee, and thy companions
with thee.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Look to the heavens, and see; and behold
the clouds which are higher than thou.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> If thou sinnest, what doest thou against
him? or if thy transgressions are multiplied, what doest thou to him?

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> If thou art righteous, what givest thou
to him? or what receiveth he from thy hand?

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou
art: and thy righteousness may profit the son of man.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> By reason of the multitude of oppressions
they make the oppressed to cry: they cry out by reason of the arm of the
mighty.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> But none saith, Where is God my maker,
who giveth songs in the night;

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> Who teacheth us more than the beasts of
the earth, and maketh us wiser than the fowls of heaven?

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> There they cry, but none giveth answer,
because of the pride of evil men.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> Surely God will not hear vanity,
neither will the Almighty regard it.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Although thou sayest thou shalt not see
him, yet judgment is before him; therefore trust thou in him.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> But now, because it is not so, he hath
visited in his anger; yet he knoweth it not in great extremity:

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> Therefore doth Job open his mouth in
vain; he multiplieth words without knowledge.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> Elihu also proceeded, and said,

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Suffer me a little, and I will show thee
that I have yet to speak on God's behalf.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> I will bring my knowledge from afar, and
will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> For truly my words shall not be false: he
that is perfect in knowledge is with thee.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Behold, God is mighty, and despiseth not
any: he is mighty in strength and wisdom.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> He preserveth not the life of the wicked:
but giveth right to the poor.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> He withdraweth not his eyes from the
righteous: but with kings are they on the throne; yes, he doth establish
them for ever, and they are exalted.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And if they are bound in fetters, and are
held in cords of affliction;

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> Then he showeth them their work, and
their transgressions that they have exceeded.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> He openeth also their ear to
discipline, and commandeth that they return from iniquity.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> If they obey and serve him, they shall
spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> But if they obey not, they shall perish
by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> But the hypocrites in heart heap up
wrath: they cry not when he bindeth them.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> They die in youth, and their life is
among the unclean.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> He delivereth the poor in his
affliction, and openeth their ears in oppression.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Even so would he have removed thee out
of the strait into a broad place, where there is no straitness; and that
which should be set on thy table would be full of fatness.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> But thou hast fulfilled the judgment of
the wicked: judgment and justice take hold on thee.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Because there is wrath, beware lest he
take thee away with his stroke: then a great ransom cannot deliver thee.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> Will he esteem thy riches? no, not
gold, nor all the forces of strength.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> Desire not the night, when people are
cut off in their place.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> Take heed, regard not iniquity: for
this hast thou chosen rather than affliction.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Behold, God exalteth by his power: who
teacheth like him?

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> Who hath enjoined him his way? or who
can say, Thou hast wrought iniquity?

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> Remember that thou magnify his work,
which men behold.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> Every man may see it; man may behold it
afar off.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> Behold, God is great, and we know him
not, neither can the number of his years be searched out.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> For he maketh small the drops of water:
they pour down rain according to the vapor of it.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> Which the clouds do drop and distill
upon man abundantly.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> Also can any understand the spreadings
of the clouds, or the noise of his tabernacle?

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> Behold, he spreadeth his light upon it,
and covereth the bottom of the sea.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> For by them he judgeth the people; he
giveth food in abundance.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> With clouds he covereth the light; and
commandeth it not to shine by the intervening cloud.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> The noise of it showeth concerning it,
the cattle also concerning the vapor.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> At this also my heart trembleth, and is
moved out of its place.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> Hear attentively the noise of his voice,
and the sound that goeth out of his mouth.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> He directeth it under the whole heaven,
and his lightning to the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> After it a voice roareth: he thundereth
with the voice of his excellence; and he will not stay them when his
voice is heard.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> God thundereth marvelously with his
voice; great things he doeth, which we cannot comprehend.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> For he saith to the snow, Be thou on the
earth; likewise to the small rain, and to the great rain of his
strength.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> He sealeth up the hand of every man; that
all men may know his work.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> Then the beasts go into dens, and remain
in their places.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> From the south cometh the whirlwind: and
cold from the north.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> By the breath of God frost is given:
and the breadth of the waters is straitened.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Also by watering he wearieth the thick
cloud: he scattereth his bright cloud:

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> And it is turned around by his
counsels: that they may do whatever he commandeth them upon the face of
the world on the earth.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> He causeth it to come, whether for
correction, or for his land, or for mercy.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> Hearken to this, O Job: stand still,
and consider the wondrous works of God.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> Dost thou know when God disposed them,
and caused the light of his cloud to shine?

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> Dost thou know the balancings of the
clouds, the wondrous works of him who is perfect in knowledge?

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> How thy garments are warm, when he
quieteth the earth by the south wind?

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> Hast thou with him spread out the sky
which is strong, and as a molten looking-glass?

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Teach us what we shall say to him; for
we cannot order our speech by reason of darkness.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> Shall it be told him that I speak? If a
man shall speak, surely he will be swallowed up.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And now men see not the bright light
which is in the clouds: but the wind passeth, and cleanseth them.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> Fair weather cometh from the north:
with God is terrible majesty.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> Touching the Almighty, we cannot find
him out: he is excellent in power, and in judgment, and in abundance of
justice: he will not afflict.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> Men therefore fear him: he respecteth
not any that are wise of heart.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> Then the LORD answered Job out of the
whirlwind, and said,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Who is this that darkeneth counsel by
words without knowledge?

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I
will demand of thee, and answer thou me.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> Where wast thou when I laid the
foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Who hath laid the measures of it, if thou
knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it?

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> Upon what are the foundations of it
fastened? or who laid its corner stone;

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> When the morning stars sang together, and
all the sons of God shouted for joy?

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> Or who shut up the sea with doors, when
it broke forth, as if it had issued out of the womb?

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> When I made a cloud its garment, and
thick darkness a swaddling band for it,

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> And broke up for it my decreed place,
and set bars and doors,

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> And said, Hitherto shalt thou come, but
no further: and here shall thy proud waves be stayed.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> Hast thou commanded the morning since
thy days; and caused the day-spring to know its place;

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> That it might take hold of the ends of
earth, that the wicked might be shaken out of it?

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> It is turned as clay to the seal; and
they stand as a garment.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And from the wicked their light is
withheld, and the high arm shall be broken.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> Hast thou entered into the springs of
the sea? or hast thou walked in the search of the depth?

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Have the gates of death been opened to
thee? or hast thou seen the doors of the shades of death?

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> Hast thou perceived the breadth of the
earth? declare if thou knowest it all.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> Where is the way where light dwelleth?
and as for darkness, where is its place,

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> That thou shouldest take it to its
bound, and that thou shouldest know the paths to its house?

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> Knowest thou it, because thou wast then
born? or because the number of thy days is great?

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> Hast thou entered into the treasures of
the snow? or hast thou seen the treasures of the hail,

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> Which I have reserved against the time
of trouble, against the day of battle and war?

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> By what way is the light parted, which
scattereth the east wind upon the earth?

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> Who hath divided a watercourse for the
overflowing of waters, or a way for the lightning of thunder;

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> To cause it to rain on the earth, where
no man is; on the wilderness in which there is no man;

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> To satisfy the desolate and waste
ground; and to cause the bud of the tender herb to spring forth?

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> Hath the rain a father? or who hath
begotten the drops of the dew?

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> Out of whose womb came the ice? and the
hoary frost of heaven, who hath gendered it?

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> The waters are hid as with a stone, and
the face of the deep is frozen.

<span id="an_38:31">38:31</span> Canst thou bind the sweet influences of
Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?

<span id="an_38:32">38:32</span> Canst thou bring forth Mazzaroth in its
season? or canst thou guide Arcturus with its sons?

<span id="an_38:33">38:33</span> Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven?
canst thou set its dominion on the earth?

<span id="an_38:34">38:34</span> Canst thou lift thy voice to the
clouds, that abundance of waters may cover thee?

<span id="an_38:35">38:35</span> Canst thou send lightnings, that they
may go, and say to thee, Here we are?

<span id="an_38:36">38:36</span> Who hath put wisdom in the inward
parts? or who hath given understanding to the heart?

<span id="an_38:37">38:37</span> Who can number the clouds in wisdom? or
who can stay the bottles of heaven,

<span id="an_38:38">38:38</span> When the dust groweth into hardness,
and the clods cleave fast together?

<span id="an_38:39">38:39</span> Wilt thou hunt the prey for the lion?
or fill the appetite of the young lions,

<span id="an_38:40">38:40</span> When they couch in their dens, and
abide in the covert to lie in wait?

<span id="an_38:41">38:41</span> Who provideth for the raven his food?
when his young ones cry to God, they wander for want of food.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> Knowest thou the time when the wild goats
of the rock bring forth? or canst thou mark when the hinds do calve?

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> Canst thou number the months that they
fulfill? or knowest thou the time when they bring forth?

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> They bow themselves, they bring forth
their young ones, they cast out their sorrows.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> Their young ones are in good liking, they
grow up with corn; they go forth, and return not to them.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> Who hath sent out the wild ass free? or
who hath loosed the bands of the wild ass?

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> Whose house I have made the wilderness,
and the barren land his dwellings.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> He scorneth the multitude of the city,
neither regardeth he the crying of the driver.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> The range of the mountains is his
pasture, and he searcheth after every green thing.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> Will the unicorn be willing to serve
thee, or abide by thy crib?

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> Canst thou bind the unicorn with his
band in the furrow? or will he harrow the valleys after thee?

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> Wilt thou trust him, because his
strength is great? or wilt thou leave thy labor to him?

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> Wilt thou believe him, that he will
bring home thy seed, and gather it into thy barn?

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> Gavest thou the goodly wings to the
peacocks? or wings and feathers to the ostrich!

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> Which leaveth her eggs in the earth,
and warmeth them in the dust,

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And forgetteth that the foot may crush
them, or that the wild beast may break them.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> She is hardened against her young ones,
as though they were not hers: her labor is in vain without fear;

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> Because God hath withheld wisdom from
her, neither hath he imparted to her understanding.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> When she lifteth herself on high, she
scorneth the horse and his rider.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> Hast thou given the horse strength?
hast thou clothed his neck with thunder?

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> Canst thou make him afraid as a
grasshopper? the glory of his nostrils is terrible.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth
in his strength: he goeth on to meet the armed men.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> He mocketh at fear, and is not
affrighted; neither turneth he back from the sword.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> The quiver rattleth against him, the
glittering spear and the shield.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> He swalloweth the ground with
fierceness and rage: neither believeth he that it is the sound of the
trumpet.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> He saith among the trumpets, Ha, ha;
and he smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and
the shouting.

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> Doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom, and
stretch her wings towards the south?

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> Doth the eagle mount up at thy command,
and make her nest on high?

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> She dwelleth and abideth on the rock,
upon the crag of the rock, and the strong place.

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> From thence she seeketh the prey, and
her eyes behold afar off.

<span id="an_39:30">39:30</span> Her young ones also suck up blood: and
where the slain are, there is she.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> Moreover, the LORD answered Job, and
said,

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> Shall he that contendeth with the
Almighty instruct him? he that reproveth God, let him answer it.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> Then Job answered the LORD, and said,

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> Behold, I am vile; what shall I answer
thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> Once have I spoken; but I will not
answer: yes, twice; but I will proceed no further.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> Then the LORD answered Job out of the
whirlwind, and said,

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> Gird up thy loins now like a man: I will
demand of thee, and declare thou to me.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> Wilt thou also disannul my judgment? wilt
thou condemn me, that thou mayest be righteous?

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> Hast thou an arm like God? or canst thou
thunder with a voice like his?

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> Deck thyself now with majesty and
excellence; and array thyself with glory and beauty.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: and
behold every one that is proud, and abase him.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> Look on every one that is proud, and
bring him low; and tread down the wicked in their place.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> Hide them in the dust together; bind
their faces in secret.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> Then will I also confess to thee that
thy own right hand can save thee.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> Behold now behemoth, which I made with
thee; he eateth grass as an ox.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> Lo now, his strength is in his loins,
and his force is in the navel of his belly.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> He moveth his tail like a cedar: the
sinews of his male organs are wrapped together.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> His bones are as strong pieces of
brass; his bones are like bars of iron.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> He is the chief of the ways of God: he
that made him can make his sword to approach him.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> Surely the mountains bring him forth
food, where all the beasts of the field play.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> He lieth under the shady trees, in the
covert of the reed, and fens.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> The shady trees cover him with their
shadow; the willows of the brook encompass him.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> Behold, he drinketh up a river, and
hasteth not: he trusteth that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> He taketh it with his eyes: his nose
pierceth through snares.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> Canst thou draw out leviathan with a
hook? or his tongue with a cord which thou lettest down?

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> Canst thou put a hook into his nose? or
bore his jaw through with a thorn?

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> Will he make many supplications to thee?
will he speak soft words to thee?

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> Will he make a covenant with thee? wilt
thou take him for a servant for ever?

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> Wilt thou play with him as with a bird?
or wilt thou bind him for thy maidens?

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> Shall the companions make a banquet of
him? shall they part him among the merchants.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> Canst thou fill his skin with barbed
irons? or his head with fish spears?

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> Lay thy hand upon him, remember the
battle, do no more.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> Behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall
not one be cast down even at the sight of him?

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> None is so fierce that he dare rouse
him: who then is able to stand before me?

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> Who hath first benefited me, that I
should repay him? whatever is under the whole heaven is mine.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> I will not conceal his parts, nor his
power, nor his comely proportion.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> Who can discover the face of his
garment? or who can come to him with his double bridle?

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> Who can open the doors of his face? his
teeth are terrible around.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> His scales are his pride, shut together
as with a close seal.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> One is so near to another, that no air
can come between them.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> They are joined one to another, they
stick together, that they cannot be sundered.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> His sneezings flash light, and his eyes
are like the eyelids of the morning.

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and
sparks of fire dart forth.

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> Out of his nostrils issueth smoke, as
out of a seething pot or caldron.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> His breath kindleth coals, and a flame
issueth from his mouth.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> In his neck remaineth strength, and
sorrow is turned into joy before him.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> The flakes of his flesh are joined
together: they are firm in themselves; they cannot be moved.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> His heart is as firm as a stone; yes,
as hard as a piece of the nether millstone.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> When he raiseth himself, the mighty are
afraid: by reason of breakings they purify themselves.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> The sword of him that attacketh him
cannot hold: the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon.

<span id="an_41:27">41:27</span> He esteemeth iron as straw, and brass
as rotten wood.

<span id="an_41:28">41:28</span> The arrow cannot make him flee:
sling-stones are turned with him into stubble.

<span id="an_41:29">41:29</span> Darts are counted as stubble: he
laugheth at the shaking of a spear.

<span id="an_41:30">41:30</span> Sharp stones are under him: he
spreadeth sharp pointed things upon the mire.

<span id="an_41:31">41:31</span> He maketh the deep to boil like a pot:
he maketh the sea like a pot of ointment.

<span id="an_41:32">41:32</span> He maketh a path to shine after him;
one would think the deep to be hoary.

<span id="an_41:33">41:33</span> Upon earth there is not his like, who
is made without fear.

<span id="an_41:34">41:34</span> He beholdeth all high things: he is a
king over all the children of pride.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> Then Job answered the LORD, and said,

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> I know that thou canst do every thing,
and that no thought can be withheld from thee.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> Who is he that hideth counsel without
knowledge? therefore have I uttered that which I understood not; things
too wonderful for me, which I knew not.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I
will ask of thee, and declare thou to me.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> I have heard of thee by the hearing of
the ear: but now my eye seeth thee.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in
dust and ashes.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And it was so, that after the LORD had
spoken these words to Job, the LORD said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My
wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have
not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job hath.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> Therefore take to you now seven bullocks
and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer for yourselves a
burnt-offering; and my servant Job shall pray for you: for him will I
accept: lest I deal with you after your folly, in that ye have not
spoken of me the thing which is right, like my servant Job.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the
Shuhite and Zophar the Naamathite went, and did according as the LORD
commanded them: the LORD also accepted Job.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> And the LORD turned the captivity of
Job, when he prayed for his friends: also the LORD gave Job twice as
much as he had before.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> Then came there to him all his
brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his
acquaintance before, and ate bread with him in his house: and they
condoled with him, and comforted him over all the evil that the LORD had
brought upon him: every man also gave him a piece of money, and every
one an ear-ring of gold.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> So the LORD blessed the latter end of
Job more than his beginning: for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six
thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she asses.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> He had also seven sons, and three
daughters.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> And he called the name of the first,
Jemima; and the name of the second, Kezia; and the name of the third,
Keren-happuch.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> And in all the land were no women found
so fair as the daughters of Job: and their father gave them inheritance
among their brethren.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> After this Job lived a hundred and
forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons, even four
generations.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> So Job died, being old and full of
days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms](psa)
