[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](exo)  [Next](num.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Leviticus

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And the LORD called to Moses, and spoke to
him out of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel, and say to
them, If any man of you shall bring an offering to the LORD, ye shall
bring your offering of the cattle, even of the herd, and of the flock.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> If his offering shall be a burnt-sacrifice
of the herd, let him offer a male without blemish: he shall offer it of
his own voluntary will at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation
before the LORD.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And he shall put his hand upon the head of
the burnt-offering; and it shall be accepted for him to make atonement
for him.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And he shall kill the bullock before the
LORD: and the priests, Aaron's sons, shall bring the blood, and sprinkle
the blood around upon the altar that is by the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And he shall flay the burnt-offering, and
cut it into its pieces,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put
fire upon the altar, and lay the wood in order upon the fire.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And the priests, Aaron's sons, shall lay
the parts, the head, and the fat, in order upon the wood that is on the
fire which is upon the altar.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> But his inwards and his legs shall he wash
in water: and the priest shall burn all on the altar, to be a
burnt-sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to the LORD.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And if his offering be of the flocks,
namely, of the sheep, or of the goats, for a burnt-sacrifice; he shall
bring it a male without blemish.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And he shall kill it on the side of the
altar northward before the LORD: and the priests, Aaron's sons, shall
sprinkle his blood around upon the altar:

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And he shall cut it into its pieces, with
its head and its fat: and the priest shall lay them in order on the wood
that is on the fire which is upon the altar:

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> But he shall wash the inwards and the
legs with water: and the priest shall bring it all, and burn it upon the
altar: it is a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet
savor to the LORD.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And if the burnt sacrifice for his
offering to the LORD shall be of fowls, then he shall bring his offering
of turtle doves, or of young pigeons.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And the priest shall bring it to the
altar, and wring off its head, and burn it on the altar: and its blood
shall be wrung out at the side of the altar:

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And he shall pluck away its crop with its
feathers, and cast it beside the altar on the east part, by the place of
the ashes:

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And he shall cleave it with its wings,
but shall not divide it asunder: and the priest shall burn it upon the
altar, upon the wood that is upon the fire: it is a burnt sacrifice, an
offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to the LORD.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And when any will offer a meat-offering to
the LORD, his offering shall be of fine flour; and he shall pour oil
upon it, and put frankincense upon it.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And he shall bring it to Aaron's sons the
priests: and he shall take out of it his handful of its flour, and of
its oil, with all its frankincense; and the priest shall burn the
memorial of it upon the altar, to be an offering made by fire, of a
sweet savor to the LORD:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And the remnant of the meat-offering shall
be Aaron's and his sons': it is a thing most holy of the offerings of
the LORD made by fire.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And if thou shalt bring an oblation of a
meat-offering baked in the oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine
flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers anointed with oil.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And if thy oblation shall be a
meat-offering baked in a pan, it shall be of fine flour unleavened,
mingled with oil.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Thou shalt part it in pieces, and pour oil
upon it: it is a meat-offering.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And if thy oblation shall be a
meat-offering baked in the frying-pan, it shall be made of fine flour
with oil.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And thou shalt bring the meat-offering that
is made of these things to the LORD: and when it is presented to the
priest, he shall bring it to the altar.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And the priest shall take from the
meat-offering a memorial of it, and shall burn it upon the altar: it is
an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to the LORD.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And that which is left of the
meat-offering shall be Aaron's and his sons': it is a thing most holy,
of the offerings of the LORD made by fire.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> No meat-offering which ye shall bring to
the LORD shall be made with leaven: for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any
honey, in any offering of the LORD made by fire.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> As for the oblation of the first-fruits,
ye shall offer them to the LORD: but they shall not be burnt on the
altar for a sweet savor.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And every oblation of thy meat-offering
shalt thou season with salt: neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the
covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat-offering: with all thy
offerings thou shalt offer salt.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And if thou shalt offer a meat-offering
of thy first-fruits to the LORD, thou shalt offer for the meat-offering
of thy first-fruits, green ears of corn dried by the fire, even corn
beaten out of full ears.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay
frankincense upon it: it is a meat-offering.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And the priest shall burn the memorial of
it, part of its beaten corn, and part of its oil, with all its
frankincense: it is an offering made by fire to the LORD.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And if his oblation shall be a sacrifice of
peace-offering, if he shall offer it of the herd, whether a male or
female; he shall offer it without blemish before the LORD.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head of
his offering, and kill it at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation: and Aaron's sons the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon
the altar round about.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the
peace-offering, an offering made by fire to the LORD; the fat that
covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on
them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the
kidneys, it shall he take away.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And Aaron's sons shall burn it on the
altar, upon the burnt-sacrifice which is upon the wood that is on the
fire: it is an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to the LORD.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And if his offering for a sacrifice of
peace-offering to the LORD shall be of the flock, male or female; he
shall offer it without blemish.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> If he shall offer a lamb for his offering,
then shall he offer it before the LORD.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head of
his offering, and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and
Aaron's sons shall sprinkle the blood of it around upon the altar.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the
peace-offering an offering made by fire to the LORD: its fat, and the
whole rump, that shall he take off hard by the back-bone; and the fat
that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And the two kidneys, and the fat that is
upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with
the kidneys, that shall he take away.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And the priest shall burn it upon the
altar: it is the food of the offering made by fire to the LORD.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And if his offering shall be a goat, then
he shall offer it before the LORD.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head
of it, and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and the
sons of Aaron shall sprinkle its blood upon the altar round about.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And he shall offer of it his offering,
even an offering made by fire to the LORD; the fat that covereth the
inwards, and all the fat that is upon the inwards,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And the two kidneys, and the fat that is
upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with
the kidneys, that shall he take away.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And the priest shall burn them upon the
altar: it is the food of the offering made by fire for a sweet savor:
all the fat is the LORD'S.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> It shall be a perpetual statute for your
generations throughout all your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor
blood.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel, saying, If
a soul shall sin through ignorance against any of the commandments of
the LORD concerning things which ought not to be done, and shall violate
any of them:

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> If the priest that is anointed shall sin
according to the sin of the people; then let him bring, for his sin
which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish to the LORD for a
sin-offering.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And he shall bring the bullock to the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation before the LORD; and shall lay his
hand upon the bullock's head, and kill the bullock before the LORD.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And the priest that is anointed shall take
of the bullock's blood, and bring it to the tabernacle of the
congregation:

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And the priest shall dip his finger in the
blood, and sprinkle of the blood seven times before the LORD, before the
vail of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And the priest shall put some of the blood
upon the horns of the altar of sweet incense before the LORD, which is
in the tabernacle of the congregation; and shall pour all the blood of
the bullock at the bottom of the altar of the burnt-offering, which is
at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And he shall take off from it all the fat
of the bullock for the sin-offering; the fat that covereth the inwards,
and all the fat that is upon the inwards,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And the two kidneys, and the fat that is
upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with
the kidneys, that shall he take away,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> As it was taken off from the bullock of
the sacrifice of peace-offerings: and the priest shall burn them upon
the altar of the burnt-offering.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And the skin of the bullock, and all his
flesh, with his head, and with his legs, and his inwards, and his dung,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Even the whole bullock shall he carry
forth without the camp to a clean place, where the ashes are poured out,
and burn him on the wood with fire: where the ashes are poured out shall
he be burnt.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And if the whole congregation of Israel
shall sin through ignorance, and the thing be hid from the eyes of the
assembly, and they have done somewhat against any of the commandments of
the LORD concerning things which should not be done, and are guilty;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> When the sin which they have sinned
against it is known, then the congregation shall offer a young bullock
for the sin, and bring him before the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And the elders of the congregation shall
lay their hands upon the head of the bullock before the LORD: and the
bullock shall be killed before the LORD.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And the priest that is anointed shall
bring of the bullock's blood to the tabernacle of the congregation:

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And the priest shall dip his finger in
some of the blood, and sprinkle it seven times before the LORD, even
before the vail.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And he shall put some of the blood upon
the horns of the altar which is before the LORD, that is in the
tabernacle of the congregation, and shall pour out all the blood at the
bottom of the altar of the burnt-offering, which is at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And he shall take all his fat from him,
and burn it upon the altar.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And he shall do with the bullock as he
did with the bullock for a sin-offering, so shall he do with this: and
the priest shall make an atonement for them, and it shall be forgiven
them.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And he shall carry forth the bullock
without the camp, and burn him as he burned the first bullock: it is a
sin-offering for the congregation.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> When a ruler hath sinned, and done
somewhat through ignorance against any of the commandments of the LORD
his God concerning things which should not be done, and is guilty;

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Or if his sin, in which he hath sinned,
shall come to his knowledge; he shall bring his offering, a kid of the
goats, a male without blemish:

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head
of the goat, and kill it in the place where they kill the burnt-offering
before the LORD: it is a sin-offering.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And the priest shall take of the blood of
the sin-offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar
of burnt-offering, and shall pour out his blood at the bottom of the
altar of burnt-offering.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And he shall burn all his fat upon the
altar, as the fat of the sacrifice of peace-offerings: and the priest
shall make an atonement for him as concerning his sin, and it shall be
forgiven him.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And if any one of the common people shall
sin through ignorance, while he doeth somewhat against any of the
commandments of the LORD concerning things which ought not to be done,
and be guilty;

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> Or if his sin which he hath sinned shall
come to his knowledge: then he shall bring his offering, a kid of the
goats, a female without blemish, for his sin which he hath sinned.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head
of the sin-offering, and slay the sin-offering in the place of the
burnt-offering.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And the priest shall take of the blood of
it with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of
burnt-offering, and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom
of the altar.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And he shall take away all its fat, as
the fat is taken away from off the sacrifice of peace-offerings; and the
priest shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savor to the LORD; and
the priest shall make an atonement for him, and it shall be forgiven
him.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And if he shall bring a lamb for a
sin-offering, he shall bring it a female without blemish.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head
of the sin-offering, and slay it for a sin-offering in the place where
they kill the burnt-offering.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> And the priest shall take of the blood of
the sin-offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar
of burnt-offering, and shall pour out all the blood of it at the bottom
of the altar:

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And he shall take away all its fat, as
the fat of the lamb is taken away from the sacrifice of the
peace-offerings; and the priest shall burn them upon the altar,
according to the offerings made by fire to the LORD: and the priest
shall make an atonement for his sin that he hath committed, and it shall
be forgiven him.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And if a soul shall sin, and hear the voice
of swearing, and be a witness, whether he hath seen or known of it; if
he doth not utter it, then he shall bear his iniquity.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Or if a soul shall touch any unclean thing,
whether a carcass of an unclean beast, or a carcass of unclean cattle,
or the carcass of unclean creeping animals, and it shall be hidden from
him; he also shall be unclean, and guilty.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Or if he shall touch the uncleanness of
man, whatever uncleanness it may be that a man shall be defiled with,
and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Or if a soul shall swear, pronouncing with
his lips to do evil, or to do good, whatever it may be, that a man shall
pronounce with an oath, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it,
then he shall be guilty in one of these.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in
one of these things, that he shall confess that he hath sinned in that
thing:

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And he shall bring his trespass-offering to
the LORD for his sin which he hath sinned, a female from the flock, a
lamb or a kid of the goats, for a sin-offering; and the priest shall
make an atonement for him concerning his sin.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And if he shall not be able to bring a
lamb, then he shall bring for his trespass which he hath committed, two
turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, to the LORD; one for a sin-offering,
and the other for a burnt-offering.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And he shall bring them to the priest, who
shall offer that which is for the sin-offering first, and wring off his
head from his neck, but shall not divide it asunder:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And he shall sprinkle of the blood of the
sin-offering upon the side of the altar; and the rest of the blood shall
be wrung out at the bottom of the altar: it is a sin-offering.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And he shall offer the second for a
burnt-offering, according to the manner: and the priest shall make an
atonement for him for his sin which he hath sinned, and it shall be
forgiven him.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But if he shall not be able to bring two
turtle-doves, or two young pigeons; then he that sinned shall bring for
his offering the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a
sin-offering; he shall put no oil upon it, neither shall he put any
frankincense upon it: for it is a sin-offering.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Then shall he bring it to the priest, and
the priest shall take his handful of it, even a memorial of it, and burn
it on the altar, according to the offerings made by fire to the LORD: it
is a sin-offering.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And the priest shall make an atonement
for him as concerning his sin that he hath sinned in one of these, and
it shall be forgiven him: and the remnant shall be the priest's, as a
meat-offering.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> If a soul shall commit a trespass, and
sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the LORD; then he shall
bring for his trespass to the LORD a ram without blemish out of the
flocks, with thy estimation by shekels of silver, after the shekel of
the sanctuary, for a trespass-offering:

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And he shall make amends for the harm
that he hath done in the holy thing, and shall add to it the fifth part,
and give it to the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for
him with the ram of the trespass-offering, and it shall be forgiven him.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And if a soul shall sin, and commit any
of these things which are forbidden to be done by the commandments of
the LORD; though he knew it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his
iniquity.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And he shall bring a ram without blemish
out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass-offering to the
priest; and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his
ignorance wherein he erred and knew it not, and it shall be forgiven
him.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> It is a trespass-offering: he hath
certainly trespassed against the LORD.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> If a soul shall sin, and commit a trespass
against the LORD, and lie to his neighbor, in that which was delivered
him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken away by violence, or
hath deceived his neighbor;

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Or hath found that which was lost, and
lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsely; in any of all these that a
man doeth, sinning therein:

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Then it shall be, because he hath sinned,
and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he took by force, or the
thing which he obtained by deceit, or that which was delivered him to
keep, or the lost thing which he found,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Or all that about which he hath sworn
falsely; he shall even restore it in the principal, and shall add to it
the fifth part more, and give it to him to whom it appertaineth, in the
day of his trespass-offering.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And he shall bring his trespass-offering to
the LORD, a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation,
for a trespass-offering, to the priest:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the priest shall make an atonement for
him before the LORD: and it shall be forgiven him for any thing of all
that he hath done in trespassing therein.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Command Aaron and his sons, saying, This is
the law of the burnt-offering: It is the burnt-offering, because of the
burning upon the altar all night until the morning, and the fire of the
altar shall be burning in it.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And the priest shall put on his linen
garment, and his linen breeches shall he put upon his flesh, and take up
the ashes which the fire hath consumed with the burnt-offering on the
altar, and he shall put them beside the altar.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And he shall put off his garments, and
put on other garments, and carry forth the ashes without the camp to a
clean place.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And the fire upon the altar shall be
burning on it; it shall not be extinguished: and the priest shall burn
wood on it every morning, and lay the burnt-offering in order upon it;
and he shall burn on it the fat of the peace-offerings.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> The fire shall ever be burning upon the
altar; it shall never go out.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And this is the law of the meat-offering:
the sons of Aaron shall offer it before the LORD, before the altar.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And he shall take of it his handful, of
the flour of the meat-offering, and of the oil thereof, and all the
frankincense which is upon the meat-offering, and shall burn it upon the
altar for a sweet savor, even the memorial of it, to the LORD.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And the remainder of it shall Aaron and
his sons eat: with unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place;
in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> It shall not be baked with leaven. I have
given it to them for their portion of my offerings made by fire; It is
most holy, as is the sin-offering, and as the trespass-offering.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> All the males among the children of Aaron
shall eat of it. It shall be a statute for ever in your generations
concerning the offerings of the LORD made by fire: every one that
toucheth them shall be holy.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> This is the offering of Aaron and of his
sons, which they shall offer to the LORD in the day when he is anointed;
the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meat-offering perpetual,
half of it in the morning, and half of it at night.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> In a pan it shall be made with oil; and
when it is baked, thou shalt bring it in: and the baked pieces of the
meat-offering shalt thou offer for a sweet savor to the LORD.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And the priest of his sons that is
anointed in his stead shall offer it: it is a statute for ever to the
LORD; it shall be wholly burnt.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For every meat-offering for the priest
shall be wholly burnt: it shall not be eaten.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Speak to Aaron and to his sons, saying,
This is the law of the sin-offering: In the place where the
burnt-offering is killed shall the sin-offering be killed before the
LORD: it is most holy.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> The priest that offereth it for sin shall
eat it: in the holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of the
tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Whatever shall touch the flesh of it
shall be holy: and when there is sprinkled of its blood upon any
garment, thou shalt wash that on which it was sprinkled in the holy
place.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> But the earthen vessel in which it is
boiled shall be broken: and if it shall be boiled in a brazen pot, it
shall be both scoured, and rinsed in water.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> All the males among the priests shall eat
of it: it is most holy.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And no sin-offering, of which any of the
blood is brought into the tabernacle of the congregation to make
reconciliation in the holy place, shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in
the fire.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Likewise this is the law of the
trespass-offering: it is most holy.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> In the place where they kill the
burnt-offering shall they kill the trespass-offering: and the blood of
it shall he sprinkle around upon the altar.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And he shall offer of it all its fat; the
rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards,

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on
them, which is by the flanks, and the caul that is above the liver, with
the kidneys, that shall he take away:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And the priest shall burn them upon the
altar for an offering made by fire to the LORD: it is a
trespass-offering.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Every male among the priests shall eat of
it: it shall be eaten in the holy place: it is most holy.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> As the sin-offering is, so is the
trespass-offering: there is one law for them: the priest that maketh
atonement with it shall have it.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And the priest that offereth any man's
burnt-offering, even the priest shall have to himself the skin of the
burnt-offering which he hath offered.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And all the meat-offering that is baked in
the oven, and all that is dressed in the frying-pan, and in the pan,
shall be the priest's that offereth it.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And every meat-offering mingled with oil,
and dry, shall all the sons of Aaron have, one as much as another.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And this is the law of the sacrifice of
peace-offerings, which he shall offer to the LORD.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> If he shall offer it for a thanksgiving,
then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes
mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes
mingled with oil, of fine flour, fried.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Besides the cakes, he shall offer for his
offering, leavened bread, with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of his
peace-offerings.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And of it he shall offer one out of the
whole oblation for a heave-offering to the LORD, and it shall be the
priest's that sprinkleth the blood of the peace-offerings.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And the flesh of the sacrifice of his
peace-offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day that it is
offered; he shall not leave any of it until the morning.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> But if the sacrifice of his offering
shall be a vow or a voluntary offering, it shall be eaten the same day
that he offereth his sacrifice: and on the morrow also the remainder of
it shall be eaten:

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> But the remainder of the flesh of the
sacrifice on the third day shall be burnt with fire.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice
of his peace-offerings shall be eaten at all on the third day, it shall
not be accepted, neither shall it be imputed to him that offereth it; it
shall be an abomination, and the soul that eateth of it shall bear his
iniquity.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And the flesh that toucheth any unclean
thing shall not be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire: and as for the
flesh, all that shall be clean shall eat of it.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> But the soul that eateth of the flesh of
the sacrifice of peace-offerings that pertain to the LORD, having his
uncleanness upon him, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Moreover, the soul that shall touch any
unclean thing, as the uncleanness of man, or any unclean beast, or any
abominable unclean thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of
peace-offerings which pertain to the LORD, even that soul shall be cut
off from his people.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Speak to the children of Israel, saying,
Ye shall eat no manner of fat, of ox, or of sheep, or of goat.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And the fat of the beast that dieth of
itself, and the fat of that which is torn with beasts, may be used for
any other purpose; but ye shall in no wise eat of it.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> For whoever eateth the fat of the beast,
of which men offer an offering made by fire to the LORD, even the soul
that eateth it shall be cut off from his people.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Moreover, ye shall eat no manner of
blood, whether of fowl or of beast, in any of your dwellings.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Whatever soul it may be that eateth any
manner of blood, even that soul shall be cut off from his people.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Speak to the children of Israel, saying,
He that offereth the sacrifice of his peace-offerings to the LORD, shall
bring his oblation to the LORD of the sacrifice of his peace-offerings.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> His own hands shall bring the offerings
of the LORD made by fire, the fat with the breast, that shall he bring,
that the breast may be waved for a wave-offering before the LORD.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And the priest shall burn the fat upon
the altar: but the breast shall be Aaron's and his sons'.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> And the right shoulder shall ye give to
the priest for a heave-offering of the sacrifices of your
peace-offerings.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> He among the sons' of Aaron that offereth
the blood of the peace-offerings, and the fat, shall have the right
shoulder for his part.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> For the wave-breast and the
heave-shoulder have I taken of the children of Israel from off the
sacrifices of their peace-offerings, and have given them to Aaron the
priest, and to his sons, by a statute for ever, from among the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> This is the portion of the anointing of
Aaron, and of the anointing of his sons, out of the offerings of the
LORD made by fire, in the day when he presented them to minister to the
LORD in the priest's office;

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> Which the LORD commanded to be given to
them by the children of Israel, in the day that he anointed them, by a
statute for ever throughout their generations.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> This is the law of the burnt-offering, of
the meat-offering, and of the sin-offering, and of the
trespass-offering, and of the consecrations, and of the sacrifice of the
Peace-offerings;

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> Which the LORD commanded Moses in mount
Sinai, in the day that he commanded the children of Israel to offer
their oblations to the LORD, in the wilderness of Sinai.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the
garments, and the anointing oil, and a bullock for the sin-offering, and
two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And assemble thou all the congregation to
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And Moses did as the LORD commanded him;
and the assembly was gathered to the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And Moses said to the congregation, This is
the thing which the LORD commanded to be done.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and
washed them with water.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And he put upon him the coat, and girded
him with the girdle, and clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod
upon him, and he girded him with the curious girdle of the ephod, and
bound it to him with it.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And he put the breast-plate upon him: also
he put in the breast-plate the Urim and the Thummim.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And he put the miter upon his head; also
upon the miter, even upon his front, did he put the golden plate, the
holy crown; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And Moses took the anointing oil, and
anointed the tabernacle and all that was in it, and sanctified them.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And he sprinkled part of it upon the
altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all its vessels, both the
laver and its foot, to sanctify them.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And he poured of the anointing oil upon
Aaron's head, and anointed him, to sanctify him.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And Moses brought Aaron's sons, and put
coats upon them, and girded them with girdles, and put bonnets upon
them; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he brought the bullock for the
sin-offering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of
the bullock for the sin-offering.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he slew it; and Moses took the blood,
and put it upon the horns of the altar round about with his finger, and
purified the altar, and poured the blood at the bottom of the altar, and
sanctified it, to make reconciliation upon it.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And he took all the fat that was upon the
inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their
fat, and Moses burned it upon the altar.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> But the bullock, and his hide, his flesh,
and his dung, he burnt with fire without the camp; as the LORD commanded
Moses.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And he brought the ram for the
burnt-offering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of
the ram.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And he killed it; and Moses sprinkled the
blood upon the altar round about.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And he cut the ram into pieces; and Moses
burnt the head, and the pieces, and the fat.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And he washed the inwards and the legs in
water; and Moses burnt the whole ram upon the altar: it was a
burnt-sacrifice for a sweet savor, and an offering made by fire to the
LORD; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And he brought the other ram, the ram of
consecration: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of
the ram.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And he slew it; and Moses took of its
blood, and put it upon the tip of Aaron's right ear, and upon the thumb
of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And he brought Aaron's sons, and Moses
put of the blood upon the tip of their right ear, and upon the thumbs of
their right hands, and upon the great toes of their right feet: and
Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And he took the fat, and the rump, and
all the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and
the two kidneys, and their fat, and the right shoulder:

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And out of the basket of unleavened
bread, that was before the LORD, he took one unleavened cake, and a cake
of oiled bread, and one wafer, and put them on the fat, and upon the
right shoulder:

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And he put all upon Aaron's hands, and
upon his sons' hands, and waved them for a wave-offering before the
LORD.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And Moses took them from off their hands,
and burnt them on the altar upon the burnt-offering: they were
consecrations for a sweet savor: it is an offering made by fire to the
LORD.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And Moses took the breast, and waved it
for a wave-offering before the LORD: for of the ram of consecration it
was Moses's part; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And Moses took of the anointing oil, and
of the blood which was upon the altar, and sprinkled it upon Aaron, and
upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon his sons' garments with
him; and sanctified Aaron, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons'
garments with him.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And Moses said to Aaron and to his sons,
Boil the flesh at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation; and
there eat it with the bread that is in the basket of consecrations, as I
commanded, saying, Aaron and his sons shall eat it.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And that which remaineth of the flesh and
of the bread shall ye burn with fire.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> And ye shall not go out of the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation in seven days, until the days of your
consecration shall be at an end: for seven days shall he consecrate you.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> As he hath done this day, so the LORD
hath commanded to do, to make an atonement for you.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Therefore shall ye abide at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation day and night seven days, and keep
the charge of the LORD, that ye die not: for so I am commanded.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> So Aaron and his sons did all things
which the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And it came to pass on the eighth day, that
Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the elders of Israel;

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And he said to Aaron, Take thee a young
calf for a sin-offering, and a ram for a burnt-offering, without
blemish, and offer them before the LORD.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And to the children of Israel thou shalt
speak, saying, Take ye a kid of the goats for a sin-offering; and a calf
and a lamb, both of the first year, without blemish, for a
burnt-offering;

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Also a bullock and a ram for
peace-offerings, to sacrifice before the LORD; and a meat-offering
mingled with oil: for to-day the LORD will appear to you.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And they brought that which Moses commanded
before the tabernacle of the congregation: and all the congregation drew
near and stood before the LORD.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And Moses said, This is the thing which the
LORD commanded that ye should do: and the glory of the LORD shall appear
to you.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And Moses said to Aaron, Go to the altar,
and offer thy sin-offering, and thy burnt-offering, and make an
atonement for thyself, and for the people: and offer the offering of the
people, and make an atonement for them; as the LORD commanded.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Aaron therefore went to the altar, and slew
the calf of the sin-offering, which was for himself.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And the sons of Aaron brought the blood to
him: and he dipped his finger in the blood, and put it upon the horns of
the altar, and poured out the blood at the bottom of the altar:

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> But the fat, and the kidneys, and the
caul above the liver of the sin-offering, he burnt upon the altar; as
the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the flesh and the hide he burnt with
fire without the camp.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And he slew the burnt-offering; and
Aaron's sons presented to him the blood, which he sprinkled around upon
the altar.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And they presented the burnt-offering to
him, with the pieces of it, and the head: and he burnt them upon the
altar.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And he washed the inwards and the legs,
and burnt them upon the burnt-offering on the altar.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And he brought the people's offering, and
took the goat, which was the sin-offering for the people, and slew it,
and offered it for sin, as the first.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And he brought the burnt-offering, and
offered it according to the manner.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And he brought the meat-offering, and
took a handful of it, and burnt it upon the altar, beside the
burnt-sacrifice of the morning.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> He slew also the bullock and the ram for
a sacrifice of peace-offerings, which was for the people: and Aaron's
sons presented to him the blood, which he sprinkled around upon the
altar,

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And the fat of the bullock, and of the
ram, the rump, and that which covereth the inwards, and the kidneys, and
the caul above the liver:

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And they put the fat upon the breasts,
and he burnt the fat upon the altar:

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And the breasts and the right shoulder
Aaron waved for a wave-offering before the LORD; as Moses commanded.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And Aaron lifted up his hand towards the
people, and blessed them; and came down from offering the sin-offering,
and the burnt-offering, and peace-offerings.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Moses and Aaron went into the
tabernacle of the congregation, and came out, and blessed the people:
and the glory of the LORD appeared to all the people.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And there came out a fire from before the
LORD, and consumed upon the altar the burnt-offering and the fat: which,
when all the people saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron,
took each of them his censer, and put fire in it, and put incense on it,
and offered strange fire before the LORD, which he commanded them not.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And there went out fire from the LORD,
and devoured them, and they died before the LORD.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Then Moses said to Aaron, This is what
the LORD spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me,
and before all the people I will be glorified. And Aaron held his peace.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan,
the sons of Uzziel the uncle of Aaron, and said to them, Come near,
carry your brethren from before the sanctuary out of the camp.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> So they went near, and carried them in
their coats out of the camp; as Moses had said.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And Moses said to Aaron, and to Eleazar
and to Ithamar, his sons, Uncover not your heads, neither rend your
clothes; lest ye die, and lest wrath come upon all the people: but let
your brethren, the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the
LORD hath kindled.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And ye shall not go out from the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: for the anointing oil
of the LORD is upon you. And they did according to the word of Moses.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And the LORD spoke to Aaron, saying,

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Do not drink wine nor strong drink, thou,
nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tabernacle of the
congregation, lest ye die: it shall be a statute for ever throughout
your generations:

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And that ye may make a difference
between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean;

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And that ye may teach the children of
Israel all the statutes which the LORD hath spoken to them by the hand
of Moses.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And Moses spoke to Aaron, and to
Eleazar and to Ithamar, his sons that were left, Take the meat-offering
that remaineth of the offerings of the LORD made by fire, and eat it
without leaven beside the altar: for it is most holy:

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And ye shall eat it in the holy place,
because it is thy due, and thy sons' due, of the sacrifices of the LORD
made by fire: for so I am commanded.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And the wave-breast and heave-shoulder
shall ye eat in a clean place; thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters
with thee: for they are thy due, and thy sons' due, which are given out
of the sacrifices of peace-offerings of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The heave-shoulder and the wave-breast
shall they bring, with the offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it
for a wave-offering before the LORD; and it shall be thine, and thy
sons' with thee, by a statute for ever; as the LORD hath commanded.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And Moses diligently sought the goat of
the sin-offering, and behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with
Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron who were left alive, saying,

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Why have ye not eaten the sin-offering
in the holy place, seeing it is most holy, and God hath given it you to
bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement for them before
the LORD?

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Behold, the blood of it was not brought
within the holy place: ye should indeed have eaten it in the holy place,
as I commanded.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And Aaron said to Moses, Behold, this
day have they offered their sin-offering, and their burnt-offering
before the LORD; and such things have befallen me: and if I had eaten
the sin-offering to day, would it have been accepted in the sight of the
LORD?

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And when Moses heard that, he was
content.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron,
saying to them.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel, saying,
These are the beasts which ye may eat among all the beasts that are on
the earth.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Whatever parteth the hoof, and is
cloven-footed, and cheweth the cud among the beasts, that shall ye eat.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Nevertheless, these shall ye not eat, of
them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the hoof: the camel,
because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean to
you.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And the coney, because he cheweth the
cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean to you.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And the hare, because he cheweth the cud,
but divideth not the hoof: he is unclean to you.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And the swine, though he divideth the
hoof, and is cloven-footed, yet he cheweth not the cud; he is unclean to
you.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and
their carcass shall ye not touch; they are unclean to you.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> These shall ye eat, of all that are in
the waters: whatever hath fins and scales in the waters, in the seas,
and in the rivers, them shall ye eat.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And all that have not fins nor scales
in the seas, and in the rivers, of all that move in the waters, and of
any living animal which is in the waters, they shall be an abomination
to you:

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> They shall be even an abomination to
you; ye shall not eat of their flesh, but ye shall have their carcasses
in abomination.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Whatever hath no fins nor scales in the
waters, that shall be an abomination to you.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And these are they which ye shall have
in abomination among the fowls; they shall not be eaten, they are an
abomination: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And the vultur, and the kite after his
kind;

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Every raven after his kind;

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And the owl, and the night-hawk, and
the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind,

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And the little owl, and the cormorant,
and the great owl,

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And the swan, and the pelican, and the
gier-eagle,

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And the stork, and the heron after her
kind, and the lapwing, and the bat.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> All fowls that creep, going upon all
four, shall be an abomination to you.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Yet these may ye eat, of every flying
creeping animal that goeth upon all four, which have legs above their
feet, to leap with upon the earth;

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Even these of them ye may eat; the
locust after its kind, and the bald locust after its kind, and the
beetle after its kind, and the grasshopper after its kind.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> But all other flying creeping animals,
which have four feet, shall be an abomination to you.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And for these ye shall be unclean:
whoever toucheth the carcass of them shall be unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And whoever beareth aught of the
carcass of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the
evening.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> The carcasses of every beast which
divideth the hoof, and is not cloven-footed, nor cheweth the cud, are
unclean to you: every one that toucheth them shall be unclean.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And whatever goeth upon its paws, among
all manner of beasts that go on all four, those are unclean to you:
whoever toucheth their carcass shall be unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And he that beareth the carcass of them
shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening: they are
unclean to you.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> These also shall be unclean to you
among the creeping animals that creep upon the earth; the weasel, and
the mouse, and the tortoise, after its kind,

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> And the ferret and the chameleon, and
the lizard, and the snail, and the mole.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> These are unclean to you among all that
creep: whoever doth touch them, when they are dead, shall be unclean
until the evening.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And upon whatever any of them, when
they are dead, doth fall, it shall be unclean; whether it is any vessel
of wood, or raiment, or skin, or sack, whatever vessel it is, in which
any work is done, it must be put into water, and it shall be unclean
until the evening; so it shall be cleansed.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And every earthen vessel, into which
any of them falleth, whatever is in it shall be unclean; and ye shall
break it.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> Of all meat which may be eaten, that on
which such water cometh shall be unclean: and all drink that may be
drank in every such vessel, shall be unclean.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> And every thing on which any part of
their carcass falleth, shall be unclean; whether an oven, or ranges for
pots, they shall be broken down: for they are unclean, and shall be
unclean to you.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> Nevertheless, a fountain or pit, in
which there is plenty of water, shall be clean: but that which toucheth
their carcass shall be unclean.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> And if any part of their carcass shall
fall upon any sowing-seed which is to be sown, it shall be clean.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> But if any water shall be put upon the
seed, and any part of their carcass shall fall on it, it shall be
unclean to you.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> And if any beast, of which ye may eat,
shall die; he that toucheth its carcass shall be unclean until the
evening.

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> And he that eateth of its carcass shall
wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening; he also that beareth
its carcass shall wash his clothes and be unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> And every creeping animal that creepeth
upon the earth shall be an abomination; it shall not be eaten.

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> Whatever goeth upon the belly, and
whatever goeth upon all four, or whatever hath more feet among all
creeping animals that creep upon the earth, them ye shall not eat; for
they are an abomination.

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> Ye shall not make your selves
abominable with any creeping animal that creepeth, neither shall ye make
yourselves unclean with them, that ye should be defiled by them.

<span id="an_11:44">11:44</span> For I am the LORD your God: ye shall
therefore sanctify yourselves, and ye shall be holy; for I am holy:
neither shall ye defile yourselves with any manner of creeping animal
that creepeth upon the earth.

<span id="an_11:45">11:45</span> For I am the LORD that bringeth you out
of the land of Egypt, to be your God: ye shall therefore be holy, for I
am holy.

<span id="an_11:46">11:46</span> This is the law of the beasts, and of
the fowl, and of every living creature that moveth in the waters, and of
every creature that creepeth upon the earth;

<span id="an_11:47">11:47</span> To make a difference between the
unclean and the clean, and between the beast that may be eaten and the
beast that may not be eaten.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel, saying,
If a woman hath conceived seed, and borne a male-child; then she shall
be unclean seven days; according to the days of the separation for her
infirmity shall she be unclean.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And in the eighth day the flesh of his
foreskin shall be circumcised.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And she shall then continue in the blood
of her purifying three and thirty days: she shall touch no hallowed
thing, nor come into the sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be
fulfilled.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> But if she shall bear a female-child,
then she shall be unclean two weeks, as in her separation: and she shall
continue in the blood of her purifying sixty six days.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And when the days of her purifying are
fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the
first year for a burnt-offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtle-dove,
for a sin-offering, to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
to the priest;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Who shall offer it before the LORD, and
make an atonement for her; and she shall be cleansed from the issue of
her blood. This is the law for her that hath borne a male or a female.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And if she shall not be able to bring a
lamb, then she shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons; the one
for the burnt-offering, and the other for a sin-offering: and the priest
shall make an atonement for her, and she shall be clean.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron,
saying,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> When a man shall have in the skin of his
flesh a rising, a scab, or bright spot, and it be in the skin of his
flesh like the plague of leprosy; then he shall be brought to Aaron the
priest, or to one of his sons the priests:

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And the priest shall look on the plague
in the skin of the flesh: and when the hair in the plague is turned
white, and the plague in sight is deeper than the skin of his flesh, it
is a plague of leprosy: and the priest shall look on him, and pronounce
him unclean.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> If the bright spot is white in the skin
of his flesh, and in sight, not deeper than the skin, and the hair of it
not turned white; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague
seven days:

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And the priest shall look on him the
seventh day: and behold, if the plague in his sight is at a stay, and
the plague spreadeth not in the skin; then the priest shall shut him up
seven days more:

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And the priest shall look on him again
the seventh day: and behold, if the plague is somewhat dark, and the
plague spreadeth not in the skin, the priest shall pronounce him clean:
it is but a scab: and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> But if the scab shall spread much in the
skin, after he hath been seen by the priest for his cleansing, he shall
be seen by the priest again:

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And if the priest shall see, that behold,
the scab spreadeth in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him
unclean: it is a leprosy.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> When the plague of leprosy is in a man,
then he shall be brought to the priest:

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And the priest shall see him: and
behold, if the rising is white in the skin, and it hath turned the hair
white, and there is raw flesh in the rising;

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> It is an old leprosy in the skin of his
flesh, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean, and shall not shut
him up; for he is unclean.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And if a leprosy shall break out in the
skin, and the leprosy shall cover all the skin of him that hath the
plague from his head even to his foot, wherever the priest looketh;

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Then the priest shall consider: and
behold, if the leprosy hath covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce
him clean that hath the plague: it is all turned white: he is clean.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But when raw flesh appeareth in him, he
shall be unclean.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And the priest shall see the raw flesh,
and pronounce him to be unclean: for the raw flesh is unclean: it is a
leprosy.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Or if the raw flesh shall turn again,
and be changed into white, he shall come to the priest;

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And the priest shall see him: and
behold, if the plague is turned into white: then the priest shall
pronounce him clean that hath the plague: he is clean.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> The flesh also, in which, even in the
skin of it, was a boil, and is healed,

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And in the place of the boil there
shall be a white rising, or a bright spot, white, and somewhat reddish,
and it be showed to the priest;

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And if, when the priest seeth it,
behold, it is in sight lower than the skin, and the hair of it is turned
white; the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague of leprosy
broken out of the boil.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> But if the priest shall look on it, and
behold, there are no white hairs in it, and if it is not lower than the
skin, but somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days:

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And if it hath spread much in the skin,
then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> But if the bright spot shall stay in
its place, and not spread, it is a burning boil; and the priest shall
pronounce him clean.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Or if there is any flesh, in the skin
of which there is a hot burning, and the live flesh that burneth hath a
white bright spot, somewhat reddish or white;

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> Then the priest shall look upon it: and
behold, if the hair in the bright spot is turned white, and it is in
sight deeper than the skin: it is a leprosy broken out of the burning:
wherefore the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of
leprosy.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> But if the priest shall look on it, and
behold, there is no white hair in the bright spot, and it is no lower
than the other skin, but is somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut
him up seven days:

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And the priest shall look upon him the
seventh day: and if it is spread much in the skin, then the priest shall
pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of leprosy,

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And if the bright spot shall stay in
its place, and not spread in the skin, but be somewhat dark; it is a
rising of the burning, and the priest shall pronounce him clean: for it
is an inflammation of the burning.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> If a man or woman shall have a plague
upon the head or the beard;

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Then the priest shall see the plague:
and behold, if it is in sight deeper than the skin, and there is in it a
yellow thin hair; then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a
dry scall, even a leprosy upon the head or beard.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> And if the priest shall look on the
plague of the scall, and behold, it is not in sight deeper than the
skin, and no black hair in it; then the priest shall shut up him that
hath the plague of the scall seven days:

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> And in the seventh day the priest shall
look on the plague: and behold, if the scall spreadeth not, and there is
in it no yellow hair, and the scall is not in sight deeper than the
skin;

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> He shall be shaven, but the scall shall
he not shave; and the priest shall shut up him that hath the scall seven
days more:

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> And in the seventh day the priest shall
look on the scall: and behold, if the scall is not spread in the skin,
nor is in sight deeper than the skin; then the priest shall pronounce
him clean: and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> But if the scall shall spread much in
the skin after his cleansing;

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Then the priest shall look on him: and
behold, if the scall is spread in the skin, the priest shall not seek
for yellow hair; he is unclean.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> But if the scall shall be in his sight
at a stay, and there is black hair grown in it; the scall is healed, he
is clean: and the priest shall pronounce him clean.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> If a man also or a woman shall have in
the skin of their flesh bright spots, even white bright spots;

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> Then the priest shall look: and behold,
if the bright spots in the skin of their flesh are darkish white; it is
a freckled spot that groweth in the skin; he is clean.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> And the man whose hair hath fallen off
his head, he is bald; yet is he clean.

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> And he that hath his hair fallen off
from the part of his head towards his face, he is forehead-bald; yet is
he clean.

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> And if there is in the bald head, or
bald forehead, a white reddish sore; it is a leprosy sprung up on his
bald head, or his bald forehead.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> Then the priest shall look upon it: and
behold, if the rising of the sore is white reddish on his bald head, or
on his bald forehead, as the leprosy appeareth in the skin of the flesh;

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> He is a leprous man, he is unclean: the
priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean; his plague is in his head.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> And the leper in whom the plague is,
his clothes shall be rent, and his head bare, and he shall put a
covering upon his upper lip, and shall cry, Unclean, unclean.

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> All the days in which the plague shall
be in him he shall be defiled; he is unclean: he shall dwell alone,
without the camp shall his habitation be.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> The garment also that the plague of
leprosy is in, whether a woolen garment, or a linen garment;

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> Whether in the warp, or woof, of linen,
or of woolen: whether in a skin, or in any thing made of skin:

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> And if the plague is greenish or
reddish in the garment, or in the skin, either in the warp, or in the
woof, or in any thing of skin: it is a plague of leprosy, and shall be
shown to the priest:

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> And the priest shall look upon the
plague, and shut up that which hath the plague seven days:

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> And he shall look on the plague on the
seventh day: if the plague is spread in the garment, either in the warp,
or in the woof, or in a skin, or in any work that is made of skin: the
plague is a fretting leprosy; it is unclean.

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> He shall therefore burn that garment,
whether warp or woof, in woolen or in linen, or any thing of skin, in
which the plague is: for it is a fretting leprosy; it shall be burnt in
the fire.

<span id="an_13:53">13:53</span> And if the priest shall look, and
behold, the plague is not spread in the garment, either in the warp or
in the woof, or in any thing of skin;

<span id="an_13:54">13:54</span> Then the priest shall command that they
wash the thing in which the plague is, and he shall shut it up seven
days more:

<span id="an_13:55">13:55</span> And the priest shall look on the plague
after it is washed: and behold, if the plague hath not changed its
color, and the plague hath not spread; it is unclean; thou shalt burn it
in the fire; it is fret inward, whether it is bare within or without.

<span id="an_13:56">13:56</span> And if the priest shall look, and
behold, the plague is somewhat dark after the washing of it; then he
shall rend it out of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the
warp, or out of the woof:

<span id="an_13:57">13:57</span> And if it shall appear still in the
garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin; it
is a spreading plague: thou shalt burn that in which the plague is, with
fire.

<span id="an_13:58">13:58</span> And the garment, either warp, or woof,
or whatever thing of skin it is, which thou shalt wash, if the plague
hath departed from them, then it shall be washed the second time, and
shall be clean.

<span id="an_13:59">13:59</span> This is the law of the plague of
leprosy in a garment of woolen or linen, either in the warp or woof, or
any thing of skins, to pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> This shall be the law of the leper in the
day of his cleansing: He shall be brought to the priest:

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And the priest shall go forth out of the
camp: and the priest shall look, and behold, if the plague of leprosy is
healed in the leper;

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Then shall the priest command to take for
him that is to be cleansed two birds alive, and clean, and cedar-wood,
and scarlet, and hyssop.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And the priest shall command that one of
the birds be killed in an earthen vessel, over running water.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> As for the living bird, he shall take it,
and the cedar-wood, and the scarlet, and the hyssop, and shall dip them,
and the living bird, in the blood of the bird that was killed over the
running water.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And he shall sprinkle upon him that is to
be cleansed from the leprosy seven times, and shall pronounce him clean,
and shall let the living bird loose into the open field.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And he that is to be cleansed shall wash
his clothes, and shave off all his hair, and wash himself in water, that
he may be clean: and after that he shall come into the camp, and shall
tarry abroad out of his tent seven days.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> But it shall be on the seventh day, that
he shall shave all his hair off his head, and his beard, and his
eye-brows, even all his hair he shall shave off; and he shall wash his
clothes, also he shall wash his flesh in water, and he shall be clean.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And on the eighth day he shall take two
he-lambs without blemish, and one ewe-lamb of the first year without
blemish, and three tenth-parts of fine flour for a meat-offering,
mingled with oil, and one log of oil.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And the priest that maketh him clean,
shall present the man that is to be made clean, and those things, before
the LORD, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And the priest shall take one he-lamb,
and offer him for a trespass-offering, and the log of oil, and wave them
for a wave-offering before the LORD.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And he shall slay the lamb in the place
where he shall kill the sin-offering and the burnt-offering, in the
holy-place: for as the sin-offering is the priest's, so is the
trespass-offering: it is most holy.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And the priest shall take some of the
blood of the trespass-offering, and the priest shall put it upon the tip
of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of
his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And the priest shall take some of the
log of oil, and pour it into the palm of his own left hand:

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And the priest shall dip his right
finger in the oil that is in his left hand, and shall sprinkle of the
oil with his finger seven times before the LORD.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And of the rest of the oil that is in
his hand, shall the priest put upon the tip of the right ear of him that
is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the
great toe of his right foot, upon the blood of the trespass-offering.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And the remnant of the oil that is in
the priest's hand he shall pour upon the head of him that is to be
cleansed: and the priest shall make an atonement for him before the
LORD.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And the priest shall offer the
sin-offering, and make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed from
his uncleanness; and afterward he shall kill the burnt-offering.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And the priest shall offer the
burnt-offering, and the meat-offering upon the altar: and the priest
shall make an atonement for him, and he shall be clean.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And if he is poor, and cannot get so
much; then he shall take one lamb for a trespass-offering to be waved,
to make an atonement for him, and one tenth-part of fine flour mingled
with oil for a meat-offering, and a log of oil;

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And two turtle-doves, or two young
pigeons, such as he is able to get; and the one shall be a sin-offering,
and the other a burnt-offering.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And he shall bring them on the eighth
day for his cleansing to the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation, before the LORD.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And the priest shall take the lamb of
the trespass-offering, and the log of oil, and the priest shall wave
them for a wave-offering before the LORD.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And he shall kill the lamb of the
trespass-offering, and the priest shall take some of the blood of the
trespass-offering, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that
is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the
great toe of his right foot.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And the priest shall pour of the oil
into the palm of his own left hand.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And the priest shall sprinkle with his
right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand seven times before
the LORD:

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And the priest shall put of the oil
that is in his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be
cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe
of his right foot, upon the place of the blood of the trespass-offering.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And the rest of the oil that is in the
priest's hand he shall put upon the head of him that is to be cleansed,
to make an atonement for him before the LORD.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And he shall offer one of the
turtle-doves, or of the young pigeons, such as he can get;

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> Even such as he is able to get, the one
for a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering, with the
meat-offering. And the priest shall make an atonement for him that is to
be cleansed, before the LORD.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> This is the law of him in whom is the
plague of leprosy, whose hand is not able to get that which pertaineth
to his cleansing.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses and to
Aaron, saying,

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> When ye shall have come into the land
of Canaan, which I give to you for a possession, and I put the plague of
leprosy in a house of the land of your possession;

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> And he that owneth the house shall come
and tell the priest, saying, it seemeth to me there is as it were a
plague in the house:

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> Then the priest shall command that they
empty the house, before the priest shall enter to see the plague, that
all that is in the house may not be made unclean; and afterward the
priest shall go in to see the house:

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> And he shall look on the plague, and
behold, if the plague is in the walls of the house, with hollow streaks,
greenish, or reddish, which in sight are lower than the wall;

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> Then the priest shall go out of the
house to the door of the house, and shut up the house seven days:

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> And the priest shall come again the
seventh day, and shall look; and behold, if the plague is spread in the
walls of the house;

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> Then the priest shall command that they
take away the stones in which the plague is, and they shall cast them
into an unclean place without the city:

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> And he shall cause the house to be
scraped within on all sides, and they shall pour out the dust that they
scrape off without the city into an unclean place:

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> And they shall take other stones, and
put them in the place of those stones; and he shall take other mortar,
and shall plaster the house.

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> And if the plague shall return, and
break out in the house, after that he hath taken away the stones, and
after he hath scraped the house, and after it is plastered;

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> Then the priest shall come and look;
and behold, if the plague is spread in the house, it is a fretting
leprosy in the house: it is unclean.

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> And he shall break down the house, its
stones, and its timber, and all the mortar of the house: and he shall
carry them forth out of the city to an unclean place.

<span id="an_14:46">14:46</span> Moreover, he that goeth into the house
all the while that it is shut up, shall be unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_14:47">14:47</span> And he that lieth in the house shall
wash his clothes: and he that eateth in the house shall wash his
clothes.

<span id="an_14:48">14:48</span> And if the priest shall come in, and
look upon it, and behold, the plague hath not spread in the house, after
the house was plastered: then the priest shall pronounce the house
clean, because the plague is healed.

<span id="an_14:49">14:49</span> And he shall take to cleanse the house
two birds, and cedar-wood, and scarlet, and hyssop:

<span id="an_14:50">14:50</span> And he shall kill one of the birds in
an earthen vessel, over running water:

<span id="an_14:51">14:51</span> And he shall take the cedar-wood, and
the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the living bird, and dip them in the
blood of the slain bird, and in the running water, and sprinkle the
house seven times:

<span id="an_14:52">14:52</span> And he shall cleanse the house with the
blood of the bird, and with the running water, and with the living bird,
and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and with the scarlet:

<span id="an_14:53">14:53</span> But he shall let go the living bird out
of the city into the open fields, and make an atonement for the house:
and it shall be clean.

<span id="an_14:54">14:54</span> This is the law for all manner of
plague of leprosy, and scall,

<span id="an_14:55">14:55</span> And for the leprosy of a garment, and
of a house,

<span id="an_14:56">14:56</span> And for a rising, and for a scab, and
for a bright spot:

<span id="an_14:57">14:57</span> To teach when it is unclean, and when
it is clean: this is the law of leprosy.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses and to Aaron,
saying,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel, and say
to them, When any man hath a running issue out of his flesh, because of
his issue he is unclean.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And this shall be his uncleanness in his
issue: whether his flesh shall run with his issue, or his flesh be
stopped from his issue, it is his uncleanness.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Every bed on which he lieth that hath the
issue, is unclean: and every thing on which he sitteth, shall be
unclean.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And whoever toucheth his bed, shall wash
his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
evening.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And he that sitteth on any thing on which
he sat that hath the issue, shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in
water, and be unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And he that toucheth the flesh of him
that hath the issue, shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water,
and be unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And if he that hath the issue shall spit
upon him that is clean; then he shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And whatever saddle he rideth upon that
hath the issue, shall be unclean.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And whoever toucheth any thing that was
under him shall be unclean until the evening; and he that beareth any of
those things, shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be
unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And whomsoever he toucheth that hath
the issue (and hath not rinsed his hands in water) he shall wash his
clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And the vessel of earth that he
toucheth who hath the issue, shall be broken: and every vessel of wood
shall be rinsed in water.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And when he that hath an issue is
cleansed of his issue; then he shall number to himself seven days for
his cleansing, and wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in running
water, and shall be clean.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And on the eighth day he shall take to
him two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, and come before the LORD to
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and give them to the
priest:

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And the priest shall offer them, the
one for a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering; and the
priest shall make an atonement for him before the LORD for his issue.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And if any man's seed of copulation
shall go from him, then he shall wash all his flesh in water, and be
unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And every garment, and every skin on
which is the seed of copulation, shall be washed with water, and be
unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> The woman also with whom man shall lie
with seed of copulation, they shall both bathe themselves in water, and
be unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> And if a woman shall have an issue, and
her issue in her flesh be blood, she shall be put apart seven days: and
whoever toucheth her shall be unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And every thing that she lieth upon in
her separation shall be unclean: every thing also that she sitteth upon
shall be unclean.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And whoever toucheth her bed shall wash
his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
evening.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And whoever toucheth any thing that she
sat upon shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be
unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And if it be on her bed, or on any
thing on which she sitteth, when he toucheth it, he shall be unclean
until the evening.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And if any man shall lie with her at
all, and her flowers be upon him, he shall be unclean seven days: and
all the bed on which he lieth shall be unclean.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And if a woman shall have an issue of
her blood many days out of the time of her separation, or if it shall
run beyond the time of her separation; all the days of the issue of her
uncleanness shall be as the days of her separation: she shall be
unclean.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Every bed on which she lieth all the
days of her issue shall be to her as the bed of her separation: and
whatever she sitteth upon shall be unclean as the uncleanness of her
separation.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And whoever toucheth those things shall
be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and
be unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> But if she shall be cleansed of her
issue, then she shall number to herself seven days, and after that she
shall be clean.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And on the eighth day she shall take to
her two turtles, or two young pigeons, and bring them to the priest, to
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And the priest shall offer the one for
a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering; and the priest shall
make an atonement for her before the LORD for the issue of her
uncleanness.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Thus shall ye separate the children of
Israel from their uncleanness: that they die not in their uncleanness,
when they defile my tabernacle that is among them.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> This is the law of him that hath an
issue, and of him whose seed goeth from him, and he is defiled
therewith.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And of her that is sick of her flowers,
and of him that hath an issue, of the man and of the woman, and of him
that lieth with her that is unclean.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses after the
death of the two sons of Aaron, when they offered before the LORD, and
died:

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Speak to
Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times into the holy place
within the vail, before the mercy-seat, which is upon the ark; that he
may not die: for I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy-seat.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Thus shall Aaron come into the holy
place: with a young bullock for a sin-offering, and a ram for a
burnt-offering.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> He shall put on the holy linen coat, and
he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded
with the linen girdle, and with the linen miter shall he be attired:
these are holy garments; therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and
so put them on.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And he shall take of the congregation of
the children of Israel two kids of the goats for a sin-offering, and one
ram for a burnt-offering.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the
sin-offering, which is for himself, and make an atonement for himself,
and for his house.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And he shall take the two goats, and
present them before the LORD at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two
goats; one lot for the LORD, and the other lot for the scape-goat.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And Aaron shall bring the goat upon which
the LORD'S lot fell, and offer him for a sin-offering.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> But the goat on which the lot fell to
be the scape-goat, shall be presented alive before the LORD, to make an
atonement with him, and to let him go for a scape-goat into the
wilderness.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And Aaron shall bring the bullock of
the sin-offering, which is for himself, and shall make an atonement for
himself, and for his house, and shall kill the bullock of the
sin-offering which is for himself:

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And he shall take a censer full of
burning coals of fire from off the altar before the LORD, and his hands
full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within the vail:

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And he shall put the incense upon the
fire before the LORD, that the cloud of the incense may cover the
mercy-seat that is upon the testimony, that he may not die.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And he shall take of the blood of the
bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger upon the mercy-seat eastward:
and before the mercy-seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger
seven times.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Then shall he kill the goat of the
sin-offering that is for the people, and bring his blood within the
vail, and do with that blood as he did with the blood of the bullock,
and sprinkle it upon the mercy-seat, and before the mercy-seat:

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And he shall make an atonement for the
holy place, because of the uncleanness of the children of Israel, and
because of their transgressions in all their sins: and so shall he do
for the tabernacle of the congregation that remaineth among them in the
midst of their uncleanness.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And there shall be no man in the
tabernacle of the congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in
the holy place, until he shall come out, and shall have made an
atonement for himself, and for his household, and for all the
congregation of Israel.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And he shall go out to the altar that
is before the LORD, and make an atonement for it; and shall take of the
blood of the bullock, and of the blood of the goat, and put it upon the
horns of the altar round about.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon
it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from the
uncleanness of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And when he hath made an end of
reconciling the holy place, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and
the altar, he shall bring the live goat:

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon
the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of
the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins,
putting them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the
hand of a fit man into the wilderness:

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And the goat shall bear upon him all
their iniquities to a land not inhabited: and he shall let go the goat
in the wilderness.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And Aaron shall come into the
tabernacle of the congregation, and shall put off the linen garments
which he put on when he went into the holy place, and shall leave them
there:

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And he shall wash his flesh with water
in the holy place, and put on his garments, and come forth, and offer
his burnt-offering, and the burnt-offering of the people, and make an
atonement for himself, and for the people.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And the fat of the sin-offering shall
he burn upon the altar.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And he that let go the goat for the
scape-goat shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and
afterward come into the camp.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And the bullock for the sin-offering,
and the goat for the sin-offering, whose blood was brought in to make
atonement in the holy place, shall one carry forth without the camp; and
they shall burn in the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their
dung.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> And he that burneth them shall wash his
clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into
the camp.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> And this shall be a statute for ever to
you: that in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall
afflict your souls, and do no work at all, whether it be one of your own
country, or a stranger that sojourneth among you:

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> For on that day shall the priest make
an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be clean from all your
sins before the LORD.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> It shall be a sabbath of rest to you,
and ye shall afflict your souls by a statute for ever.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And the priest whom he shall anoint,
and whom he shall consecrate to minister in the priest's office in his
father's stead, shall make the atonement, and shall put on the linen
clothes, even the holy garments:

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And he shall make an atonement for the
holy sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement for the tabernacle of the
congregation, and for the altar: and he shall make an atonement for the
priests, and for all the people of the congregation.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> And this shall be an everlasting
statute to you, to make an atonement for the children of Israel for all
their sins once a year. And he did as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Speak to Aaron, and to his sons, and to
all the children of Israel, and say to them, This is the thing which the
LORD hath commanded, saying,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Whatever man there may be of the house of
Israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb, or goat in the camp, or that
killeth it out of the camp,

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And bringeth it not to the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, to offer an offering to the LORD before
the tabernacle of the LORD; blood shall be imputed to that man; he hath
shed blood; and that man shall be cut off from among his people:

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> To the end that the children of Israel
may bring their sacrifices which they offer in the open field, even that
they may bring them to the LORD, to the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, to the priest, and offer them for peace-offerings to the
LORD.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And the priest shall sprinkle the blood
upon the altar of the LORD at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and burn the fat for a sweet savor to the LORD.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And they shall no more offer their
sacrifices to idols, with which they have committed idolatry: This shall
be a statute for ever to them throughout their generations.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And thou shalt say to them, Whatever man
there may be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers which sojourn
among you, that offereth a burnt-offering or sacrifice,

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And bringeth it not to the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, to offer it to the LORD; even that man
shall be cut off from among his people.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And whatever man there may be of the
house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth
any manner of blood; I will even set my face against that soul that
eateth blood, and will cut him off from among his people.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> For the life of the flesh is in the
blood: and I have given it to you upon the altar, to make an atonement
for your souls: for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the
soul.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Therefore I said to the children of
Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger that
sojourneth among you eat blood.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And whatever man there may be of the
children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, who
hunteth and catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten; he shall even
pour out its blood, and cover it with dust.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> For it is the life of all flesh, the
blood of it is for the life of it; therefore I said to the children of
Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of
all flesh is its blood: whoever eateth it shall be cut off.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And every soul that eateth that which
died of itself, or that which was torn with beasts, (whether it is one
of your own country, or a stranger) he shall both wash his clothes, and
bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening; then shall he
be clean.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> But if he doth not wash them, nor bathe
his flesh; then he shall bear his iniquity.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel, and say
to them, I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> After the doings of the land of Egypt in
which ye dwelt, shall ye not do: and after the doings of the land of
Canaan whither I bring you, shall ye not do: neither shall ye walk in
their ordinances.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Ye shall perform my judgments, and keep
my ordinances, to walk in them; I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and
my judgments: which if a man doeth, he shall live in them: I am the
LORD.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> None of you shall approach to any that is
near of kin to him, to uncover their nakedness: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> The nakedness of thy father, or the
nakedness of thy mother, shalt thou not uncover: she is thy mother, thou
shalt not uncover her nakedness.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> The nakedness of thy father's wife shalt
thou not uncover: it is thy father's nakedness.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter
of thy father, or daughter of thy mother, whether born at home, or born
abroad, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> The nakedness of thy son's daughter, or
of thy daughter's daughter, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover:
for theirs is thy own nakedness.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> The nakedness of thy father's wife's
daughter, begotten by thy father, (she is thy sister) thou shalt not
uncover her nakedness.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of
thy father's sister: she is thy father's near kinswoman.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of
thy mother's sister: for she is thy mother's near kinswoman.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of
thy father's brother, thou shalt not approach to his wife: she is thy
aunt.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of
thy daughter-in-law: she is thy son's wife, thou shalt not uncover her
nakedness.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of
thy brother's wife: it is thy brother's nakedness.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of
a woman and her daughter, neither shalt thou take her son's daughter, or
her daughter's daughter, to uncover her nakedness; for they are her near
kinswomen: it is wickedness.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Neither shalt thou take a wife to her
sister, to vex her, to uncover her nakedness besides the other in her
life-time.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Also thou shalt not approach to a woman
to uncover her nakedness, as long as she is put apart for her
uncleanness.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Moreover, thou shalt not lie carnally
with thy neighbor's wife, to defile thyself with her.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And thou shalt not let any of thy seed
pass through the fire to Molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of
thy God: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as
with womankind: it is abomination.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Neither shalt thou lie with any beast
to defile thyself therewith: neither shall any woman stand before a
beast to lie down thereto: it is confusion.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Defile not ye yourselves in any of
these things; for in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out
before you:

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And the land is defiled: therefore I do
visit its iniquity upon it, and the land itself vomiteth out her
inhabitants.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and
my judgments, and shall not commit any of these abominations; neither
any of your own nation, nor any stranger that sojourneth among you.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> (For all these abominations have the
men of the land done, who were before you, and the land is defiled;)

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> That the land may not vomit you out
also, when ye defile it, as it vomited out the nations that were before
you.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> For whoever shall commit any of these
abominations, even the souls that commit them shall be cut off from
among their people.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Therefore shall ye keep my ordinance,
that ye commit not any one of these abominable customs, which were
committed before you, and that ye defile not yourselves in them; I am
the LORD your God.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Speak to all the congregation of the
children of Israel, and say to them, Ye shall be holy: for I the LORD
your God am holy.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Ye shall fear every man his mother and
his father, and keep my sabbaths: I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Turn ye not to idols, nor make to
yourselves molten gods: I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And if ye offer a sacrifice of
peace-offerings to the LORD, ye shall offer it at your own will.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> It shall be eaten the same day ye offer
it, and on the morrow: and if aught shall remain until the third day, it
shall be burnt in the fire.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And if it shall be eaten at all on the
third day, it is abominable; it shall not be accepted.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Therefore every one that eateth it shall
bear his iniquity, because he hath profaned the hallowed thing of the
LORD; and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And when ye reap the harvest of your
land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt
thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard,
neither shalt thou gather every grape of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave
them for the poor and stranger: I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Ye shall not steal, neither deal
falsely, neither lie one to another.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> And ye shall not swear by my name
falsely, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbor,
neither rob him: the wages of him that is hired shall not abide with
thee all night until the morning.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put
a stumbling-block before the blind, but shalt fear thy God: I am the
LORD.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment; thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the
person of the mighty: but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy
neighbor.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> Thou shalt not go up and down as a
tale-bearer among thy people; neither shalt thou stand against the blood
of thy neighbor; I am the LORD.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy
heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin
upon him.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any
grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself; I am the LORD.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> Ye shall keep my statutes. Thou shalt
not let thy cattle engender with a diverse kind: Thou shalt not sow thy
field with mingled seed: neither shall a garment mingled of linen and
woolen come upon thee.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And whoever lieth carnally with a woman
that is a bond-maid betrothed to a husband, and not at all redeemed, nor
freedom given her; she shall be scourged: they shall not be put to
death, because she was not free.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And he shall bring his
trespass-offering to the LORD, to the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, even a ram for a trespass-offering.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And the priest shall make an atonement
for him with the ram of the trespass-offering before the LORD for his
sin which he hath done; and the sin which he hath done shall be forgiven
him.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And when ye shall come into the land,
and shall have planted all manner of trees for food; then ye shall count
its fruit as uncircumcised: three years shall it be as uncircumcised to
you: it shall not be eaten of.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> But in the fourth year all its fruit
shall be holy to praise the LORD with.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And in the fifth year shall ye eat of
its fruit, that it may yield to you its increase: I am the LORD your
God.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> Ye shall not eat any thing with the
blood: neither shall ye use enchantment, nor observe times.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Ye shall not round the corners of your
heads, neither shalt thou mar the corners of thy beard.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> Ye shall not make any cuttings in your
flesh for the dead, nor print any marks upon you: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Do not prostitute thy daughter to cause
her to be a harlot: lest the land should fall to lewdness, and the land
become full of wickedness.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and
reverence my sanctuary: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> Regard not them that have familiar
spirits, neither seek after wizards, to be defiled by them: I am the
LORD your God.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Thou shalt rise up before the hoary
head, and honor the face of the old man, and fear thy God: I am the
LORD.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> And if a stranger shall sojourn with
thee in your land, ye shall not oppress him.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> But the stranger that dwelleth with you
shall be to you as one born among you, and thou shalt love him as
thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your
God.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment, in weight, in measure of length or of capacity.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> Just balances, just weights, a just
ephah, and a just hin shall ye have: I am the LORD your God, who brought
you out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> Therefore shall ye observe all my
statutes, and all my judgments, and do them: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Again thou shalt say to the children of
Israel, Whoever he be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers
that sojourn in Israel, that giveth any of his seed to Molech, he shall
surely be put to death: the people of the land shall stone him with
stones.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And I will set my face against that man,
and will cut him off from among his people; because he hath given of his
seed to Molech, to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And if the people of the land do any ways
hide their eyes from the man, when he giveth of his seed to Molech, and
kill him not;

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Then I will set my face against that man,
and against his family, and will cut him off, and all that go astray
after him, to commit lewdness with Molech from among their people.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And the soul that turneth after such as
have familiar spirits, and after wizards, to go astray after them, I
will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from among
his people.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Sanctify yourselves therefore and be ye
holy: for I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And ye shall keep my statutes, and do
them: I am the LORD who sanctify you.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> For every one that curseth his father or
his mother, shall surely be put to death: he hath cursed his father or
his mother; his blood shall be upon him.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And the man that committeth adultery
with another man's wife, even he that committeth adultery with his
neighbor's wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to
death.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And the man that lieth with his
father's wife hath uncovered his father's nakedness; both of them shall
surely be put to death: their blood shall be upon them.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And if a man shall lie with his
daughter-in-law, both of them shall surely be put to death: they have
wrought confusion; their blood shall be upon them.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> If a man also shall lie with mankind,
as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination:
they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And if a man shall take a wife and her
mother, it is wickedness: they shall be burnt with fire, both he and
they: that there be no wickedness among you.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And if a man shall lie with a beast, he
shall surely be put to death: and ye shall slay the beast.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And if a woman shall approach to any
beast, and lie down thereto, thou shalt kill the woman and the beast;
they shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And if a man shall take his sister, his
father's daughter, or his mother's daughter, and see her nakedness, and
she see his nakedness; it is a wicked thing; and they shall be cut off
in the sight of their people: he hath uncovered his sister's nakedness;
he shall bear his iniquity.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And if a man shall lie with a woman
having her sickness, and shall uncover her nakedness; he hath discovered
her fountain, and she hath uncovered the fountain of her blood: and both
of them shall be cut off from among their people.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And thou shalt not uncover the
nakedness of thy mother's sister, nor of thy father's sister: for he
uncovereth his near kin: they shall bear their iniquity.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And if a man shall lie with his uncle's
wife, he hath uncovered his uncle's nakedness: they shall bear their
sin; they shall die childless.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And if a man shall take his brother's
wife, it is an unclean thing: he hath uncovered his brother's nakedness;
they shall be childless.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Ye shall therefore keep all my
statutes, and all my judgments, and do them: that the land whither I
bring you to dwell therein, may not vomit you out.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> And ye shall not walk in the manners of
the nations which I cast out before you: for they committed all these
things, and therefore I abhorred them.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> But I have said to you, Ye shall
inherit their land, and I will give it to you to possess it, a land that
floweth with milk and honey: I am the LORD your God, who have separated
you from other people.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> Ye shall therefore distinguish between
clean beasts and unclean, and between unclean fowls and clean: and ye
shall not make your souls abominable by beast or by fowl, or by any
manner of living animal that creepeth on the ground, which I have
separated from you as unclean.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And ye shall be holy to me: for I the
LORD am holy, and have severed you from other people, that ye should be
mine.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> A man also or a woman that hath a
familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death: they
shall stone them with stones: their blood shall be upon them.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Speak to the
priests, the sons of Aaron, and say to them, There shall none be defiled
for the dead among his people:

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> But for his kin, that is near to him,
that is, for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for
his daughter, and for his brother,

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And for his sister a virgin, that is nigh
to him, who hath had no husband: for her he may be defiled.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> But he shall not defile himself, being a
chief man among his people, to profane himself.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> They shall not make baldness upon their
head, neither shall they shave off the corner of their beard, nor make
any cuttings in their flesh.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> They shall be holy to their God, and not
profane the name of their God: for the offerings of the LORD made by
fire, and the bread of their God they do offer: therefore they shall be
holy.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> They shall not take a wife that is a lewd
woman, or profane; neither shall they take a woman put away from her
husband: for he is holy to his God.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Thou shalt sanctify him therefore, for he
offereth the bread of thy God: he shall be holy to thee: for I the LORD,
who sanctify you, am holy.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And the daughter of any priest, if she
shall profane herself by lewdness, she profaneth her father: she shall
be burnt with fire.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And he that is the high priest among
his brethren, upon whose head the anointing oil was poured, and that is
consecrated to put on the garments, shall not uncover his head, nor rend
his clothes;

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Neither shall he go in to any dead
body, nor defile himself for his father, or for his mother;

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Neither shall he go out of the
sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his God; for the crown of the
anointing oil of his God is upon him: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And he shall take a wife in her
virginity.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> A widow, or a divorced woman, or
profane, or a harlot, these shall he not take: but he shall take a
virgin of his own people for a wife.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> Neither shall he profane his seed among
his people: for I the LORD do sanctify him.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> Speak to Aaron, saying, whoever he may
be of thy seed in their generations that hath any blemish, let him not
approach to offer the bread of his God:

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> For whatever man he may be that hath a
blemish, he shall not approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath
a flat nose, or any thing superfluous,

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Or a man that is broken-footed, or
broken-handed,

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Or crooked-backed, or a dwarf, or that
hath a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his
peculiar members broken:

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> No man of the seed of Aaron the priest,
that hath a blemish, shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the LORD
made by fire; he hath a blemish, he shall not come nigh to offer the
bread of his God.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> He shall eat the bread of his God, both
of the most holy, and of the holy.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Only he shall not go in to the vail,
nor come nigh to the altar, because he hath a blemish; that he may not
profane my sanctuaries: for I the LORD do sanctify them.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> And Moses told it to Aaron, and to his
sons, and to all the children of Israel.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Speak to Aaron and to his sons, that they
separate themselves from the holy things of the children of Israel, and
that they profane not my holy name in those things which they hallow to
me: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Say to them, Whoever he may be of all
your seed among your generations, that approacheth the holy things,
which the children of Israel hallow to the LORD, having his uncleanness
upon him, that soul shall be cut off from my presence: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Whatever man of the seed of Aaron is a
leper, or hath a running issue; he shall not eat of the holy things,
until he is clean. And whoever toucheth any thing that is unclean by the
dead, or a man whose seed goeth from him;

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Or whoever toucheth any creeping animal,
by which he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may take
uncleanness, whatever uncleanness he hath:

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> The soul which hath touched any such
shall be unclean until evening, and shall not eat of the holy things,
unless he shall wash his flesh with water.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And when the sun is set, he shall be
clean, and shall afterward eat of the holy things, because it is his
food.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> That which dieth of itself, or is torn by
beasts, he shall not eat to defile himself with it: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> They shall therefore keep my ordinance,
lest they bear sin for it, and die therefore, if they profane it: I the
LORD do sanctify them.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> There shall no stranger eat of the holy
thing: a sojourner of the priest, or a hired servant, shall not eat of
the holy thing.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> But if the priest shall buy any soul
with his money, he shall eat of it, and he that is born in his house:
they shall eat of his meat.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> If the priest's daughter also shall be
married to a stranger, she may not eat of an offering of the holy
things.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> But if the priest's daughter shall be a
widow, or divorced, and shall have no child, and have returned to her
father's house, as in her youth, she shall eat of her father's meat; but
there shall no stranger eat of it.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And if a man shall eat of the holy
thing unknowingly, then he shall put to it the fifth part, and shall
give it to the priest, with the holy thing.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And they shall not profane the holy
things of the children of Israel which they offer to the LORD;

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Or suffer them to bear the iniquity of
trespass, when they eat their holy things: for I the LORD do sanctify
them.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Speak to Aaron, and to his sons, and to
all the children of Israel, and say to them, Whoever he may be of the
house of Israel, or of the strangers in Israel, that will offer his
oblation for all his vows, and for all his free-will-offerings, which
they will offer to the LORD for a burnt-offering:

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Ye shall offer at your own will a male
without blemish of the beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> But whatever hath a blemish, that shall
ye not offer: for it shall not be acceptable for you.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And whoever offereth a sacrifice of
peace-offerings to the LORD to accomplish his vow, or a
free-will-offering in beeves, or sheep, it shall be perfect to be
accepted: there shall be in it no blemish.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having
a wen, or scurvy, or scabbed, ye shall not offer these to the LORD, nor
make an offering by fire of them upon the altar to the LORD.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> Either a bullock, or a lamb that hath
any thing superfluous or lacking in his parts, that mayest thou offer
for a free-will-offering; but for a vow it shall not be accepted.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Ye shall not offer to the LORD that
which is bruised, or crushed, or broken, or cut; neither shall ye make
any offering thereof in your land.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Neither from a stranger's hand shall ye
offer the bread of your God of any of these; because their corruption is
in them, and blemishes are in them: they shall not be accepted for you.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat
is brought forth, then it shall be seven days under the dam; and from
the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be accepted for an offering made
by fire to the LORD.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And whether it is cow, or ewe, ye shall
not kill it and her young both in one day.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> And when ye will offer a sacrifice of
thanksgiving to the LORD, offer it at your own will.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> On the same day it shall be eaten up,
ye shall leave none of it until the morrow: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> Therefore shall ye keep my
commandments, and do them: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> Neither shall ye profane my holy name;
but I will be hallowed among the children of Israel: I am the LORD who
hallow you,

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> That brought you out of the land of
Egypt, to be your God: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel, and say
to them, Concerning the feasts of the LORD, which ye shall proclaim to
be holy convocations, even these are my feasts.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Six days shall work be done: but the
seventh day is the sabbath of rest, a holy convocation: ye shall do no
work in it: it is the sabbath of the LORD in all your dwellings.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> These are the feasts of the LORD, holy
convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their seasons.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> In the fourteenth day of the first month
at evening is the LORD'S passover.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> And on the fifteenth day of the same
month is the feast of unleavened bread to the LORD, seven days ye must
eat unleavened bread.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> In the first day ye shall have a holy
convocation: ye shall do no servile work in it.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> But ye shall offer an offering made by
fire to the LORD seven days: in the seventh day is a holy convocation,
ye shall do no servile work in it.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Speak to the children of Israel, and
say to them, When ye shall have come into the land which I give to you,
and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye shall bring a sheaf of the
first-fruits of your harvest to the priest:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And he shall wave the sheaf before the
LORD, to be accepted for you: on the morrow after the sabbath the priest
shall wave it.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And ye shall offer, that day when ye
wave the sheaf, a he-lamb without blemish of the first year for a
burnt-offering to the LORD.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And the meat-offering thereof shall be
two tenth-parts of fine flour mingled with oil, an offering made by fire
to the LORD for a sweet savor: and the drink-offering thereof shall be
of wine, the fourth part of a hin.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And ye shall eat neither bread, nor
parched corn, nor green ears, until the same day that ye have brought an
offering to your God: It shall be a statute for ever throughout your
generations in all your dwellings.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> And ye shall count to you from the
morrow after the sabbath, from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the
wave-offering; seven sabbaths shall be complete:

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Even to the morrow after the seventh
sabbath shall ye number fifty days; and ye shall offer a new
meat-offering to the LORD.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Ye shall bring out of your habitations
two wave-loaves of two tenth-parts: they shall be of fine flour, they
shall be baked with leaven, they are the first-fruits to the LORD.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And ye shall offer with the bread seven
lambs without blemish of the first year, and one young bullock, and two
rams: they shall be for a burnt-offering to the LORD, with their
meat-offering, and their drink offerings, even an offering made by fire
of a sweet savor to the LORD.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the
goats for a sin-offering, and two lambs of the first year for a
sacrifice of peace-offerings.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And the priest shall wave them with the
bread of the first-fruits for a wave-offering before the LORD, with the
two lambs: they shall be holy to the LORD for the priest.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> And ye shall proclaim on the same day,
that it may be a holy convocation to you: ye shall do no servile work in
it. it shall be a statute for ever in all your dwellings throughout your
generations.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> And when ye reap the harvest of your
land, thou shalt not make clean riddance of the corners of thy field
when thou reapest, neither shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy
harvest: thou shalt leave them to the poor, and to the stranger: I am
the LORD your God.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Speak to the children of Israel,
saying, In the seventh month, in the first day of the month, shall ye
have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, a holy convocation.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Ye shall do no servile work in it; but
ye shall offer an offering made by fire to the LORD.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> Also on the tenth day of this seventh
month there shall be a day of atonement; it shall be a holy convocation
to you, and ye shall afflict your souls, and offer an offering made by
fire to the LORD.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And ye shall do no work in that same
day; for it is a day of atonement, to make an atonement for you before
the LORD your God.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> For whatever soul it may be that shall
not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off from among his
people.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> And whatever soul it may be that doeth
any work in that same day, the same soul will I destroy from among his
people.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Ye shall do no manner of work. It shall
be a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> It shall be to you a sabbath of rest,
and ye shall afflict your souls in the ninth day of the month at
evening: from evening to evening shall ye celebrate your sabbath.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> Speak to the children of Israel,
saying, The fifteenth day of this seventh month shall be the feast of
tabernacles for seven days to the LORD.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> On the first day shall be a holy
convocation: ye shall do no servile work in it.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> Seven days ye shall offer an offering
made by fire to the LORD: on the eighth day shall be a holy convocation
to you, and ye shall offer an offering made by fire to the LORD: it is a
solemn assembly; and ye shall do no servile work in it.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> These are the feasts of the LORD, which
ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, to offer an offering made by
fire to the LORD, a burnt-offering, and a meat-offering, a sacrifice,
and drink-offerings, every thing upon its day:

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> Beside the sabbaths of the LORD, and
beside your gifts, and beside all your vows, and beside all your
free-will-offerings, which ye give to the LORD.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> Also in the fifteenth day of the
seventh month, when ye have gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall
keep a feast to the LORD seven days: on the first day shall be a
sabbath, and on the eighth day shall be a sabbath.

<span id="an_23:40">23:40</span> And ye shall take you on the first day
the boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm-trees, and the boughs of
thick trees, and willows of the brook; and ye shall rejoice before the
LORD your God seven days.

<span id="an_23:41">23:41</span> And ye shall keep it a feast to the
LORD seven days in the year. It shall be a statute for ever in your
generations; ye shall celebrate it in the seventh month.

<span id="an_23:42">23:42</span> Ye shall dwell in booths seven days:
all that are Israelites born shall dwell in booths:

<span id="an_23:43">23:43</span> That your generations may know that I
made the children of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them out
of the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_23:44">23:44</span> And Moses declared to the children of
Israel the feasts of the LORD.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> Command the children of Israel, that they
bring to thee pure olive oil beaten for the light, to cause the lamps to
burn continually.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Without the vail of the testimony, in the
tabernacle of the congregation, shall Aaron order it from the evening to
the morning before the LORD continually: It shall be a statute for ever
in your generations.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> Ye shall order the lamps upon the pure
candlestick before the LORD continually.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And thou shalt take fine flour, and bake
twelve cakes of it: two tenth-parts shall be in one cake.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And thou shalt set them in two rows, six
in a row, upon the pure table before the LORD.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon
each row, that it may be on the bread for a memorial, even an offering
made by fire to the LORD.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> Every sabbath he shall set it in order
before the LORD continually, being taken from the children of Israel by
an everlasting covenant.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And it shall be Aaron's and his sons';
and they shall eat it in the holy place: for it is most holy to him of
the offerings of the LORD made by fire by a perpetual statute.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And the son of an Israelitish woman
whose father was an Egyptian, went out among the children of Israel; and
this son of the Israelitish woman and a man of Israel strove together in
the camp;

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And the Israelitish woman's son
blasphemed the name of the LORD, and cursed: and they brought him to
Moses: (and his mother's name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of
the tribe of Dan:)

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And they put him in custody, that the
mind of the LORD might be shown to them.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> Bring forth him that hath cursed
without the camp; and let all that heard him lay their hands upon his
head, and let all the congregation stone him.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And thou shalt speak to the children of
Israel, saying, Whoever curseth his God shall bear his sin.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And he that blasphemeth the name of the
LORD, he shall surely be put to death, and all the congregation shall
certainly stone him: as well the stranger, as he that is born in the
land, when he blasphemeth the name of the LORD, shall be put to death.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And he that killeth any man shall
surely be put to death.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And he that killeth a beast shall make
it good; beast for beast.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And if a man shall cause a blemish in
his neighbor; as he hath done, so shall it be done to him;

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth
for tooth: as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be done to
him.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And he that killeth a beast, he shall
restore it: and he that killeth a man, he shall be put to death.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> Ye shall have one manner of law, as
well for the stranger, as for one of your own country: for I am the LORD
your God.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And Moses spoke to the children of
Israel, that they should bring forth him that had cursed out of the
camp, and stone him with stones: and the children of Israel did as the
LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses in mount
Sinai, saying,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel, and say
to them, When ye come into the land which I give you, then shall the
land keep a sabbath to the LORD.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and
six years thou shalt prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit
thereof;

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> But in the seventh year shall be a
sabbath of rest to the land, a sabbath for the LORD: thou shalt neither
sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> That which groweth of its own accord of
thy harvest, thou shalt not reap, neither gather the grapes of thy vine
undressed: for it is a year of rest to the land.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And the sabbath of the land shall be food
for you; for thee, and for thy servant, and for thy maid, and for thy
hired servant, and for thy stranger that sojourneth with thee,

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And for thy cattle, and for the beast
that are in thy land, shall all the increase of it be food.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of
years to thee, seven times seven years; and the space of the seven
sabbaths of years shall be to thee forty and nine years.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the
jubilee to sound, on the tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of
atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your land.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year,
and proclaim liberty throughout all the land to all its inhabitants: it
shall be a jubilee to you; and ye shall return every man to his
possession, and ye shall return every man to his family.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> A jubilee shall that fiftieth year be
to you: ye shall not sow, neither reap that which groweth of itself in
it, nor gather the grapes in it of thy vine undressed.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> For it is the jubilee; it shall be holy
to you: ye shall eat the increase of it out of the field.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> In the year of this jubilee ye shall
return every man to his possession.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And if thou shalt sell aught to thy
neighbor, or buy aught of thy neighbor's hand, ye shall not oppress one
another:

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> According to the number of years after
the jubilee thou shalt buy of thy neighbor, and according to the number
of years of the fruits he shall sell to thee:

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> According to the multitude of years
thou shalt increase the price of it, and according to the fewness of
years thou shalt diminish the price of it: for according to the number
of the years of the fruits doth he sell to thee.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Ye shall not therefore oppress one
another; but thou shalt fear thy God: for I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> Wherefore ye shall do my statutes, and
keep my judgments, and do them; and ye shall dwell in the land in
safety.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> And the land shall yield her fruit, and
ye shall eat your fill, and dwell in it in safety.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And if ye shall say, What shall we eat
the seventh year? behold, we shall not sow nor gather in our increase:

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> Then I will command my blessing upon
you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three years.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And ye shall sow the eighth year, and
eat of old fruit until the ninth year; until its fruits come in ye shall
eat of the old store.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> The land shall not be sold for ever;
for the land is mine, for ye are strangers and sojourners with me.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And in all the land of your possession
ye shall grant a redemption for the land.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> If thy brother shall have become poor,
and have sold some of his possession, and if any of his kin shall come
to redeem it, then shall he redeem that which his brother sold.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> And if the man shall have none to
redeem it, and himself be able to redeem it;

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> Then let him count the years of the
sale of it, and restore the overplus to the man to whom he sold it; that
he may return to his possession.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> But if he shall not be able to restore
it to him, then that which is sold shall remain in the hand of him that
hath bought it until the year of jubilee: and in the jubilee it shall go
out, and he shall return to his possession.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> And if a man shall sell a
dwelling-house in a walled city, then he may redeem it within a whole
year after it is sold: within a full year may he redeem it.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> And if it shall not be redeemed within
the space of a full year, then the house that is in the walled city
shall be established for ever to him that bought it, throughout his
generations: it shall not go out in the jubilee,

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> But the houses of the villages which
have no walls around them, shall be counted as the fields of the
country: they may be redeemed, and they shall go out in the jubilee.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> Notwithstanding the cities of the
Levites, and the houses of the cities of their possession, may the
Levites redeem at any time.

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> And if a man shall purchase of the
Levites, then the house that was sold, and the city of his possession
shall go out in the year of jubilee; for the houses of the cities of the
Levites are their possession among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> But the field of the suburbs of their
cities may not be sold, for it is their perpetual possession.

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> And if thy brother shall have become
poor, and fallen in decay with thee; then thou shalt relieve him: yea,
though he may be a stranger, or a sojourner; that he may live with thee.

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> Take thou no interest of him, or
increase; but fear thy God; that thy brother may live with thee.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> Thou shalt not give him thy money upon
interest, nor lend him thy victuals for increase.

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> I am the LORD your God, who brought you
out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, and to be your
God.

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> And if thy brother that dwelleth by
thee shall have become poor, and be sold to thee; thou shalt not compel
him to serve as a bond servant:

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> But as a hired servant, and as a
sojourner he shall be with thee, and shall serve thee to the year of
jubilee.

<span id="an_25:41">25:41</span> And then shall he depart from thee,
both he and his children with him, and shall return to his own family,
and to the possession of his fathers shall he return.

<span id="an_25:42">25:42</span> For they are my servants, which I
brought out of the land of Egypt; they shall not be sold as bond-men.

<span id="an_25:43">25:43</span> Thou shalt not rule over him with
rigor, but shalt fear thy God.

<span id="an_25:44">25:44</span> Both thy bond-men, and thy bond-maids,
which thou shalt have, shall be of the heathen that are around you; of
them shall ye buy bond-men and bond-maids.

<span id="an_25:45">25:45</span> Moreover of the children of the
strangers that sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy, and of their
families that are with you, which they begat in your land: and they
shall be your possession.

<span id="an_25:46">25:46</span> And ye shall take them as an
inheritance for your children after you, to inherit them for a
possession, they shall be your bond-men for ever: but over your brethren
the children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over another with rigor.

<span id="an_25:47">25:47</span> And if a sojourner or a stranger shall
become rich by thee, and thy brother that dwelleth by him shall become
poor, and sell himself to the stranger or sojourner by thee, or to the
stock of the stranger's family:

<span id="an_25:48">25:48</span> After that he is sold he may be
redeemed again; one of his brethren may redeem him:

<span id="an_25:49">25:49</span> Either his uncle, or his uncle's son
may redeem him, or any that is nigh of kin to him of his family, may
redeem him; or if he is able, he may redeem himself.

<span id="an_25:50">25:50</span> And he shall reckon with him that
bought him, from the year that he was sold to him, to the year of
jubilee: and the price of his sale shall be according to the number of
years, according to the time of a hired servant shall it be with him.

<span id="an_25:51">25:51</span> If there shall be yet many years
behind, according to them he shall give again the price of his
redemption out of the money that he was bought for.

<span id="an_25:52">25:52</span> And if there shall remain but few years
to the year of jubilee, then he shall count with him, and according to
his years shall he give him again the price of his redemption.

<span id="an_25:53">25:53</span> And as a yearly hired servant shall he
be with him: and the other shall not rule with rigor over him in thy
sight.

<span id="an_25:54">25:54</span> And if he shall not be redeemed in
these years, then he shall go out in the year of jubilee, both he, and
his children with him.

<span id="an_25:55">25:55</span> For to me the children of Israel are
servants, they are my servants whom I brought out of the land of Egypt:
I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Ye shall make you no idols nor graven
image, neither rear you up a standing image, neither shall ye set up any
image of stone in your land, to bow down to it: for I am the LORD your
God.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence
my sanctuary: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my
commandments, and do them;

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Then I will give you rain in due season,
and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall
yield their fruit:

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> And your threshing shall reach to the
vintage, and the vintage shall reach to the sowing time; and ye shall
eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And I will give peace in the land, and ye
shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid: and I will rid the land
of evil beasts, neither shall the sword go through your land.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And ye shall chase your enemies, and they
shall fall before you by the sword.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And five of you shall chase a hundred,
and a hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight: and your enemies
shall fall before you by the sword.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> For I will have respect to you, and make
you fruitful, and multiply you, and establish my covenant with you.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And ye shall eat old store, and bring
forth the old because of the new.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And I will set my tabernacle among you:
and my soul shall not abhor you.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And I will walk among you, and will be
your God, and ye shall be my people.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> I am the LORD your God, who brought you
out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their bond-men, and I
have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you go upright.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> But if ye will not hearken to me, and
will not do all these commandments;

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And if ye shall despise my statutes, or
if your soul shall abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my
commandments, but that ye break my covenant:

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> I also will do this to you, I will even
appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that shall
consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall sow your seed
in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And I will set my face against you, and
ye shall be slain before your enemies: they that hate you shall reign
over you, and ye shall flee when none pursueth you.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> And if ye will not yet for all this
hearken to me, then I will punish you seven times more for your sins.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> And I will break the pride of your
power; and I will make your heaven as iron, and your earth as brass:

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> And your strength shall be spent in
vain: for your land shall not yield her increase, neither shall the
trees of the land yield their fruits.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And if ye shall walk contrary to me,
and will not hearken to me, I will bring seven times more plagues upon
you according to your sins.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> I will also send wild beasts among you,
which shall rob you of your children, and destroy your cattle, and make
you few in number, and your high-ways shall be desolate.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And if ye will not be reformed by me by
these things, but will walk contrary to me;

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> Then will I also walk contrary to you,
and I will punish you yet seven times for your sins.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> And I will bring a sword upon you, that
shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant: and when ye are gathered within
your cities, I will send the pestilence among you: and ye shall be
delivered into the hand of the enemy.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> And when I have broke the staff of your
bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven, and they shall
deliver you your bread again by weight: and ye shall eat, and not be
satisfied.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> And if ye will not for all this hearken
to me, but walk contrary to me;

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> Then I will walk contrary to you also
in fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> And ye shall eat the flesh of your
sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And I will destroy your high places,
and cut down your images, and cast your carcasses upon the carcasses of
your idols, and my soul shall abhor you.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> And I will make your cities waste, and
bring your sanctuaries to desolation, and I will not smell the savor of
your sweet odors.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> And I will bring the land into
desolation: and your enemies who dwell in it shall be astonished at it.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> And I will scatter you among the
heathen, and will draw out a sword after you: and your land shall be
desolate, and your cities waste.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> Then shall the land enjoy its sabbaths,
as long as it lieth desolate, and ye are in your enemies' land; even
then shall the land rest, and enjoy its sabbaths.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> As long as it lieth desolate, it shall
rest; because it did not rest in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> And upon them that are left alive of
you, I will send a faintness into their hearts in the lands of their
enemies; and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall
flee, as fleeing from a sword; and they shall fall, when none pursueth.

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> And they shall fall one upon another,
as it were before a sword, when none pursueth: and ye shall have no
power to stand before your enemies.

<span id="an_26:38">26:38</span> And ye shall perish among the heathen,
and the land of your enemies shall eat you up.

<span id="an_26:39">26:39</span> And they that are left of you shall
pine away in their iniquity in your enemies' lands; and also in the
iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away with them.

<span id="an_26:40">26:40</span> If they shall confess their iniquity,
and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass which they
trespassed against me, and that also they have walked contrary to me;

<span id="an_26:41">26:41</span> And that I also have walked contrary to
them, and have brought them into the land of their enemies; if then
their uncircumcised hearts shall be humbled, and they then accept of the
punishment of their iniquity:

<span id="an_26:42">26:42</span> Then will I remember my covenant with
Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with
Abraham will I remember; and I will remember the land.

<span id="an_26:43">26:43</span> The land also shall be left by them,
and shall enjoy her sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without them: and
they shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity; because, even
because they despised my judgments, and because their soul abhorred my
statutes.

<span id="an_26:44">26:44</span> And yet for all that, when they shall
be in the land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will
I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant with
them; for I am the LORD their God.

<span id="an_26:45">26:45</span> But I will for their sakes remember the
covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt in
the sight of the heathen, that I might be their God: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_26:46">26:46</span> These are the statutes, and judgments,
and laws, which the LORD made between him and the children of Israel in
mount Sinai by the hand of Moses.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel, and say
to them, When a man shall make a singular vow, the persons shall be for
the LORD, by thy estimation.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And thy estimation shall be, of the male
from twenty years old even to sixty years old, even thy estimation shall
be fifty shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And if it shall be a female, then thy
estimation shall be thirty shekels.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And if it shall be from five years old
even to twenty years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male
twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And if it shall be from a month old even
to five years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male five shekels
of silver, and for the female thy estimation shall be three shekels of
silver.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And if it shall be from sixty years old
and above; if a male, then thy estimation shall be fifteen shekels, and
for the female ten shekels.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> But if he shall be poorer than thy
estimation, then he shall present himself before the priest, and the
priest shall value him: according to his ability that vowed shall the
priest value him.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And if it shall be a beast of which men
bring an offering to the LORD, all that any man giveth of such to the
LORD shall be holy.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> He shall not alter it, nor change it, a
good for a bad, or a bad for a good: and if he shall at all change beast
for beast, then it and the exchange of it shall be holy.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And if it shall be any unclean beast,
of which they do not offer a sacrifice to the LORD, then he shall
present the beast before the priest:

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And the priest shall value it, whether
it be good or bad: as thou valuest it, who art the priest, so shall it
be.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> But if he will at all redeem it, then
he shall add a fifth part of it to thy estimation.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> And when a man shall sanctify his house
to be holy to the LORD, then the priest shall estimate it, whether it is
good or bad: as the priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And if he that sanctified it will
redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy
estimation to it, and it shall be his.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And if a man shall sanctify to the LORD
some part of a field of his possession, then thy estimation shall be
according to the seed of it: a homer of barley seed shall be valued at
fifty shekels of silver.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> If he shall sanctify his field from the
year of jubilee, according to thy estimation it shall stand.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> But if he shall sanctify his field
after the jubilee, then the priest shall reckon to him the money
according to the years that remain, even to the year of the jubilee, and
it shall be abated from thy estimation.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> And if he that sanctified the field
will in any wise redeem it, then he shall add the fifth part of the
money of thy estimation to it, and it shall be assured to him.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And if he will not redeem the field, or
if he shall have sold the field to another man, it shall not be redeemed
any more.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> But the field, when it goeth out in the
jubilee, shall be holy to the LORD, as a field devoted: the possession
of it shall be the priest's.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> And if a man shall sanctify to the LORD
a field which he hath bought, which is not of the fields of his
possession;

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Then the priest shall reckon to him the
worth of thy estimation, even to the year of the jubilee, and he shall
give thy estimation in that day, as a holy thing to the LORD.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> In the year of the jubilee, the field
shall return to him of whom it was bought, even to him to whom the
possession of the land belonged.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> And all thy estimations shall be
according to the shekel of the sanctuary: twenty gerahs shall be the
shekel.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Only the firstling of the beasts, which
should be the LORD'S firstling, no man shall sanctify it; whether ox, or
sheep: it is the LORD'S.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> And if it shall be of an unclean beast,
then he shall redeem it, according to thy estimation, and shall add to
it a fifth part of it: or if it shall be not redeemed, then it shall be
sold according to thy estimation.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> Notwithstanding, no devoted thing that
a man shall devote to the LORD of all that he hath, both of man and
beast, and of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed:
every devoted thing is most holy to the LORD.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> None devoted, which shall be devoted by
men, shall be redeemed: but shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> And all the tithe of the land, whether
of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the LORD'S: it
is holy to the LORD.

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> And if a man will at all redeem aught
of his tithes, he shall add to it the fifth part of it.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> And concerning the tithe of the herd,
or of the flock, even of whatever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall
be holy to the LORD.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> He shall not search whether it is good
or bad, neither shall he change it: and if he shall change it at all,
then both it and the change of it shall be holy; it shall not be
redeemed.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> These are the commandments which the
LORD commanded Moses for the children of Israel in mount Sinai.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers](num.md)
