[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mal)  [Next](mar) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Matthew

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The book of the generation of Jesus Christ,
the son of David, the son of Abraham.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob;
and Jacob begat Judah and his brethren;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And Judah begat Phares and Zara of Thamar;
and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And Aram begat Aminadab; and Aminadab begat
Naasson; and Naasson begat Salmon;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz
begat Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And Jesse begat David the king; and David
the king begat Solomon of her that had been the wife of Uriah;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And Solomon begat Roboam; and Roboam begat
Abia; and Abia begat Asa;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And Asa begat Josaphat; and Josaphat begat
Joram; and Joram begat Ozias;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham begat
Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And Ezekias begat Manasses; and Manasses
begat Amon; and Amon begat Josias;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And Josias begat Jechonias and his
brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon:

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And after they were brought to Babylon,
Jechonias begat Salathiel; and Salathiel begat Zorobabel;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And Zorobabel begat Abiud; and Abiud
begat Eliakim; and Eliakim begat Azor;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Azor begat Sadoc; and Sadoc begat
Achim; and Achim begat Eliud;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar
begat Matthan; and Matthan begat Jacob;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of
Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> So all the generations from Abraham to
David are fourteen generations; and from David until the carrying away
into Babylon are fourteen generations; and from the carrying away into
Babylon to Christ are fourteen generations.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Now the birth of Jesus Christ was in this
manner: When his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came
together, she was found with child by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Then Joseph her husband, being a just
man, and not willing to make her a public example, purposed to put her
away privately.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But while he thought on these things, the
angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son
of David, fear not to take to thee Mary thy wife: for that which is
conceived in her is by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And she shall bring forth a son, and thou
shalt call his name JESUS: for he shall save his people from their sins.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Now all this was done, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken from the Lord by the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and
shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which
being interpreted is, God with us.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Then Joseph, being raised from sleep, did
as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took to him his wife:

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And knew her not till she had brought
forth her first-born son: and he called his name JESUS.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now, after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of
Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from
the east to Jerusalem,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Saying, Where is he that is born king of
the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east, and have come to
worship him.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> When Herod the king had heard these things,
he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And when he had assembled all the chief
priests and scribes of the people, he inquired of them where Christ
should be born.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And they said to him, In Bethlehem of
Judea: for thus it is written by the prophet,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Judah,
art not the least among the princes of Judah: for out of thee shall come
a Governor, that shall rule my people Israel.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Then Herod, when he had privately called
the wise men, inquired of them diligently what time the star appeared.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said,
Go, and search diligently for the young child; and when ye have found
him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> When they had heard the king, they
departed; and lo, the star, which they saw in the east, went before
them, till it came and stood over where the young child was.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> When they saw the star, they rejoiced
with exceeding great joy.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And when they had come into the house,
they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and fell down, and
worshiped him: and when they had opened their treasures, they presented
to him gifts; gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And being warned by God in a dream that
they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country
another way.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And when they had departed, behold, the
angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and
take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou
there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child to
destroy him.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> When he arose, he took the young child
and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And was there until the death of Herod:
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken from the Lord by the
prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Then Herod, when he saw that he was
mocked by the wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew
all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all its borders, from
two years old and under, according to the time which he had diligently
inquired of the wise men.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Then was fulfilled that which was spoken
by Jeremiah the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> In Rama was there a voice heard,
lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her
children, and would not be comforted, because they are not.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel
of the Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Saying, Arise, and take the young child
and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they are dead who
sought the young child's life.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And he arose, and took the young child
and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But when he heard that Archelaus reigned
in Judea in the room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither:
notwithstanding, being warned by God in a dream, he turned aside into
the parts of Galilee:

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And he came and dwelt in a city called
Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets,
He shall be called a Nazarene.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> In those days came John the Baptist,
preaching in the wilderness of Judea,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For this is he that was spoken of by the
prophet Isaiah, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And the same John had his raiment of
camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his food was
locusts and wild honey.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all
Judea, and all the region about Jordan,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And were baptized by him in Jordan,
confessing their sins.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But when he saw many of the Pharisees and
Sadducees come to his baptism, he said to them, O generation of vipers,
who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Bring forth therefore fruits meet for
repentance:

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And think not to say within yourselves, We
have Abraham for our father: for I say to you, that God is able of these
stones to raise up children to Abraham.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And now also the ax is laid to the root
of the trees: therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit
is hewn down, and cast into the fire.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> I indeed baptize you with water to
repentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes
I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit, and
with fire:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Whose fan is in his hand, and he will
thoroughly cleanse his floor, and gather his wheat into the granary; but
he will burn the chaff with unquenchable fire.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan
to John, to be baptized by him.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But John forbad him, saying, I have need
to be baptized by thee, and comest thou to me?

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And Jesus answering said to him, Suffer
it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness.
Then he suffered him.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up
immediately out of the water: and lo, the heavens were opened to him,
and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon
him:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Then was Jesus led by the Spirit into the
wilderness, to be tempted by the devil.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And when he had fasted forty days and forty
nights, he was afterward hungry.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And when the tempter came to him, he said,
If thou art the son of God, command that these stones be made bread.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But he answered and said, It is written,
Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out
of the mouth of God.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Then the devil taketh him up into the holy
city, and setteth him on a pinnacle of the temple,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And saith to him, If thou art the Son of
God, cast thyself down, for it is written, He shall give his angels
charge concerning thee: and in their hands they shall uphold thee, lest
at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Jesus said to him, It is written again,
Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Again, the devil taketh him up upon an
exceeding high mountain, and showeth him all the kingdoms of the world,
and the glory of them,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And saith to him, All these things will I
give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Then saith Jesus to him, Be gone, Satan:
for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shalt thou serve.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Then the devil leaveth him, and behold,
angels came and ministered to him.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Now when Jesus had heard that John was
cast into prison, he departed into Galilee.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt
in Capernaum, which is upon the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and
Nephthalim;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by Isaiah the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> The land of Zabulon, and the land of
Nephthalim, by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the
Gentiles:

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> The people who sat in darkness, saw great
light; and to them who sat in the region and shades of death, light hath
arisen.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> From that time Jesus began to preach, and
to say, Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee,
saw two brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a
net into the sea: for they were fishers.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And he saith to them, Follow me, and I
will make you fishers of men.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And they immediately left their nets, and
followed him.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And going on from thence, he saw other
two brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a boat
with Zebedee their father, mending their nets: and he called them.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And they immediately left the boat, and
their father, and followed him.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And Jesus went about all Galilee,
teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom,
and healing all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease among the
people.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And his fame spread throughout all Syria:
and they brought to him all sick people that were taken with diverse
diseases and torments, and those who were possessed with demons, and
those who were lunatic, and those that had the palsy; and he healed
them.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And there followed him great multitudes
of people from Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from
Judea, and from beyond Jordan.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And seeing the multitudes, he ascended a
mountain: and when he was seated, his disciples came to him.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And he opened his mouth, and taught them,
saying,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall
be comforted.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Blessed are the meek: for they shall
inherit the earth.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for
righteousness: for they shall be filled.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Blessed are the merciful: for they shall
obtain mercy.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Blessed are the pure in heart: for they
shall see God.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Blessed are the peace-makers: for they
shall be called children of God.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Blessed are they who are persecuted for
righteousness' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Blessed are ye when men shall revile you,
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely,
for my sake.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great
is your reward in heaven: for so they persecuted the prophets who were
before you.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the
salt hath lost its savor, with what shall it be salted? it is
thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden
under foot by men.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Ye are the light of the world. A city
that is set on a hill cannot be hid.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Neither do men light a candle, and put it
under a close vessel, but on a candlestick: and it giveth light to all
that are in the house.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Let your light so shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Think not that I am come to destroy the
law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For verily I say to you, Till heaven and
earth shall pass away, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from
the law, till all be fulfilled.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Whoever therefore shall break one of
these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the
least in the kingdom of heaven: but whoever shall do, and teach them,
the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For I say to you, That except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Ye have heard that it was said to them of
old time, Thou shalt not kill; and whoever shall kill, shall be in
danger of the judgment:

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But I say to you, That whoever is angry
with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment:
and whoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the
council: but whoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of
hell-fire.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Therefore if thou shalt bring thy gift to
the altar, and there remember that thy brother hath aught against thee;

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Leave there thy gift before the altar,
and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and
offer thy gift.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Agree with thy adversary quickly, while
thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver
thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou
be cast into prison.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Verily, I say to thee, thou shalt by no
means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Ye have heard that it was said to them of
old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery:

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> But I say to you, That whoever looketh on
a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her already in
his heart.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> And if thy right eye shall cause thee to
sin, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee
that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body
should be cast into hell.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And if thy right hand shall cause thee to
sin, cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee
that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body
should be cast into hell.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> It hath been said, Whoever shall put away
his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement:

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> But I say to you, That whoever shall put
away his wife, saving for the cause of lewdness, causeth her to commit
adultery: and whoever shall marry her that is divorced, committeth
adultery.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> Again, ye have heard that it hath been
said to them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt
perform to the Lord thy oaths:

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But I say to you, Swear not at all:
neither by heaven; for it is God's throne:

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> Nor by the earth; for it is his
footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King,

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> Neither shalt thou swear by thy head,
because thou canst not make one hair white or black.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> But let your communication be, Yea, yea,
Nay, nay: for whatever is more than these cometh of evil.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> Ye have heard that it hath been said, An
eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> But I say to you, That ye resist not
evil: but whoever shall strike thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the
other also.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And if any man will sue thee at the law,
and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloke also.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> And whoever shall constrain thee to go
one mile, go with him two.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> Give to him that asketh thee, and from
him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> Ye have heard that it hath been said,
Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thy enemy:

<span id="an_5:44">5:44</span> But I say to you, Love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them who despitefully use you, and persecute you;

<span id="an_5:45">5:45</span> That ye may be the children of your
Father who is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and
on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.

<span id="an_5:46">5:46</span> For if ye love them who love you, what
reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?

<span id="an_5:47">5:47</span> And if ye salute your brethren only, what
do ye more than others? do not even the publicans so?

<span id="an_5:48">5:48</span> Be ye therefore perfect, even as your
Father who is in heaven is perfect.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Take heed that ye do not your alms before
men, to be seen by them: otherwise ye have no reward from your Father
who is in heaven.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Therefore, when thou doest thy alms, do not
sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do, in the synagogues,
and in the streets, that they may have glory from men. Verily, I say to
you, they have their reward.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> But when thou doest alms, let not thy left
hand know what thy right hand doeth:

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> That thy alms may be in secret; and thy
Father who seeth in secret, himself will reward thee openly.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as
the hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the synagogues,
and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen by men. Verily,
I say to you, they have their reward.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy
closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in
secret, and thy Father who seeth in secret, will reward thee openly.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions,
as the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their
much speaking.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Therefore be ye not like them: for your
Father knoweth what things ye need before ye ask him.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> After this manner therefore pray ye: Our
Father who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on
earth as it is in heaven.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Give us this day our daily bread.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And forgive us our debts, as we forgive
our debtors.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, for ever. Amen.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For, if ye forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father will also forgive you:

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> But if ye forgive not men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the
hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that
they may appear to men to fast. Verily, I say to you, they have their
reward.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thy
head, and wash thy face;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> That thou mayest not appear to men to
fast, but to thy Father, who is in secret: and thy Father, who seeth in
secret, shall reward thee openly.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon
earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through
and steal:

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> But lay up for yourselves treasures in
heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do
not break through nor steal.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> For where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> The light of the body is the eye: if
therefore thy eye be single, thy whole body will be full of light.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> But if thy eye be evil, thy whole body
will be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee is
darkness, how great is that darkness!

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> No man can serve two masters: for either
he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the
one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Therefore I say to you, Be not anxious
for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for
your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than food, and the
body than raiment?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow
not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly
Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they?

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Which of you by anxious care can add one
cubit to his stature?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And why are ye anxious for raiment?
Consider the lilies of the field how they grow? they toil not, neither
do they spin?

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> And yet I say to you, that even Solomon
in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Wherefore, if God so clotheth the grass
of the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven, will
he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> Therefore be not anxious, saying, What
shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or, with what shall we be clothed?

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> (For after all these things do the
Gentiles seek) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all
these things.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and
his righteousness, and all these things shall be added to you.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> Therefore be not anxious for the morrow:
for the morrow will be solicitous for the things of itself. Sufficient
to the day is its own evil.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Judge not, that ye be not judged.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall
be judged: and the measure which ye give, shall be measured to you
again.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And why beholdest thou the mote that is in
thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thy own eye?

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me
pull out the mote out of thy eye; and behold, a beam is in thy own eye?

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out
of thy own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out
of thy brother's eye.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Give not that which is holy to dogs,
neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under
their feet, and turn again and rend you.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and
ye shall find; knock, and the door shall be opened to you:

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For every one that asketh, receiveth; and
he that seeketh, findeth; and to him that knocketh, the door shall be
opened.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Or what man is there of you, who, if his
son shall ask bread, will give him a stone?

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Or if he shall ask a fish, will he give
him a serpent?

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> If ye then being evil know how to give
good gifts to your children, how much more shall your Father who is in
heaven give good things to them that ask him?

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Therefore all things whatever ye would
that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law
and the prophets.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide
is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many
there are who go in by it.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Because strait is the gate, and narrow is
the way, which leadeth to life, and few there are that find it.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Beware of false prophets, who come to you
in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Ye shall know them by their fruits: Do
men gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles:

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Even so every good tree bringeth forth
good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> A good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Every tree that bringeth not forth good
fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know
them,

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Not every one that saith to me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will
of my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Many will say to me in that day, Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out
demons? and in thy name done many wonderful works?

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And then will I profess to them, I never
knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Therefore whoever heareth these sayings
of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him to a wise man, who built his
house upon a rock:

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And the rain descended, and the floods
came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for
it was founded upon a rock.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And every one that heareth these sayings
of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened to a foolish man, who
built his house upon the sand:

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And the rain descended, and the floods
came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell, and
great was the fall of it.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And it came to pass when Jesus had ended
these sayings, the people were astonished at his doctrine.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> For he taught them as one having
authority, and not as the scribes.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> When he had come down from the mountain,
great multitudes followed him.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And behold, there came a leper and
worshiped him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched
him, saying, I will; be thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was
cleansed.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And Jesus saith to him, See thou tell no
man; but go, show thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses
commanded, for a testimony to them.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And when Jesus had entered into Capernaum,
there came to him a centurion, beseeching him,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home
sick with the palsy, grievously tormented.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And Jesus saith to him, I will come and
heal him.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> The centurion answered and said, Lord, I am
not worthy that thou shouldst come under my roof: but speak the word
only, and my servant will be healed.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For I am a man under authority, having
soldiers under me: and I say to this man, Go, and he goeth; and to
another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth
it.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> When Jesus heard it, he marveled, and
said to them that followed, Verily I say to you, I have not found so
great faith, no, not in Israel.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And I say to you, that many shall come
from the east and the west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> But the children of the kingdom shall be
cast out into utter darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And Jesus said to the centurion, Depart;
and as thou hast believed, so be it done to thee. And his servant was
healed in the same hour.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And when Jesus had come into Peter's
house, he saw his wife's mother laid, and sick with a fever.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he touched her hand, and the fever
left her: and she arose, and ministered to them.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> When the evening was come, they brought
to him many that were possessed with demons: and he cast out the spirits
with his word, and healed all that were sick;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by Isaiah the prophet, saying, He himself took our infirmities,
and bore our sicknesses.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about
him, he gave commandment to depart to the other side.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And a certain scribe came, and said to
him, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And Jesus saith to him, The foxes have
holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not
where to lay his head.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And another of his disciples said to him,
Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> But Jesus said to him, Follow me; and let
the dead bury their dead.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And when he had entered into a boat, his
disciples followed him.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And behold, there arose a great tempest
in the sea, insomuch that the boat was covered with the waves: but he
was asleep.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And his disciples came to him, and awoke
him, saying, Lord, save us: we perish.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And he saith to them, Why are ye fearful,
O ye of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea;
and there was a great calm.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> But the men marveled, saying, What manner
of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him!

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And when he had come to the other side,
into the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two possessed with
demons, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might
pass by that way.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And behold, they cried out, saying, What
have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to
torment us before the time?

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And there was a good way off from them a
herd of many swine, feeding.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> So the demons besought him, saying, If
thou expellest us, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And he said to them, Go. And when they
had come out, they went into the herd of swine: and behold, the whole
herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea, and
perished in the waters.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> And they that kept them, fled, and went
into the city, and told every thing; and what had befallen to the
possessed with demons.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And behold, the whole city came out to
meet Jesus: and when they saw him, they besought him that he would
depart out of their borders.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And he entered into a boat, and passed
over, and came into his own city.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And behold, they brought to him a man sick
with the palsy, lying on a bed: and Jesus, seeing their faith, said to
the sick of the palsy, Son, be of good cheer; thy sins are forgiven
thee.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And behold, certain of the scribes said
within themselves, This man blasphemeth.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said,
Why think ye evil in your hearts?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For which is easier, to say, Thy sins are
forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and walk?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But that ye may know that the Son of man
hath power on earth to forgive sins, (then saith he to the sick with the
palsy,) Arise, take up thy bed, and go to thy house.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And he arose, and departed to his house.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> But when the multitude saw it, they
marveled, and glorified God, who had given such power to men.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And as Jesus was passing from thence, he
saw a man named Matthew, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he saith
to him, Follow me. And he arose, and followed him.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at
table in the house, behold, many publicans and sinners came and sat down
with him and his disciples.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And when the Pharisees saw it, they said
to his disciples, Why eateth your Master with publicans and sinners?

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> But when Jesus heard that, he said to
them, They that are in health need not a physician, but they that are
sick.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But go ye and learn what that meaneth, I
will have mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am not come to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Then came to him the disciples of John,
saying, Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but thy disciples fast
not?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And Jesus said to them, Can the children
of the bride-chamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? but
the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and
then they will fast.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> No man putteth a piece of new cloth to an
old garment: for that which is put in to fill it up, taketh from the
garment, and the rent is made worse.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Neither do men put new wine into old
bottles: else the bottles break, and the wine runneth out, and the
bottles perish: but they put new wine into new bottles, and both are
preserved.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> While he was speaking these things to
them, behold, there came a certain ruler, and worshiped him, saying, My
daughter is even now dead: but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she
will live.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And Jesus arose, and followed him, and so
did his disciples.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> (And behold, a woman who was diseased
with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind him, and touched the
hem of his garment.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> For she said within herself, If I may but
touch his garment, I shall be whole.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But Jesus turned himself about, and when
he saw her, he said, Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made
thee whole. And the woman was made whole from that hour.)

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And when Jesus came into the ruler's
house, and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> He said to them, Give place: for the maid
is not dead, but sleepeth. And they derided him.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> But when the people were put forth, he
went in, and took her by the hand, and the maid arose.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And the fame of this went abroad into all
that land.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And when Jesus departed thence, two blind
men followed him, crying, and saying, Thou son of David, have mercy on
us.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And when he had come into the house, the
blind men came to him: and Jesus saith to them, Believe ye that I am
able to do this? They said to him, Yes, Lord.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Then he touched their eyes, saying,
According to your faith, be it to you.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And their eyes were opened; and Jesus
strictly charged them, saying, See that no man know it.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> But they, when they had departed, spread
abroad his fame in all that country.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> As thy went out, behold, they brought to
him a dumb man possessed with a demon.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And when the demon was cast out, the dumb
spoke: and the multitudes marveled, saying, It was never so seen in
Israel.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> But the Pharisees said, He casteth out
demons, through the prince of the demons.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And Jesus went about all the cities and
villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the
kingdom, and healing every sickness, and every disease among the people.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> But when he saw the multitudes, he was
moved with compassion on them, because they fainted, and were scattered
abroad, as sheep having no shepherd.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> Then saith he to his disciples, The
harvest truly is plentiful, but the laborers are few.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> Pray ye therefore the Lord of the
harvest, that he will send forth laborers into his harvest.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And when he had called to him his twelve
disciples, he gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out,
and to heal all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Now the names of the twelve apostles are
these; The first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother;
James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother;

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and
Matthew the publican; James the son of Alpheus, and Lebbeus, whose
surname was Thaddeus;

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot,
who also betrayed him.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> These twelve Jesus sent forth, and
commanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and enter
ye not into any city of the Samaritans.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But go rather to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And as ye go, proclaim, saying, The
kingdom of heaven is at hand.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise
the dead, cast out demons: freely ye have received, freely give.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor
brass in your purses;

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Nor bag for your journey, neither two
coats, neither shoes, nor a staff: for the workman is worthy of his
food.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And into whatever city or town ye shall
enter, inquire who in it is worthy, and there abide till ye go thence.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And when ye come into a house, salute
it.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And if the house be worthy, let your
peace come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to
you.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And whoever shall not receive you, nor
hear your words, when ye depart from that house, or city, shake off the
dust of your feet.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Verily, I say to you, It shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of judgment,
than for that city.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Behold, I send you forth as sheep in
the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as
doves.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But beware of men: for they will
deliver you to the councils, and they will scourge you in their
synagogues.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And ye will be brought before governors
and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But when they deliver you up, be not
anxious how or what ye shall speak, for it shall be given to you in that
same hour what ye shall speak.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> For it is not ye that speak, but the
Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And the brother will deliver up the
brother to death, and the father the child: and the children will rise
up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And ye will be hated by all men for my
name's sake: but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> But when they persecute you in this
city, flee ye into another: for verily I say to you, Ye shall not have
gone over the cities of Israel till the Son of man shall have come.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> The disciple is not above his teacher,
nor the servant above his lord.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> It is enough for the disciple that he
should be as his teacher, and the servant as his lord: if they have
called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more will they call
them of his household?

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Fear them not therefore: for there is
nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be
known.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> What I tell you in darkness, that speak
ye in light: and what ye hear in the ear, that publish ye upon the
house-tops.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And fear not them who kill the body,
but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him who is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Are not two sparrows sold for a
farthing? and not one of them shall fall on the ground without your
Father.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> But the very hairs of your head are all
numbered.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more
value than many sparrows.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Whoever therefore shall confess me
before men, him will I also confess before my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> But whoever shall deny me before men,
him will I also deny before my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> Think not that I am come to send peace
on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> For I am come to set a man at variance
against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> And a man's foes will be they of his
own household.

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> He that loveth father or mother more
than me, is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more
than me, is not worthy of me.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> And he that taketh not his cross, and
followeth me, is not worthy of me.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> He that findeth his life shall lose it:
and he that loseth his life for my sake, shall find it.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> He that receiveth you, receiveth me,
and he that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> He that receiveth a prophet in the name
of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a
righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous
man's reward.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And whoever shall give to drink to one
of these little ones, a cup of cold water only, in the name of a
disciple, verily, I say to you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And it came to pass when Jesus had made
an end of commanding his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach
and to preach in their cities.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Now when John had heard in the prison the
works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And said to him, Art thou he that should
come, or do we look for another?

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Jesus answered and said to them, Go and
show John again those things which ye hear and see:

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> The blind receive their sight, and the
lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are
raised, and the poor have the gospel preached to them.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And blessed is he to whom I shall not be
the cause of his falling into sin.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And as they departed, Jesus began to say
to the multitudes concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness
to see? a reed shaken with the wind?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> But what went ye out to see? A man
clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they that wear soft clothing are in
kings' houses.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> But what went ye out to see? A prophet?
yes, I say to you, and more than a prophet.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For this is he concerning whom it is
written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare
thy way before thee.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Verily, I say to you, among them that
are born of women, there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist:
notwithstanding, he that is least in the kingdom of heaven, is greater
than he.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And from the days of John the Baptist,
until now, the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent
take it by force.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For all the prophets and the law
prophesied until John.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And if ye will receive it, this is
Elijah who was to come.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> He that hath ears to hear, let him
hear.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> But to what shall I liken this
generation? It is like to children sitting in the markets, and calling
to their fellows,

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And saying, We have piped to you, and
ye have not danced; We have mourned to you, and ye have not lamented.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> For John came neither eating nor
drinking, and they say, He hath a demon.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> The Son of man came eating and
drinking, and they say, Behold, a man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, a
friend of publicans and sinners. But wisdom is justified by her
children.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Then he began to upbraid the cities in
which most of his mighty works had been done, because they repented not.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Woe to thee, Chorazin; woe to thee,
Bethsaida: for if the mighty works which have been done in you had been
done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth
and ashes.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> But I say to you, It shall be more
tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted
to heaven, shalt be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works which
have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained
until this day.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> But I say to you, that it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom, in the day of judgment, than for thee.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> At that time Jesus answered and said, I
thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Even so, Father, for so it seemed good
in thy sight.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> All things are delivered to me by my
Father; and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any
man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal
him.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> Come to me, all ye that labor, and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Take my yoke upon you, and learn from
me: for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest to your
souls.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For my yoke is easy, and my burden is
light.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> At that time Jesus went on the sabbath
through the corn, and his disciples were hungry, and began to pluck the
ears of corn, and to eat.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> But when the Pharisees saw it, they said
to him, Behold, thy disciples do that which it is not lawful to do on
the sabbath.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> But he said to them, Have ye not read
what David did when he was hungry, and they that were with him;

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> How he entered into the house of God, and
ate the show-bread, which it was not lawful for him to eat, neither for
them who were with him, but only for the priests?

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Or have ye not read in the law, that on
the sabbath the priests in the temple profane the sabbath, and are
blameless?

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> But I say to you, that in this place is
one greater than the temple.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But if ye had known what this meaneth, I
will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the
guiltless.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> For the Son of man is Lord even of the
sabbath.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And when he had departed thence, he went
into their synagogue.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And behold, there was a man who had his
hand withered. And they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the
sabbath? that they might accuse him.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And he said to them, What man shall
there be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it shall fall into
a pit on the sabbath, will he not lay hold on it, and lift it out?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> How much then is a man better than a
sheep? wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath days.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Then saith he to the man, Stretch out
thy hand. And he stretched it out; and it was restored to a sound state
like the other.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Then the Pharisees went out, and held a
council against him, how they might destroy him.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> But when Jesus knew it, he withdrew
himself from thence: and great multitudes followed him, and he healed
them all.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And charged them that they should not
make him known:

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by Isaiah the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Behold, my servant, whom I have chosen;
my beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my spirit upon
him, and he shall show judgment to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> He shall not contend, nor cry; neither
shall any man hear his voice in the streets.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> A bruised reed shall he not break, and
smoking flax shall he not quench, till he shall send forth judgment to
victory.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And in his name shall the Gentiles
trust.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Then was brought to him one possessed
with a demon, blind and dumb; and he healed him, so that the blind and
dumb both spoke and saw.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And all the people were amazed, and
said, Is not this the son of David?

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> But when the Pharisees heard it, they
said, This man doth not cast out demons, but by Beelzebub the prince of
the demons.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said
to them, Every kingdom divided against itself, is brought to desolation;
and every city or house divided against itself, shall not stand.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And if Satan casteth out Satan, he is
divided against himself; how then shall his kingdom stand?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> And if I by Beelzebub cast out demons,
by whom do your children expel them? therefore they shall be your
judges.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> But if I cast out demons by the Spirit
of God, then the kingdom of God is come to you.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> Or else, how can one enter into a
strong man's house, and seize his goods, except he shall first bind the
strong man? and then he will plunder his house.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> He that is not with me, is against me;
and he that gathereth not with me, scattereth abroad.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Wherefore I say to you, All manner of
sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven to men: but the blasphemy against
the Holy Spirit shall not be forgiven to men.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And whoever speaketh a word against the
Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whoever speaketh against the
Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world,
neither in the world to come.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> Either make the tree good, and its
fruit good; or else make the tree corrupt, and its fruit corrupt: for
the tree is known by its fruit.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> O generation of vipers, how can ye,
being evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of the heart,
the mouth speaketh.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> A good man, out of the good treasure of
the heart, bringeth forth good things: and an evil man, out of the evil
treasure, bringeth forth evil things.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> But I say to you, That for every idle
word that men shall speak, they shall give account in the day of
judgment.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> For by thy words thou shalt be
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> Then certain of the scribes and of the
Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee.

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> But he answered and said to them, An
evil and adulterous generation seeketh for a sign, and there shall no
sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonah.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> For as Jonah was three days and three
nights in the whale's belly: so shall the Son of man be three days and
three nights in the heart of the earth.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> The men of Nineveh shall rise in
judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: because they
repented at the preaching of Jonah; and behold, a greater than Jonah is
here.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> The queen of the south shall rise up in
the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for she came
from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and
behold, a greater than Solomon is here.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> When the unclean spirit is gone out of
a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest, and he findeth none.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> Then he saith, I will return into my
house from whence I came out; and when he is come, he findeth it empty,
swept, and garnished.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> Then goeth he, and taketh with himself
seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and
dwell there: and the last state of that man is worse than the first.
Even so shall it be also to this wicked generation.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> While he was yet speaking to the
people, behold, his mother and his brethren stood without, desiring to
speak with him.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> Then one said to him, Behold, thy
mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> But he answered and said to him that
told him, Who is my mother? and who are my brethren?

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> And he stretched forth his hand towards
his disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren!

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> For whoever shall do the will of my
Father who is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> The same day Jesus went out of the house,
and sat by the sea side.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And great multitudes were gathered to
him, so that he went into a boat, and sat down; and the whole multitude
stood on the shore.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And he spoke many things to them in
parables, saying, Behold, a sower went forth to sow;

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And when he sowed, some seeds fell by the
way side, and the fowls came and devoured them:

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Some fell upon stony places, where they
had not much earth: and forthwith they sprung up, because they had no
deepness of earth:

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And when the sun had risen, they were
scorched; and because they had not root, they withered.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And some fell among thorns; and the
thorns sprung up, and choked them:

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> But others fell into good ground, and
brought forth fruit, some a hundred-fold, some sixty-fold, some
thirty-fold.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And the disciples came, and said to
him, Why speakest thou to them in parables?

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> He answered and said to them, Because
it is given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but
to them it is not given.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> For whoever hath, to him shall be
given, and he shall have more abundance: but whoever hath not, from him
shall be taken away even that which he hath.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Therefore I speak to them in parables:
because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they
understand.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And in them is fulfilled the prophecy
of Isaiah, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not
understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive:

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> For this people's heart is become
gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have
closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> But blessed are your eyes, for they
see: and your ears, for they hear.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> For verily I say to you, That many
prophets and righteous men have desired to see the things which ye see,
and have not seen them; and to hear the things which ye hear, and have
not heard them.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Hear ye therefore the parable of the
sower.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> When any one heareth the word of the
kingdom, and understandeth it not, then cometh the wicked one, and
catcheth away that which was sown in his heart. This is he who received
seed by the way side.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> But he that received the seed into
stony places, the same is he that heareth the word, and immediately with
joy receiveth it;

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Yet he hath not root in himself, but
endureth for a while: for when tribulation or persecution ariseth
because of the word, forthwith he is offended.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> He also that received seed among the
thorns is he that heareth the word; and the care of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> But he that receiveth seed into the
good ground is he that heareth the word, and understandeth it; who also
beareth fruit, and bringeth forth, some a hundred fold, some sixty, some
thirty.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Another parable he proposed to them,
saying, The kingdom of heaven is likened to a man who sowed good seed in
his field:

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> But while men slept, his enemy came and
sowed tares among the wheat, and departed.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> But when the blade had sprung up, and
brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> So the servants of the householder came
and said to him, Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field? from
whence then hath it tares?

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> He said to them, An enemy hath done
this. The servants said to him, Wilt thou then that we go and gather
them?

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> But he said, No; lest while ye gather
the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Let both grow together until the
harvest: and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye
first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the
wheat into my barn.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> Another parable he proposed to them,
saying, The kingdom of heaven is like a grain of mustard-seed, which a
man took, and sowed in his field:

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> Which indeed is the least of all seeds:
but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a
tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge on its branches.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Another parable he spoke to them; The
kingdom of heaven is like leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three
measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> All these things Jesus spoke to the
multitude in parables; and without a parable he spoke not to them:

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the prophet, saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I will
utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the
world.

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and
went into the house: and his disciples came to him, saying, Declare to
us the parable of the tares of the field.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> He answered and said to them, He that
soweth the good seed is the Son of man;

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> The field is the world; the good seed
are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the
wicked one;

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> The enemy that sowed them is the devil;
the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> As therefore the tares are gathered and
burned in the fire; so shall it be in the end of this world.

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> The Son of man shall send forth his
angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend,
and them who do iniquity;

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> And shall cast them into a furnace of
fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> Then shall the righteous shine as the
sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> Again, the kingdom of heaven is like
treasure hid in a field; which, when a man hath found, he hideth, and
for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that
field.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a
merchant seeking goodly pearls:

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> Who, when he had found one pearl of
great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a
net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind:

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> Which, when it was full, they drew to
the shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast
away the bad.

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> So shall it be at the end of the world:
the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just,

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> And shall cast them into the furnace of
fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> Jesus saith to them, Have ye understood
all these things? They say to him, Yes, Lord.

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> Then said he to them, Therefore every
scribe who is instructed to the kingdom of heaven, is like a man that is
a householder, who bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and
old.

<span id="an_13:53">13:53</span> And it came to pass, that when Jesus
had finished these parables, he departed thence.

<span id="an_13:54">13:54</span> And when he had come into his own
country, he taught them in their synagogue, so that they were
astonished, and said, Whence hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty
works?

<span id="an_13:55">13:55</span> Is not this the carpenter's son? is not
his mother called Mary? and his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon,
and Judas?

<span id="an_13:56">13:56</span> And his sisters, are they not all with
us? Whence then hath this man all these things?

<span id="an_13:57">13:57</span> And they were offended in him. But
Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honor, save in his own
country, and in his own house.

<span id="an_13:58">13:58</span> And he did not many mighty works there,
because of their unbelief.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> At that time Herod the Tetrarch heard of
the fame of Jesus,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And said to his servants, This is John
the Baptist; he hath risen from the dead; and therefore mighty works do
show forth themselves in him.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> For Herod had laid hold on John, and
bound him, and put him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother
Philip's wife.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> For John had said to him, It is not
lawful for thee to have her.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And when he would have put him to death,
he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> But when Herod's birth-day was kept, the
daughter of Herodias danced before them, and pleased Herod.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Upon which he promised with an oath to
give her whatever she would ask.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And she, being before instructed by her
mother, said, Give me here the head of John the Baptist in a dish.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And the king was sorry: nevertheless for
the sake of the oath, and of them who sat with him at table, he
commanded it to be given her.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And he sent, and beheaded John in the
prison.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And his head was brought in a dish, and
given to the damsel: and she brought it to her mother.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And his disciples came, and took up the
body, and buried it, and went and told Jesus.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> When Jesus heard of it, he departed
thence in a boat, into a desert place apart: and when the people had
heard of it, they followed him on foot out of the cities.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And Jesus went forth, and saw a great
multitude, and was moved with compassion towards them, and he healed
their sick.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And when it was evening, his disciples
came to him, saying, This is a desert place, and the time is now past;
send the multitude away, that they may go into the villages, and buy
themselves victuals.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> But Jesus said to them, They need not
depart; give ye them to eat.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And they say to him, We have here but
five loaves, and two fishes.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> He said, Bring them hither to me.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And he commanded the multitude to sit
down on the grass, and took the five loaves, and the two fishes, and
looking up to heaven, he blessed, and broke, and gave the loaves to his
disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And they all ate, and were satisfied:
and they took up of the fragments that remained twelve baskets full.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And they that had eaten were about five
thousand men, besides women and children.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And immediately Jesus constrained his
disciples to get into a boat, and to go before him to the other side,
while he sent the multitudes away.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And when he had sent the multitudes
away, he ascended a mountain apart to pray: and when the evening was
come, he was there alone.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> But the boat was now in the midst of
the sea, tossed with waves: for the wind was contrary.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And in the fourth watch of the night
Jesus went to them, walking on the sea.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And when the disciples saw him walking
on the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and they cried
out for fear.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> But immediately Jesus spoke to them,
saying, Be of good cheer; it is I; be not afraid.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And Peter answered him and said, Lord,
if it is thou, bid me come to thee on the water.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And he said, Come. And when Peter had
come down out of the boat, he walked on the water, to go to Jesus.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> But when he saw the wind boisterous, he
was afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And immediately Jesus stretched forth
his hand, and caught him, and said to him, O thou of little faith, Why
didst thou doubt?

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And when they had come into the boat,
the wind ceased.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> Then they that were in the boat came
and worshiped him, saying, In truth thou art the son of God.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> And when they had gone over, they came
into the land of Gennesaret.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> And when the men of that place had
knowledge of him, they sent out into all the surrounding country, and
brought to him all that were diseased;

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> And besought him that they might only
touch the hem of his garment: and as many as touched were restored to
health.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees,
who were of Jerusalem, saying,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Why do thy disciples transgress the
tradition of the elders? for they wash not their hands when they eat
bread.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> But he answered and said to them, Why do
ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> For God commanded, saying, Honor thy
father and mother: and, He that curseth father or mother, let him die
the death.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But ye say, Whoever shall say to his
father or his mother, It is a gift, by whatever thou mightest be
profited by me;

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And honor not his father or his mother,
he shall be free. Thus have ye made the commandment of God of no effect
by your tradition.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Ye hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophesy
of you, saying,

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> This people draw nigh to me with their
mouth, and honor me with their lips; but their heart is far from me.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> But in vain they do worship me, teaching
for doctrines the commandments of men.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And he called the multitude, and said
to them, Hear, and understand:

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Not that which goeth into the mouth
defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a
man.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Then came his disciples, and said to
him, Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended after they heard this
saying?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> But he answered and said, Every plant,
which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be extirpated.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Let them alone: they are blind leaders
of the blind. And if the blind leadeth the blind, both will fall into
the ditch.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Then answered Peter and said to him,
Declare to us this parable.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And Jesus said, Are ye also yet without
understanding?

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Do ye not yet understand, that whatever
entereth in at the mouth goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the
draught?

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> But those things which proceed out of
the mouth come forth from the heart; and they defile the man.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness,
blasphemies:

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> These are the things which defile a
man: but to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Then Jesus went thence, and departed
into the territories of Tyre and Sidon.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And behold, a woman of Canaan came out
of the same territories, and cried to him, saying, Have mercy on me, O
Lord, thou son of David; my daughter is grievously afflicted with a
demon.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> But he answered her not a word. And his
disciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away; for she crieth
after us.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> But he answered and said, I am not sent
but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> Then came she and worshiped him,
saying, Lord, help me.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> But he answered and said, It is not
meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it to dogs.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And she said, Truth, Lord: yet the dogs
eat of the crums which fall from their master's table.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> Then Jesus answered and said to her, O
woman, great is thy faith: be it to thee even as thou wilt. And her
daughter was healed from that very hour.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And Jesus departed from thence, and
came nigh to the sea of Galilee; and ascended a mountain, and sat down
there.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And great multitudes came to him,
having with them those that were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many
others, and cast them down at Jesus' feet; and he healed them:

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> So that the multitude wondered, when
they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk,
and the blind to see: and they glorified the God of Israel.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> Then Jesus called his disciples to him,
and said, I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with
me now three days, and have nothing to eat: and I will not send them
away fasting, lest they faint in the way.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And his disciples say to him, Whence
should we have so much bread in the wilderness, as to satisfy so great a
multitude?

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And Jesus saith to them, How many
loaves have ye? And they said, Seven, and a few little fishes.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And he commanded the multitude to sit
on the ground.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And he took the seven loaves and the
fishes, and gave thanks, and broke them, and gave to his disciples, and
the disciples to the multitude.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And they all ate and were filled: and
they took up of the fragments that were left seven baskets full.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> And they that had eaten were four
thousand men, besides women and children.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And he sent away the multitude, and
took a boat, and came into the borders of Magdala.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> The Pharisees also and the Sadducees
came, and, tempting, desired him that he would show them a sign from
heaven.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> He answered and said to them, When it is
evening, ye say, It will be fair weather: for the sky is red.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And in the morning, It will be foul
weather to-day: for the sky is red and lowering. O ye hypocrites, ye can
discern the face of the sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the
times?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> A wicked and adulterous generation
seeketh for a sign; and there shall no sign been to it, but the sign of
the prophet Jonah. And he left them, and departed.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And when his disciples had come to the
other side, they had forgotten to take bread.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Then Jesus said to them, Take heed and
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And they reasoned among themselves,
saying, It is because we have taken no bread.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Which when Jesus perceived, he said to
them, O ye of little faith, why reason ye among yourselves, because ye
have brought no bread?

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Do ye not yet understand, neither
remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye
took up?

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Neither the seven loaves of the four
thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> How is it that ye do not understand
that I spoke not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees?

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Then they understood that he did not
caution them against the leaven of bread, but against the doctrine of
the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> When Jesus came into the borders of
Cesarea Phillippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Who do men say that I
the Son of man am?

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And they said, Some say that thou art
John the Baptist: some Elijah; and others, Jeremiah, or one of the
prophets.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> He saith to them, But who say ye that I
am?

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou
art the Christ, the Son of the living God.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And Jesus answered and said to him,
Blessed art thou, Simon-Barjona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed
it to thee, but my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And I say also to thee, that thou art
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church: and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And I will give to thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven: and whatever thou shalt bind on earth, shall be bound
in heaven; and whatever thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Then he charged his disciples that they
should tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> From that time forth Jesus began to
show to his disciples, that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many
things from the elders and chief priests, and scribes, and be killed,
and be raised again the third day.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Then Peter took him, and began to
rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be to
thee.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> But he turned, and said to Peter, Get
thee behind me, Satan; thou art an offense to me: for thou savorest not
the things that are of God, but those that are of men.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Then said Jesus to his disciples, If
any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> For whoever will save his life, shall
lose it: and whoever will lose his life for my sake, shall find it.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> For what is a man profited, if he shall
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul?

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> For the Son of man will come in the
glory of his Father, with his angels; and then he will reward every man
according to his works.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> Verily I say to you, There are some
standing here, who shall not taste death, till they shall see the Son of
man coming in his kingdom.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And after six days, Jesus taketh Peter,
James, and John his brother, and bringeth them upon a high mountain
apart.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And he was transfigured before them: and
his face shone as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And behold, there appeared to them Moses
and Elijah talking with him.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> Then answered Peter, and said to Jesus,
Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three
tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> While he was yet speaking, behold, a
bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold, a voice out of the cloud,
which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: hear ye
him.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And when the disciples heard it, they
fell on their face, and were in great fear.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And Jesus came and touched them, and
said, Arise, and be not afraid.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And when they had lifted up their eyes,
they saw no man, save Jesus only.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And as they were descending the mountain,
Jesus charged them, saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of
man be raised again from the dead.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And his disciples asked him, saying,
Why then say the scribes, that Elijah must first come?

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And Jesus answered and said to them,
Elijah truly will first come, and restore all things:

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> But I say to you, that Elijah is come
already, and they knew him not, but have done to him whatever they
pleased: likewise will also the Son of man suffer by them.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Then the disciples understood that he
spoke to them concerning John the Baptist.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And when they had come to the
multitude, there came to him a certain man kneeling down to him, and
saying,

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Lord, have mercy on my son; for he is
lunatic, and grievously distressed; for often he falleth into the fire,
and often into the water.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And I brought him to thy disciples, and
they could not cure him.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Then Jesus answered and said, O
faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how
long shall I suffer you? bring him hither to me.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And Jesus rebuked the demon, and he
departed out of him: and the child was cured from that very hour.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Then came the disciples to Jesus apart,
and said, Why could not we cast him out?

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And Jesus said to them, Because of your
unbelief: for verily I say to you, If ye have faith as a grain of
mustard-seed, ye shall say to this mountain, Remove hence to yonder
place, and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible to you.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> However, this kind goeth not out, but
by prayer and fasting.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus
said to them, The Son of man will be betrayed into the hands of men:

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And they will kill him, and the third
day he will be raised again: And they were exceedingly grieved.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And when they had come to Capernaum,
they that received tribute-money, came to Peter, and said, Doth not your
Master pay tribute?

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> He saith, Yes. And when he had come
into the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, What thinkest thou,
Simon? from whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? from
their own children, or from strangers?

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> Peter saith to him, From strangers.
Jesus saith to him, Then are the children free.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> Notwithstanding, lest we should offend
them, go thou to the sea, and cast a hook, and take the fish that first
cometh up: and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece
of money: take that, and give to them for me and thee.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> At the same time came the disciples to
Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And Jesus called a little child to him,
and set him in the midst of them,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And said, Verily I say to you, Except ye
be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Whoever therefore shall humble himself as
this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And whoever shall receive one such little
child in my name, receiveth me.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> But whoever shall cause one of these
little ones who believe in me, to sin, it were better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the sea.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> Woe to the world because of offenses! for
it must needs be that offenses come; but woe to that man by whom the
offense cometh!

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> Wherefore, if thy hand or thy foot
causeth thee to sin, cut them off, and cast them from thee: it is better
for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having two hands
or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And if thy eye causeth thee to sin, pluck
it out, and cast it from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life
with one eye, rather than having two eyes, to be cast into hell-fire.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Take heed that ye despise not one of
these little ones: for I say to you, that in heaven their angels do
always behold the face of my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> For the Son of man is come to save that
which was lost.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> How think ye? if a man hath a hundred
sheep, and one of them is gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and
nine, and go to the mountains, and seek that which is gone astray?

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And if he findeth it, verily I say to
you, he rejoiceth more over that sheep, than over the ninety and nine
which went not astray.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Even so it is not the will of your
Father who is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass
against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if
he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> But if he will not hear thee, then take
with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word may be established.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And if he shall neglect to hear them,
tell it to the church: but if he shall neglect to hear the church, let
him be to thee as a heathen and a publican.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Verily I say to you, Whatever ye shall
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatever ye shall loose on
earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Again I say to you, That if two of you
shall agree on earth, concerning any thing that they shall ask, it shall
be done for them by my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> For where two or three are assembled in
my name, there am I in the midst of them.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord,
how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? till seven
times?

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Jesus saith to him, I say not to thee,
Until seven times: but, Until seventy times seven.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Therefore is the kingdom of heaven
likened to a certain king who would take account of his servants.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And when he had begun to reckon, one
was brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> But as he had not ability to pay, his
lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children, and all that
he had, and payment to be made.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> The servant therefore fell down, and
worshiped him, saying, Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee
all.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> Then the lord of that servant was moved
with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> But the same servant went out, and
found one of his fellow-servants, who owed him a hundred pence: and he
laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me what thou
owest.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> And his fellow-servant fell down at his
feet, and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay
thee all.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> And he would not: but went and cast him
into prison, till he should pay the debt.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> So when his fellow-servants saw what
was done, they were very sorry, and came and told to their lord all that
was done.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> Then his lord, having called him, said
to him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because
thou desiredst me:

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> Shouldst thou not also have had
compassion on thy fellow-servant, even as I had pity on thee?

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> And his lord was wroth, and delivered
him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due to him.

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> So likewise shall my heavenly Father do
to you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And it came to pass, that when Jesus had
finished these sayings, he departed from Galilee, and came into the
borders of Judea, beyond Jordan:

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And great multitudes followed him, and he
healed them there.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> The Pharisees also came to him, tempting
him, and saying to him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for
every cause?

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And he answered and said to them, Have ye
not read, that he who made them, at the beginning made them male and
female,

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And said, For this cause shall a man
leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they two
shall be one flesh?

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Wherefore they are no more two, but one
flesh. Therefore what God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> They say to him, Why did Moses then
command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away?

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He saith to them, Moses, because of the
hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put away your wives: but from
the beginning it was not so.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And I say to you, Whoever shall put away
his wife, except for lewdness, and shall marry another, committeth
adultery: and whoever marrieth her who is put away, committeth adultery.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> His disciples say to him, If the case
of the man is so with his wife, it is not good to marry.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> But he said to them, All men cannot
receive this saying, save they to whom it is given.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> For there are some eunuchs, who were so
born from their mothers womb: and there are some eunuchs, who were made
eunuchs by men: and there are eunuchs, who have made themselves eunuchs
for the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive it, let him
receive it.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Then were brought to him little
children, that he should put his hands on them, and pray: and the
disciples rebuked them.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> But Jesus said, Suffer little children,
and forbid them not to come to me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And he laid his hands on them, and
departed thence.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And behold, one came and said to him,
Good Master, what good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life?

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And he said to him, Why callest thou me
good? there is none good but one, that is, God: but if thou wilt enter
into life, keep the commandments.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> He saith to him, Which? Jesus said,
Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not
steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness,

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> Honor thy father and thy mother: and,
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> The young man saith to him, All these
things have I kept from my youth: what lack I yet?

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Jesus said to him, If thou wilt be
perfect, go and sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou
shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> But when the young man heard that
saying, he went away sorrowful: for he had great possessions.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> Then said Jesus to his disciples,
Verily I say to you, that a rich man shall with difficulty enter into
the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And again I say to you, It is easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> When his disciples heard it, they were
exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved?

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> But Jesus beheld them, and said to
them, With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Then answered Peter, and said to him,
Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee? what shall we have
therefore?

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And Jesus said to them, Verily I say to
you, that ye who have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of
man shall sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And every one that hath forsaken
houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or lands for my name's sake, shall receive a hundred-fold, and
shall inherit everlasting life.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> But many that are first shall be last,
and the last shall be first.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> For the kingdom of heaven is like to a
man that is a householder, who went out early in the morning to hire
laborers into his vineyard.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And when he had agreed with the laborers
for a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And he went out about the third hour, and
saw others standing idle in the market-place,

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And said to them, Go ye also into the
vineyard; and whatever is right, I will give you. And they departed.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Again he went out about the sixth and
ninth hour, and did likewise.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And about the eleventh hour he went out,
and found others standing idle, and saith to them, Why stand ye here all
the day idle?

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> They say to him, Because no man hath
hired us. He saith to them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatever
is right, that shall ye receive.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> So when evening was come, the lord of the
vineyard saith to his steward, Call the laborers, and give them their
hire, beginning from the last to the first.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And when they came that were hired about
the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> But when the first came, they supposed
that they should receive more; and they likewise received every man a
penny.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And when they had received it, they
murmured against the master of the house.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Saying, These last have wrought but one
hour, and thou hast made them equal to us, who have borne the burden and
heat of the day.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> But he answered one of them, and said,
Friend, I do thee no wrong: didst thou not agree with me for a penny?

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Take that which is thine, and depart: I
will give to this last, even as to thee.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Is it not lawful for me to do what I
will with my own? is thy eye evil because I am good?

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> So the last shall be first, and the
first last: for many are called, but few chosen.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took
the twelve disciples apart in the way, and said to them,

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the
Son of man will be betrayed to the chief priests, and to the scribes,
and they will condemn him to death,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And will deliver him to the Gentiles to
mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him: and the third day he will rise
again.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Then came to him the mother of
Zebedee's children, with her sons, worshiping him, and desiring a
certain thing of him.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And he said to her, What wilt thou: She
saith to him, Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right
hand, and the other on the left in thy kingdom.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> But Jesus answered and said, Ye know
not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of,
and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? They say to
him, We are able.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> And he saith to them, Ye shall drink
indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized
with: but to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give,
but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared by my Father.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> And when the ten heard it, they were
moved with indignation against the two brethren.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> But Jesus called them to him, and said,
Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them,
and they that are great exercise authority upon them.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> But it shall not be so among you: but
whoever will be great among you, let him be your minister;

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> And whoever will be chief among you,
let him be your servant:

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Even as the Son of man came not to be
ministered to, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> And as they departed from Jericho, a
great multitude followed him.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> And behold, two blind men sitting by
the way-side, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying,
Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> And the multitude rebuked them, that
they should hold their peace: but they cried the more, saying, Have
mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And Jesus stood still, and called them,
and said, What will ye that I shall do to you?

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> They say to him, Lord, that our eyes
may be opened.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> So Jesus had compassion on them, and
touched their eyes: and immediately their eyes received sight, and they
followed him.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And when they drew nigh to Jerusalem, and
had come to Bethphage, to the mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two
disciples,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Saying to them, Go into the village over
against you, and immediately ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with
her, loose them, and bring them to me.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And if any man shall say aught to you, ye
shall say, The Lord hath need of them; and immediately he will send
them.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> All this was done, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy
King cometh to thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal
of an ass.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And the disciples went, and did as Jesus
commanded them,

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And brought the ass and the colt, and put
on them their clothes, and they set him thereon.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And a very great multitude spread their
garments in the way; others cut down branches from the trees, and
strewed them in the way.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And the multitudes that went before, and
that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the son of David: blessed is he
that cometh in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And when he had come into Jerusalem,
all the city was moved, saying, Who is this?

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And the multitude said, This is Jesus
the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And Jesus went into the temple of God,
and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew
the tables of the money-changers, and the seats of them that sold doves.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And said to them, It is written, My
house shall be called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of
thieves.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And the blind and the lame came to him
in the temple; and he healed them.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And when the chief priests and scribes
saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the
temple, and saying, Hosanna to the son of David; they were greatly
displeased,

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And said to him, Hearest thou what
these say? And Jesus saith to them, Yes: have ye never read, Out of the
mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And he left them, and went out of the
city into Bethany, and he lodged there.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Now in the morning as he was returning
into the city, he was hungry.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And when he saw a fig-tree in the way,
he came to it, and found nothing on it, but leaves only, and said to it,
Let no fruit grow on thee henceforth for ever. And immediately the
fig-tree withered.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And when the disciples saw it, they
marveled, saying, How soon is the fig-tree withered!

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Jesus answered and said to them, Verily
I say to you, If ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do this
which is done to the fig-tree, but also, if ye shall say to this
mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; it shall be
done.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And all things whatever ye shall ask in
prayer, believing, ye shall receive.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And when he had come into the temple,
the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him as he was
teaching, and said, By what authority doest thou these things; and who
gave thee this authority?

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> And Jesus answered and said to them, I
also will ask you one thing, which if ye tell me, I also will tell you
by what authority I do these things.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> The baptism of John, whence was it?
from heaven, or from men? And they reasoned with themselves, saying, if
we shall say, From heaven; he will say to us, Why then did ye not
believe him?

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> But if we shall say, From men; we fear
the people: for all hold John as a prophet.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And they answered Jesus, and said, We
cannot tell. And he said to them, Neither do I tell you by what
authority I do these things.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> But what think ye? A certain man had
two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go, work to-day in my
vineyard.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> He answered and said, I will not; but
afterward he repented, and went.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And he came to the second, and said
likewise. And he answered and said, I go, sir: and went not.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Which of the two did the will of his
father? They say to him, The first. Jesus saith to them, Verily I say to
you, that the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God
before you.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> For John came to you in the way of
righteousness, and ye believed him not: but the publicans and the
harlots believed him: and ye, when ye had seen it, repented not
afterward, that ye might believe him.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Hear another parable; There was a
certain householder, who planted a vineyard, and hedged it around, and
digged a wine-press in it, and built a tower, and let it out to
husbandmen, and went into a remote country:

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And when the time of the fruit drew
near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive
the fruits of it.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> And the husbandmen took his servants,
and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> Again he sent other servants more than
the first: and they did to them in like manner.

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> But last of all he sent to them his
son, saying, They will reverence my son.

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> But when the husbandmen saw the son,
they said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and
let us seize on his inheritance.

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> And they caught him, and cast him out
of the vineyard, and slew him.

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> When therefore the Lord of the vineyard
cometh, what will he do to those husbandmen?

<span id="an_21:41">21:41</span> They say to him, He will miserably
destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard to other
husbandmen, who will render him the fruits in their seasons.

<span id="an_21:42">21:42</span> Jesus saith to them, Did ye never read
in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is
become the head of the corner: this is the Lord's doing, and it is
marvelous in our eyes?

<span id="an_21:43">21:43</span> Therefore I say to you, The kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the
fruits of it.

<span id="an_21:44">21:44</span> And whoever shall fall on this stone,
shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to
powder.

<span id="an_21:45">21:45</span> And when the chief priests and
Pharisees had heard his parables, they perceived that he spoke of them.

<span id="an_21:46">21:46</span> But when they sought to lay hands on
him, they feared the multitude, because they took him for a prophet.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And Jesus answered, and spoke to them
again by parables, and said,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> The kingdom of heaven is like to a
certain king, who made a marriage for his son,

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And sent his servants to call them that
were invited to the wedding: and they would not come.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Again, he sent other servants, saying,
Tell them who are invited, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen
and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: come to the
marriage.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> But they made light of it, and went, one
to his farm, another to his merchandise.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And the remnant took his servants, and
treated them spitefully, and slew them.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> But when the king heard of it, he was
wroth: and he sent his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned
up their city.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> Then he saith to his servants, The
wedding is ready, but they who were invited were not worthy.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Go ye therefore into the highways, and as
many as ye shall find, invite to the marriage.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> So those servants went out into the
highways, and collected all as many as they found, both bad and good:
and the wedding was furnished with guests.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And when the king came in to see the
guests, he saw there a man who had not a wedding-garment:

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And he saith to him, Friend, how camest
thou in hither, not having a wedding-garment? And he was speechless.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Then said the king to the servants,
Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into utter
darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> For many are called, but few are
chosen.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Then went the Pharisees, and took
counsel how they might entangle him in his talk.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And they sent out to him their
disciples, with the Herodians, saying, Master, we know that thou art
true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any
man: for thou regardest not the person of men.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou?
Is it lawful to give tribute to Cesar, or not?

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> But Jesus perceived their wickedness,
and said, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Show me the tribute-money. And they
brought to him a penny.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And he saith to them, Whose is this
image, and superscription?

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> They say to him, Cesar's. Then saith he
to them, Render therefore to Cesar, the things which are Cesar's; and to
God, the things that are God's.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> When they had heard these words, they
marveled, and left him, and departed.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> The same day came to him the Sadducees,
who say that there is no resurrection, and asked him,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man
shall die, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and
raise up seed to his brother.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Now there were with us seven brothers:
and the first, when he had married a wife, deceased; and having no
issue, left his wife to his brother.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Likewise the second also, and the
third, to the seventh.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> And last of all the woman died also.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Therefore in the resurrection, whose
wife shall she be of the seven? for they all had her.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Jesus answered and said to them, Ye do
err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> For in the resurrection they neither
marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in
heaven.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> But as concerning the resurrection of
the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken to you by God, saying,

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> And when the multitude heard this, they
were astonished at his doctrine.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> But when the Pharisees had heard that
he had put the Sadducees to silence, they were assembled about him.

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> Then one of them who was a lawyer,
asked him a question, tempting him, and saying,

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> Master, which is the great commandment
in the law?

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> Jesus said to him, Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind.

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> This is the first and great
commandment.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> And the second is like it, Thou shalt
love thy neighbor as thyself.

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> On these two commandments hang all the
law and the prophets.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> While the Pharisees were assembled,
Jesus asked them,

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> Saying, What think ye of Christ? whose
son is he? They say to him, The son of David.

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> He saith to them, How then doth David
in spirit call him Lord, saying,

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> The LORD said to my Lord, Sit thou on
my right hand, till I make thy enemies thy footstool?

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> If David then calleth him Lord, how is
he his son?

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> And no man was able to answer him a
word, neither durst any man, from that day forth, ask him any more
questions.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Then Jesus spoke to the multitude, and to
his disciples,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Saying, The scribes and the Pharisees sit
in Moses's seat.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> All therefore, whatever they bid you
observe, that observe and do: but do not ye according to their works:
for they say, and do not.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> For they bind heavy burdens, and grievous
to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will
not move them with one of their fingers.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> But all their works they do to be seen by
men: they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of
their garments,

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> And love the uppermost rooms at feasts,
and the chief seats in the synagogues,

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And greetings in the markets, and to be
called by men, Rabbi, Rabbi.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is
your Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And call no man your father upon the
earth: for one is your Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Neither be ye called masters: for one
is your master, even Christ.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> But he that is greatest among you,
shall be your servant.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And whoever shall exalt himself, shall
be abased; and he that shall humble himself, shall be exalted.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees!
hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye
neither go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering, to
go in.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make long
prayer: therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when
he is made, ye make him two-fold more the child of hell than yourselves.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Woe to you, ye blind guides, who say,
Whoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whoever shall
swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Ye fools, and blind: for which is
greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And whoever shall swear by the altar,
it is nothing; but whoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is
guilty.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Ye fools, and blind: for which is
greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Whoever therefore shall swear by the
altar, sweareth by it, and by all things upon it.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> And whoever shall swear by the temple,
sweareth by it, and by him that dwelleth in it.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> And he that shall swear by heaven,
sweareth by the throne of God, and by him that sitteth upon it.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint, and anise, and cummin, and have
omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith:
these ye ought to have done, and not to leave the others undone.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Ye blind guides, who strain out a gnat,
and swallow a camel.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter,
but within they are full of extortion and excess.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that
which is within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be
clean also.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye are like whitened sepulchers, which indeed appear
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead men's bones, and of all
uncleanness.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> Thus ye also outwardly appear righteous
to men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the
sepulchers of the righteous,

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> And say, If we had been in the days of
our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of
the prophets.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Wherefore ye are witnesses to
yourselves, that ye are the children of them who killed the prophets.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Fill ye up then the measure of your
fathers.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers,
how can ye escape the damnation of hell?

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> Wherefore behold, I send to you
prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and some of them ye will kill and
crucify, and some of them ye will scourge in your synagogues, and
persecute them from city to city:

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> That upon you may come all the
righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel,
to the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the
temple and the altar.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> Verily I say to you, all these things
shall come upon this generation.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
killest the prophets, and stonest them who are sent to thee, how often
would I have gathered thy children, even as a hen gathereth her chickens
under her wings, and ye would not!

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> Behold, your house is left to you
desolate.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> For I say to you, Ye shall not see me
henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of
the Lord.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And Jesus went out, and departed from the
temple: and his disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the
temple.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And Jesus said to them, See ye not all
these things? verily I say to you, There shall not be left here one
stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And as he sat upon the mount of Olives,
the disciples came to him privately, saying, Tell us, when will these
things be? and what will be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of
the world?

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And Jesus answered and said to them, Take
heed that no man deceive you.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> For many will come in my name, saying, I
am Christ; and will deceive many.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And ye will hear of wars, and rumors of
wars: see that ye be not troubled: for all these things must come to
pass, but the end is not yet.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> For nation will rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom: and there will be famines, and pestilences, and
earthquakes in divers places.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> All these are the beginning of sorrows.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Then will they deliver you up to be
afflicted, and will kill you: and ye will be hated by all nations for my
name's sake.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And then will many be offended, and
will betray one another, and will hate one another.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And many false prophets will rise, and
will deceive many.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And because iniquity will abound, the
love of many will become cold.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> But he that shall endure to the end,
the same shall be saved.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And this gospel of the kingdom shall be
preached in all the world, for a testimony to all nations; and then
shall the end come.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> When therefore ye shall see the
abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the
holy place, (whoever readeth, let him understand,)

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Then let them who are in Judea flee to
the mountains:

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Let him who is on the house-top not
come down to take any thing out of his house:

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Neither let him who is in the field
return back to take his clothes.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And woe to them that are with child,
and to them that nurse infants in those days!

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> But pray ye that your flight may not be
in the winter, neither on the sabbath:

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> For then shall be great tribulation,
such as hath not been since the beginning of the world to this time, no,
nor ever shall be.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And except those days should be
shortened, there would no flesh be saved: but for the elect's sake those
days shall be shortened.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> Then if any man shall say to you, Lo,
here is Christ, or there; believe it not.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> For false Christs will arise, and false
prophets, and will show great signs and wonders; so that, if it were
possible, they would deceive the very elect.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> Behold, I have told you before.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> Wherefore, if they shall say to you,
Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth: behold, he is in the secret
chambers; believe it not.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> For as the lightning cometh out of the
east, and shineth even to the west; so shall also the coming of the Son
of man be.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> For wherever the carcass is, there will
the eagles be collected.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> Immediately after the tribulation of
those days, shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her
light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the
heavens shall be shaken:

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> And then shall appear the sign of the
Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn,
and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with
power and great glory.

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And he will send his angels with a
great sound of a trumpet, and they will gather his elect from the four
winds, from one end of heaven to the other.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> Now learn a parable of the fig-tree;
When its branch is yet tender and putteth forth leaves, ye know that
summer is nigh:

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> So likewise ye, when ye shall see all
these things, know that it is near, even at the doors.

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> Verily I say to you, This generation
shall not pass, till all these things shall be fulfilled.

<span id="an_24:35">24:35</span> Heaven and earth shall pass away, but
my words shall not pass away.

<span id="an_24:36">24:36</span> But of that day and hour knoweth no
man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only.

<span id="an_24:37">24:37</span> But as the days of Noah were, so will
also the coming of the Son of man be.

<span id="an_24:38">24:38</span> For as in the days that were before the
flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage,
until the day that Noah entered into the ark,

<span id="an_24:39">24:39</span> And knew not until the flood came, and
took them all away: so also will be the coming of the Son of man.

<span id="an_24:40">24:40</span> Then will two be in the field; the one
shall be taken, and the other left.

<span id="an_24:41">24:41</span> Two women will be grinding at the mill;
the one shall be taken, and the other left.

<span id="an_24:42">24:42</span> Watch therefore; for ye know not what
hour your Lord cometh.

<span id="an_24:43">24:43</span> But know this, that if the master of
the house knew in what watch the thief would come, he would watch, and
would not suffer his house to be broken up.

<span id="an_24:44">24:44</span> Therefore be ye also ready: for in such
an hour as ye think not, the Son of man cometh.

<span id="an_24:45">24:45</span> Who then is a faithful and wise
servant, whom his Lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them
food in due season?

<span id="an_24:46">24:46</span> Blessed is that servant, whom his lord,
when he cometh, shall find so doing.

<span id="an_24:47">24:47</span> Verily I say to you, that he will make
him ruler over all his goods.

<span id="an_24:48">24:48</span> But if that evil servant shall say in
his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming;

<span id="an_24:49">24:49</span> And shall begin to beat his
fellow-servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken;

<span id="an_24:50">24:50</span> The Lord of that servant will come in a
day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of,

<span id="an_24:51">24:51</span> And will cut him asunder, and appoint
him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Then shall the kingdom of heaven be
likened to ten virgins, who took their lamps, and went forth to meet the
bridegroom.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And five of them were wise, and five were
foolish.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> They that were foolish took their lamps,
and took no oil with them:

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> But the wise took oil in their vessels
with their lamps.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> While the bridegroom tarried, they all
slumbered and slept.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And at midnight there was a cry made,
Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed
their lamps.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And the foolish said to the wise, Give us
of your oil: for our lamps are gone out.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> But the wise answered, saying, Not so;
lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that
sell, and buy for yourselves.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And while they were going to buy, the
bridegroom came; and they that were ready, went in with him to the
marriage, and the door was shut.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> Afterward came also the other virgins,
saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> But he answered and said, Verily I say
to you, I know you not.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Watch therefore, for ye know neither
the day nor the hour in which the Son of man cometh.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> For the kingdom of heaven is as a man
traveling into a far country, who called his own servants, and delivered
to them his goods.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> And to one he gave five talents, to
another two, and to another one; to every man according to his several
ability; and forthwith took his journey.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Then he that had received the five
talents, went and traded with the same, and gained other five talents.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And likewise he that had received two,
he also gained other two.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> But he that had received one, went and
digged in the earth, and hid his lord's money.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> After a long time the lord of those
servants cometh, and reckoneth with them.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And he that had received five talents,
came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst to
me five talents: behold, I have gained besides them five talents more.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> His lord said to him, Well done thou
good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I
will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy
lord.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> He also that had received two talents
came, and said, Lord, thou deliveredst to me two talents: behold, I have
gained two other talents besides them.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> His lord said to him, Well done, good
and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will
make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> Then he who had received the one talent
came, and said, Lord, I knew thee that thou art a hard man, reaping
where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not strewed:

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And I was afraid, and went and hid thy
talent in the earth: lo, there thou hast what is thine.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> His lord answered and said to him, Thou
wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap where I have not
sown, and gather where I have not strewed:

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> Thou oughtest therefore to have put my
money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received my
own with interest.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> Take therefore the talent from him, and
give it to him who hath ten talents.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> For to every one that hath shall be
given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be
taken away even that which he hath.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> And cast ye the unprofitable servant
into utter darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> When the Son of man shall come in his
glory, and all the holy angels with him, then will he sit upon the
throne of his glory:

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> And before him shall be gathered all
nations: and he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd
divideth his sheep from the goats:

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> And he will set the sheep on his right
hand, but the goats on the left.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> Then will the King say to them on his
right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world:

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> For I was hungry, and ye gave me food:
I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me
in:

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick,
and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came to me.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> Then will the righteous answer him,
saying, Lord, when saw we thee hungry, and fed thee? or thirsty, and
gave thee drink?

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> When saw we thee a stranger, and took
thee in? or naked, and clothed thee?

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison,
and came to thee?

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> And the king will answer and say to
them, Verily I say to you, Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the
least of these my brethren, ye have done it to me.

<span id="an_25:41">25:41</span> Then will he say also to them on the
left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels:

<span id="an_25:42">25:42</span> For I was hungry, and ye gave me no
food: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink:

<span id="an_25:43">25:43</span> I was a stranger, and ye took me not
in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me
not.

<span id="an_25:44">25:44</span> Then will they also answer him, saying,
Lord, when saw we thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or
sick, or in prison, and did not minister to thee?

<span id="an_25:45">25:45</span> Then will he answer them, saying,
Verily I say to you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of
these, ye did it not to me.

<span id="an_25:46">25:46</span> And these shall go away into
everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And it came to pass, when Jesus had
finished all these sayings, he said to his disciples,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Ye know that after two days is the
passover, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Then assembled the chief priests, and the
scribes, and the elders of the people, in the palace of the high priest,
who was called Caiaphas,

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And consulted that they might take Jesus
by subtilty, and kill him.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> But they said, Not on the feast-day, lest
there be an uproar among the people.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the
house of Simon the leper,

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> There came to him a woman having an
alabaster-box of very precious ointment, and poured it on his head as he
sat at table.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> But when his disciples saw it, they had
indignation, saying, To what purpose is this waste?

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> For this ointment might have been sold
for much, and given to the poor.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> When Jesus understood it, he said to
them, Why trouble ye the woman? for she hath wrought a good work upon
me.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> For ye have the poor always with you;
but me ye have not always.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> For in that she hath poured this
ointment on my body, she did it for my burial.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> Verily I say to you, Wherever this
gospel shall be preached in the whole world, there shall also this,
which this woman hath done, be told for a memorial of her.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Then one of the twelve, called Judas
Iscariot, went to the chief priests,

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And said, What will ye give me, and I
will deliver him to you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces
of silver.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> And from that time he sought
opportunity to betray him.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Now the first day of the feast of
unleavened bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying to him, Where wilt
thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> And he said, Go into the city to such a
man, and say to him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I will keep
the passover at thy house with my disciples.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> And the disciples did as Jesus had
appointed them; and they made ready the passover.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Now when the evening was come, he sat
down with the twelve.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And as they were eating, he said,
Verily I say to you, that one of you will betray me.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And they were exceeding sorrowful, and
began every one of them to say to him, Lord, is it I?

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And he answered and said, He that
dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same will betray me.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> The Son of man goeth, as it is written
concerning him: but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed!
it had been good for that man, if he had not been born.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> Then Judas, who betrayed him, answered
and said, Master, is it I? He said to him, Thou hast said.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> And as they were eating, Jesus took
bread, and blessed it, and broke it, and gave it to the disciples, and
said, Take, eat; this is my body.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> And he took the cup, and gave thanks,
and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it;

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> For this is my blood of the new
testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sin.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> But I say to you, I will not drink
henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new
with you in my Father's kingdom.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And when they had sung a hymn, they
went out to the mount of Olives.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> Then saith Jesus to them, All ye shall
be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will smite
the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> But after I am risen again, I will go
before you into Galilee.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> Peter answered and said to him, Though
all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> Jesus said to him, Verily I say to
thee, that this night, before the cock shall crow, thou wilt deny me
thrice.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> Peter said to him, Though I should die
with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the
disciples.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> Then cometh Jesus with them to a place
called Gethsemane, and saith to the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go
yonder and pray.

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> And he took with him Peter, and the two
sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy.

<span id="an_26:38">26:38</span> Then saith he to them, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even to death: tarry ye here, and watch with me.

<span id="an_26:39">26:39</span> And he went a little further, and fell
on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it is possible, let
this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt.

<span id="an_26:40">26:40</span> And he cometh to the disciples, and
findeth them asleep, and saith to Peter, What, could ye not watch with
me one hour?

<span id="an_26:41">26:41</span> Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

<span id="an_26:42">26:42</span> He went away again the second time, and
prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me,
except I drink it, thy will be done.

<span id="an_26:43">26:43</span> And he came and found them asleep
again: for their eyes were heavy.

<span id="an_26:44">26:44</span> And he left them, and went away again,
and prayed the third time, saying the same words.

<span id="an_26:45">26:45</span> Then he cometh to his disciples, and
saith to them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: behold, the hour is at
hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.

<span id="an_26:46">26:46</span> Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at
hand that doth betray me.

<span id="an_26:47">26:47</span> And while he was yet speaking, lo,
Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with
swords and staffs, from the chief priests and elders of the people.

<span id="an_26:48">26:48</span> Now he that betrayed him, gave them a
sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; hold him fast.

<span id="an_26:49">26:49</span> And forthwith he came to Jesus, and
said, Hail Master; and kissed him.

<span id="an_26:50">26:50</span> And Jesus said to him, Friend, Why art
thou come? Then they came, and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.

<span id="an_26:51">26:51</span> And behold, one of them, who were with
Jesus, stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant
of the high priest, and smote off his ear.

<span id="an_26:52">26:52</span> Then said Jesus to him, Put up again
thy sword into its place: for all they that take the sword, shall perish
by the sword.

<span id="an_26:53">26:53</span> Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to
my Father, and he will presently give me more than twelve legions of
angels?

<span id="an_26:54">26:54</span> But how then shall the scriptures be
fulfilled, that thus it must be?

<span id="an_26:55">26:55</span> In that same hour said Jesus to the
multitudes, Are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staffs to
take me? I sat daily with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no
hold on me.

<span id="an_26:56">26:56</span> But all this was done, that the
scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples
forsook him, and fled.

<span id="an_26:57">26:57</span> And they that had laid hold on Jesus,
led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the
elders were assembled.

<span id="an_26:58">26:58</span> But Peter followed him at a distance,
to the high priest's palace, and went in, and sat with the servants to
see the end.

<span id="an_26:59">26:59</span> Now the chief priests and elders, and
all the council, sought false testimony against Jesus, to put him to
death;

<span id="an_26:60">26:60</span> But found none: and, though many false
witnesses came, yet found they none. At the last came two false
witnesses,

<span id="an_26:61">26:61</span> And said, This man said, I am able to
destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.

<span id="an_26:62">26:62</span> And the high priest arose, and said to
him, Answerest thou nothing, what is it which these testify against
thee?

<span id="an_26:63">26:63</span> But Jesus held his peace. And the high
priest answered and said to him, I adjure thee by the living God, that
thou tell us whether thou art the Christ the Son of God.

<span id="an_26:64">26:64</span> Jesus saith to him, Thou hast said:
nevertheless I say to you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting
on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.

<span id="an_26:65">26:65</span> Then the high priest rent his clothes,
saying, He hath spoken blasphemy; what further need have we of
witnesses? behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy.

<span id="an_26:66">26:66</span> What think ye? They answered and said,
He is guilty of death.

<span id="an_26:67">26:67</span> Then they spit in his face, and
buffetted him; and others smote him with the palms of their hands,

<span id="an_26:68">26:68</span> Saying, Prophesy to us, thou Christ,
Who is he that smote thee?

<span id="an_26:69">26:69</span> Now Peter sat without in the palace:
and a damsel came to him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee.

<span id="an_26:70">26:70</span> But he denied before them all, saying,
I know not what thou sayest.

<span id="an_26:71">26:71</span> And when he had gone out into the
porch, another maid saw him, and said to them that were there, This man
was also with Jesus of Nazareth.

<span id="an_26:72">26:72</span> And again he denied with an oath, I do
not know the man.

<span id="an_26:73">26:73</span> And after a while came to him they that
stood by, and said to Peter, Surely thou also art one of them; for thy
speech betrayeth thee.

<span id="an_26:74">26:74</span> Then began he to curse and to swear,
saying, I know not the man. And immediately the cock crowed.

<span id="an_26:75">26:75</span> And Peter remembered the word of Jesus,
who said to him, Before the cock shall crow, thou wilt deny me thrice.
And he went out, and wept bitterly.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> When the morning was come, all the chief
priests and elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him
to death.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And when they had bound him, they led him
away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> Then Judas, who had betrayed him, when he
saw that he was condemned, repented and brought again the thirty pieces
of silver to the chief priests and elders,

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Saying, I have sinned in that I have
betrayed innocent blood. And they said, What is that to us? see thou to
that.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And he cast down the pieces of silver in
the temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And the chief priests took the silver
pieces, and said, It is not lawful to put them into the treasury,
because it is the price of blood.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And they took counsel, and bought with
them the potter's field, to bury strangers in.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> Wherefore that field has been called, The
field of blood, to this day.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Then was fulfilled that which was spoken
by Jeremiah the prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of
silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of
Israel did value;

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> And gave them for the potter's field,
as the Lord appointed me.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And Jesus stood before the governor:
and the governor asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And
Jesus said to him, Thou sayest.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And when he was accused by the chief
priests and elders, he answered nothing.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Then saith Pilate to him, Hearest thou
not how many things they testify against thee?

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> And he answered him to not a word; so
that the governor marveled greatly.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Now at that feast, the governor was
wont to release to the people a prisoner, whom they would.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And they had then a notable prisoner,
called Barabbas.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Therefore when they were assembled,
Pilate said to them, Whom will ye that I release to you? Barabbas, or
Jesus, who is called Christ?

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> (For he knew that for envy they had
delivered him.)

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> When he was sitting on the
judgment-seat, his wife sent to him, saying, Have thou nothing to do
with that just man: for I have suffered many things this day in a dream,
because of him.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> But the chief priests and elders
persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy
Jesus.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> The governor answered and said to them,
Which of the two will ye that I release to you? They said, Barabbas.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Pilate saith to them, What shall I do
then with Jesus, who is called Christ? They all say to him, Let him be
crucified.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> And the governor said, Why, what evil
hath he done? But they cried out the more, saying, Let him be crucified.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> When Pilate saw that he could not
prevail at all, but that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and
washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the
blood of this just person: see ye to it.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> Then answered all the people, and said,
His blood be on us, and on our children.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Then he released Barabbas to them: and
when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> Then the soldiers of the governor took
Jesus into the common hall, and gathered to him the whole band of
soldiers.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> And they stripped him, and put on him a
scarlet robe.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> And when they had platted a crown of
thorns, they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and
they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of
the Jews?

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> And they spit upon him, and took the
reed, and struck him on the head.

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> And after that they had mocked him,
they took the robe off from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led
him away to crucify him.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> And as they came out, they found a man
of Cyrene, Simon by name: him they constrained to bear his cross.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> And when they had come to a place
called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a skull,

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> They gave him vinegar to drink, mingled
with gall: and when he had tasted of it, he would not drink.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> And they crucified him, and parted his
garments, casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the prophet, They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture
they cast lots.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> And sitting down, they watched him
there:

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> And set up over his head his accusation
written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> Then were there two thieves crucified
with him: one on the right hand, and another on the left.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> And they that passed by, reviled him,
wagging their heads,

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> And saying, Thou that destroyest the
temple, and buildest it in three days, save thyself. If thou art the Son
of God, come down from the cross.

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> Likewise also the chief priests mocking
him, with the scribes and elders, said,

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> He saved others; himself he cannot
save. If he is King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and
we will believe him.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> He trusted in God; let him deliver him
now if he will have him: for he said, I am the Son of God.

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> The thieves also who were crucified
with him, cast the same in his teeth.

<span id="an_27:45">27:45</span> Now from the sixth hour there was
darkness over all the land to the ninth hour.

<span id="an_27:46">27:46</span> And about the ninth hour Jesus cried
with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say,
My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?

<span id="an_27:47">27:47</span> Some of them that stood there, when
they heard that, said, This man calleth for Elijah.

<span id="an_27:48">27:48</span> And immediately one of them ran, and
took a spunge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and
gave him to drink.

<span id="an_27:49">27:49</span> The rest said, Forbear, let us see
whether Elijah will come to save him.

<span id="an_27:50">27:50</span> Jesus, when he had cried again with a
loud voice, expired.

<span id="an_27:51">27:51</span> And behold, the vail of the temple was
rent in two, from the top to the bottom: and the earth shook, and the
rocks rent;

<span id="an_27:52">27:52</span> And the graves were opened, and many
bodies of saints who slept, arose,

<span id="an_27:53">27:53</span> And came out of the graves after his
resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared to many.

<span id="an_27:54">27:54</span> Now when the centurion, and they that
were with him, watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that
were done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.

<span id="an_27:55">27:55</span> And many women were there (beholding at
a distance) who followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering to him:

<span id="an_27:56">27:56</span> Among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary
the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedee's children.

<span id="an_27:57">27:57</span> When the evening was come, there came a
rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph, who also himself was a disciple of
Jesus.

<span id="an_27:58">27:58</span> He went to Pilate, and begged the body
of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered.

<span id="an_27:59">27:59</span> And when Joseph had taken the body, he
wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,

<span id="an_27:60">27:60</span> And laid it in his own new tomb, which
he had hewn out in the rock; and he rolled a great stone to the door of
the sepulcher, and departed.

<span id="an_27:61">27:61</span> And there was Mary Magdalene, and the
other Mary, sitting over against the sepulcher.

<span id="an_27:62">27:62</span> Now the next day that followed the day
of the preparation, the chief priests and Pharisees came together to
Pilate,

<span id="an_27:63">27:63</span> Saying, Sir, we remember that that
deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I will rise
again.

<span id="an_27:64">27:64</span> Command therefore that the sepulcher be
made secure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, and
steal him away, and say to the people, He is risen from the dead: so the
last error will be worse than the first.

<span id="an_27:65">27:65</span> Pilate said to them, Ye have a watch:
go, make it as secure as ye can.

<span id="an_27:66">27:66</span> So they went, and having sealed the
stone, made the sepulcher secure with a watch.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> In the end of the sabbath, as it began to
dawn towards the first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene, and the
other Mary to see the sepulcher.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And behold, there was a great earthquake:
for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled
back the stone from the door, and sat upon it.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> His countenance was like lightning, and
his raiment white as snow.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And for fear of him the keepers trembled
and became as dead men.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And the angel answered and said to the
women, Fear ye not: for I know that ye seek Jesus, who was crucified.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> He is not here: for he is risen, as he
said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> And go quickly, and tell his disciples,
that he is risen from the dead, and behold, he goeth before you into
Galilee; there shall ye see him: lo, I have told you.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And they departed quickly from the
sepulcher, with fear and great joy; and ran to bring word to his
disciples.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And as they were going to tell his
disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail. And they came, and
held him by the feet, and worshiped him.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Then said Jesus to them, Be not afraid:
go tell my brethren, that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see
me.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Now when they were going, behold, some
of the watch came into the city, and showed to the chief priests all the
things that had been done.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And when they were assembled with the
elders, and had taken counsel, they gave a large sum of money to the
soldiers,

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by
night, and stole him away while we slept.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> And if this shall come to the
governor's ears, we will persuade him, and secure you.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> So they took the money, and did as they
were instructed: and this saying is commonly reported among the Jews
until this day.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Then the eleven disciples went away
into Galilee, to a mountain where Jesus had appointed them.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And when they saw him, they worshiped
him: but some doubted.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> And Jesus came, and spoke to them,
saying, All power is given to me in heaven and upon earth.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> Go ye therefore and teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Teaching them to observe all things
whatever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, even to the
end of the world. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark](mar)
