[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jon)  [Next](nah) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Micah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of the LORD that came to Micah the
Morasthite in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah,
which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Hear, all ye people; hearken, O earth, and
all that therein is: and let the Lord GOD be witness against you, the
Lord from his holy temple.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> For behold, the LORD cometh forth from his
place, and will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And the mountains shall be melted under
him, and the valleys shall be cleft, as wax before the fire, and as the
waters that are poured down a steep place.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For the transgression of Jacob is all this,
and for the sins of the house of Israel. What is the transgression of
Jacob? is it not Samaria? and what are the high places of Judah? are
they not Jerusalem?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Therefore I will make Samaria as a heap of
the field, and as plantings of a vineyard: and I will pour down her
stones into the valley, and I will lay bare her foundations.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And all her graven images shall be beaten
to pieces, and all her hires shall be burned with the fire, and all her
idols will I lay desolate: for she gathered it from the hire of a
harlot, and they shall return to the hire of a harlot.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Therefore I will wail and howl, I will go
stripped and naked: I will make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning
as the owls.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For her wound is incurable; for it is come
to Judah; he is come to the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Declare ye it not at Gath, weep ye not at
all: in the house of Aphrah roll thyself in the dust.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Pass ye away, thou inhabitant of Saphir,
having thy shame exposed: the inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the
mourning of Beth-ezel; he shall receive from you his standing.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For the inhabitant of Maroth waited
anxiously for good: but evil came down from the LORD to the gate of
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the
chariot to the swift beast: she is the beginning of the sin to the
daughter of Zion: for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Therefore shalt thou give presents to
Moresheth-gath: the houses of Achzib shall be a lie to the kings of
Israel.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Yet will I bring an heir to thee, O
inhabitant of Mareshah: he shall come to Adullam the glory of Israel.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Make thee bald, and poll thee for thy
delicate children; enlarge thy baldness as the eagle; for they are gone
into captivity from thee.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work
evil upon their beds! when the morning is light, they practice it,
because it is in the power of their hand.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And they covet fields, and take them by
violence; and houses, and take them away: so they oppress a man and his
house, even a man and his heritage.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold,
against this family do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove
your necks; neither shall ye go haughtily: for this time is evil.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> In that day shall one take up a parable
against you, and lament with a grievous lamentation, and say, We are
utterly wasted: he hath changed the portion of my people: how hath he
removed it from me! turning away he hath divided our fields.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Therefore thou shalt have none that shall
cast a cord by lot in the congregation of the LORD.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Prophesy ye not, say they to them that
prophesy: they shall not prophesy to them, that they shall not take
shame.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> O thou that art named the house of Jacob,
is the spirit of the LORD straitened? are these his doings? do not my
words do good to him that walketh uprightly?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Even of late my people hath risen up as an
enemy: ye pull off the robe with the garment from them that pass by
securely as men averse to war.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The women of my people have ye cast out
from their pleasant houses; from their children have ye taken away my
glory for ever.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Arise ye, and depart; for this is not
your rest: because it is polluted, it shall destroy you, even with a
grievous destruction.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> If a man walking in the spirit and
falsehood doth lie, saying, I will prophesy to thee of wine and of
strong drink; he shall even be the prophet of this people.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of
thee; I will surely gather the remnant of Israel; I will put them
together as the sheep of Bozrah, as the flock in the midst of their
fold: they shall make great noise by reason of the multitude of men.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The breaker is come up before them: they
have broken up, and have passed through the gate, and have gone out by
it; and their king shall pass before them, and the LORD on the head of
them.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And I said, Hear, I pray you, O heads of
Jacob, and ye princes of the house of Israel: Is it not for you to know
judgment?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Who hate the good, and love the evil; who
pluck off their skin from them, and their flesh from off their bones;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Who also eat the flesh of my people, and
flay their skin from off them; and they break their bones, and chop them
in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Then shall they cry to the LORD, but he
will not hear them: he will even hide his face from them at that time,
as they have behaved themselves ill in their doings.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Thus saith the LORD concerning the prophets
that make my people err, that bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace; and
he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war against
him:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Therefore night shall be to you, that ye
shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark to you, that ye shall not
divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall
be dark over them.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the
diviners confounded: yes, they shall all cover their lips; for there is
no answer of God.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But truly I am full of power by the spirit
of the LORD, and of judgment, and of might, to declare to Jacob his
transgression, and to Israel his sin.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the
house of Jacob, and princes of the house of Israel, that abhor judgment,
and pervert all equity.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> They build up Zion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Her heads judge for reward, and her
priests teach for hire, and her prophets divine for money; yet will they
lean upon the LORD, and say, Is not the LORD among us? no evil can come
upon us.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Therefore shall Zion for your sake be
plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of
the house as the high places of the forest.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But in the last days it shall come to pass,
that the mount of the house of the LORD shall be established on the top
of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and people
shall flow to it.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And many nations shall come, and say, Come,
and let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, and to the house of the
God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths: for the law shall go forth from Zion, and the word of the LORD
from Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And he shall judge among many people, and
rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into
plow-shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks: nation shall not lift
up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But they shall sit every man under his vine
and under his fig-tree; and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth
of the LORD of hosts hath spoken it.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For all people will walk every one in the
name of his god, and we will walk in the name of the LORD our God for
ever and ever.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> In that day, saith the LORD, I will
assemble her that halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, and
her that I have afflicted;

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And I will make her that halted a remnant,
and her that was cast far off a strong nation: and the LORD will reign
over them in mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And thou, O tower of the flock, the strong
hold of the daughter of Zion, to thee shall it come, even the first
dominion; the kingdom shall come, to the daughter of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Now why dost thou cry aloud? is there no
king in thee? hath thy counselor perished? for pangs have taken thee as
a woman in travail.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Be in pain, and labor to bring forth, O
daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail: for now shalt thou go forth
from the city, and thou shalt dwell in the field, and thou shalt go even
to Babylon; there shalt thou be delivered; there the LORD shall redeem
thee from the hand of thy enemies.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Now also many nations are gathered
against thee, that say, Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon
Zion.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> But they know not the thoughts of the
LORD, neither understand they his counsel: for he will gather them as
sheaves into the floor.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion: for
I will make thy horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass: and thou
shalt beat in pieces many people: and I will consecrate their gain to
JEHOVAH, and their substance to the Lord of the whole earth.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now gather thyself in troops, O daughter of
troops: he hath laid siege against us: they shall smite the judge of
Israel with a rod upon the cheek.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> But thou, Beth-lehem Ephratah, though thou
art little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come
forth to me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been
from of old, from everlasting.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Therefore will he give them up, until the
time that she who travaileth hath brought forth: then the remnant of his
brethren shall return to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And he will stand and feed in the strength
of the LORD, in the majesty of the name of the LORD his God; and they
shall abide: for now will he be great to the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And this man will be the peace, when the
Assyrian shall come into our land: and when he shall tread in our
palaces, then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, and eight
principal men.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And they shall waste the land of Assyria
with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in its entrances: thus will he
deliver us from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he
treadeth within our borders.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the
midst of many people as a dew from the LORD, as the showers upon the
grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the
gentiles in the midst of many people as a lion among the beasts of the
forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep: who, if he goeth
through, both treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and none can
deliver.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Thy hand shall be lifted up upon thy
adversaries, and all thy enemies shall be cut off.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
saith the LORD, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee,
and I will destroy thy chariots:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And I will cut off the cities of thy
land, and throw down all thy strong holds:

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy
hand; and thou shalt have no more sooth-sayers:

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Thy graven images also will I cut off,
and thy standing images out of the midst of thee; and thou shalt no more
worship the work of thy hands.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And I will pluck up thy groves out of the
midst of thee: so will I destroy thy cities.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And I will execute vengeance in anger and
fury upon the heathen, such as they have not heard.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Hear ye now what the LORD saith; Arise,
contend thou before the mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Hear ye, O mountains, the LORD'S
controversy, and ye strong foundations of the earth: for the LORD hath a
controversy with his people, and he will plead with Israel.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> O my people, what have I done to thee? and
wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For I brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, and redeemed thee from the house of servants; and I sent before
thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> O my people, remember now what Balak king
of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him from
Shittim to Gilgal; that ye may know the righteousness of the LORD.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Wherewith shall I come before the LORD, and
bow myself before the high God? shall I come before him with
burnt-offerings, with calves of a year old?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Will the LORD be pleased with thousands of
rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my first-born
for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> He hath shown thee, O man, what is good;
and what the LORD doth require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> The LORD'S voice crieth to the city, and
the man of wisdom shall see thy name: hear ye the rod, and who hath
appointed it.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Are there yet the treasures of wickedness
in the house of the wicked, and the scant measure that is abominable?

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Shall I count them pure with the wicked
balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> For the rich men thereof are full of
violence, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue
is deceitful in their mouth.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Therefore also will I make thee sick in
smiting thee, in making thee desolate because of thy sins.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied; and
thy casting down shall be in the midst of thee; and thou shalt take
hold, but shalt not deliver; and that which thou deliverest will I give
up to the sword.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap;
thou shalt tread the olives, but thou shalt not anoint thee with oil;
and sweet wine, but shalt not drink wine.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> For the statutes of Omri are kept, and
all the works of the house of Ahab, and ye walk in their counsels; that
I should make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an hissing:
therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my people.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Woe is me! for I am as when they have
gathered the summer fruits, as the grape-gleanings of the vintage: there
is no cluster to eat: my soul desired the first ripe fruit.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> The good man hath perished from the earth:
and there is none upright among men: they all lie in wait for blood;
they hunt every man his brother with a net.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> That they may do evil with both hands
earnestly, the prince asketh, and the judge asketh for a reward; and the
great man, he uttereth his mischievous desire: so they wrap it up.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The best of them is as a brier: the most
upright is sharper than a thorn hedge: the day of thy watchmen and thy
visitation cometh; now shall be their perplexity.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not
confidence in a guide: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lieth
in thy bosom.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For the son dishonoreth the father, the
daughter riseth up against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her
mother-in-law; a man's enemies are the men of his own house.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Therefore I will look to the LORD; I will
wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Rejoice not against me, O my enemy: when I
fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the LORD will be a light to
me.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> I will bear the indignation of the LORD,
because I have sinned against him, until he shall plead my cause, and
execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the light, and I
shall behold his righteousness.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Then she that is my enemy shall see it,
and shame shall cover her who said to me, Where is the LORD thy God? my
eyes shall behold her: now shall she be trodden down as the mire of the
streets.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> In the day that thy walls are to be
built, in that day shall the decree be far removed.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> In that day also he shall come even to
thee from Assyria, and from the fortified cities, and from the fortress
even to the river, and from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Notwithstanding the land shall be
desolate because of them that dwell in it, for the fruit of their
doings.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock
of thy heritage, who dwell solitarily in the wood, in the midst of
Carmel: let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> According to the days of thy departure
from the land of Egypt will I show to him marvelous things.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> The nations shall see and be confounded
at all their might: they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, their
ears shall be deaf.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> They shall lick the dust like a serpent,
they shall move out of their holes like worms of the earth: they shall
be afraid of the LORD our God, and shall fear because of thee.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Who is a God like to thee, that pardoneth
iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage? he retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in
mercy.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> He will turn again, he will have
compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities; and thou wilt cast
all their sins into the depths of the sea.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, and
the mercy to Abraham, which thou hast sworn to our fathers from the days
of old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum](nah)
