[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](amo)  [Next](jon) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Obadiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The vision of Obadiah. Thus saith the Lord
GOD concerning Edom; We have heard a rumor from the LORD, and an
embassador is sent among the heathen, Arise ye, and let us rise up
against her in battle.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Behold, I have made thee small among the
heathen: thou art greatly despised.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The pride of thy heart hath deceived thee,
thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high;
that saith in his heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground?

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Though thou shalt exalt thyself as the
eagle, and though thou shalt set thy nest among the stars, thence will I
bring thee down, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> If thieves came to thee, if robbers by
night, (how art thou cut off!) would they not have stolen till they had
enough? if the grape-gatherers came to thee, would they not leave some
grapes?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> How are the things of Esau searched out!
how are his hidden things sought!

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> All the men of thy confederacy have brought
thee even to the border: the men that were at peace with thee have
deceived thee, and prevailed against thee; they that eat thy bread have
laid a wound under thee: there is no understanding in him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Shall I not in that day, saith the LORD,
even destroy the wise men out of Edom, and understanding out of the
mount of Esau?

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be
dismayed, to the end that every one of the mount of Esau may be cut off
by slaughter.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For thy violence against thy brother
Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou shalt be cut off for ever.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> In the day that thou stoodst on the other
side, in the day that the strangers carried away captive his forces, and
foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even
thou wast as one of them.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But thou shouldst not have looked on the
day of thy brother in the day that he became a stranger; neither
shouldst thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of
their destruction; neither shouldst thou have spoken proudly in the day
of distress.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Thou shouldst not have entered into the
gate of my people in the day of their calamity; yes, thou shouldst not
have looked on their affliction in the day of their calamity, nor have
laid hands on their substance in the day of their calamity;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Neither shouldst thou have stood in the
cross-way, to cut off those of his that escaped; neither shouldst thou
have delivered up those of his that remained in the day of distress.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For the day of the LORD is near upon all
the heathen: as thou hast done, it shall be done to thee: thy reward
shall return upon thy own head.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For as ye have drank upon my holy
mountain, so shall all the heathen drink continually, yes, they shall
drink, and they shall swallow down, and they shall be as though they had
not been.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance,
and there shall be holiness; and the house of Jacob shall possess their
possessions.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And the house of Jacob shall be a fire,
and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and
they shall kindle in them, and devour them; and there shall not be any
remaining of the house of Esau; for the LORD hath spoken it.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And they of the south shall possess the
mount of Esau; and they of the plain the Philistines: and they shall
possess the fields of Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria: and Benjamin
shall possess Gilead.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And the captivity of this host of the
children of Israel shall possess that of the Canaanites, even to
Zarephath; and the captivity of Jerusalem, which is in Sepharad, shall
possess the cities of the south.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And saviors shall come upon mount Zion to
judge the mount of Esau; and the kingdom shall be the LORD'S.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah](jon)
