[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eph)  [Next](col.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Philippians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul and Timothy, the servants of Jesus
Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus who are at Philippi, with the
bishops and deacons:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace be to you, and peace, from God our
Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I thank my God upon every remembrance of
you,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Always in every prayer of mine for you all
making request with joy,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For your fellowship in the gospel from the
first day until now;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Being confident of this very thing, that he
who hath begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Even as it is meet for me to think this of
you all, because I have you in my heart; inasmuch as both in my bonds,
and in the defense and confirmation of the gospel, ye all are partakers
of my grace.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For God is my witness, how greatly I long
after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And this I pray, that your love may abound
yet more and more in knowledge and in all judgment;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> That ye may approve things that are
excellent; that ye may be sincere and without offense till the day of
Christ;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of
God.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But I would ye should understand,
brethren, that the things which happened to me have fallen out rather to
the furtherance of the gospel;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> So that my bonds in Christ are manifest
in all the palace, and in all other places;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And many of the brethren in the Lord,
becoming confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word
without fear.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Some indeed preach Christ even from envy
and strife; and some also from good will.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The one preach Christ from contention,
not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds:

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But the other from love, knowing that I
am set for the defense of the gospel.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> What then? notwithstanding, every way,
whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do
rejoice, yes, and will rejoice.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For I know that this will turn to my
salvation through your prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> According to my earnest expectation and
hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as
always, so now also, Christ will be magnified in my body, whether by
life, or by death.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For to me to live is Christ, and to die
is gain.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> But if I live in the flesh, this is the
fruit of my labor: yet what I shall choose I know not.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> For I am in a strait betwixt two, having
a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better:

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is
more needful for you.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And having this confidence, I know that I
shall abide and continue with you all for your furtherance and joy of
faith;

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> That your rejoicing for me may be more
abundant in Jesus Christ by my coming to you again.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Only let your manner of life be as it
becometh the gospel of Christ: that whether I come and see you, or else
be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit,
with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel;

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And in nothing terrified by your
adversaries: which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you
of salvation, and that from God.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> For to you it is given in the behalf of
Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake;

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Having the same conflict which ye saw in
me, and now hear to be in me.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> If there is therefore any consolation in
Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any
bowels and mercies,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Let nothing be done through strife or vain
glory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than
themselves.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Look not every man on his own things, but
every man also on the things of others.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Let this mind be in you, which was also in
Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Who, being in the form of God, thought it
not robbery to be equal with God:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> But made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And being found in fashion as a man, he
humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the
cross.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him,
and given him a name which is above every name:

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> That at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things under
the earth;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And that every tongue should confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always
obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence,
work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For it is God who worketh in you both to
will and to do of his good pleasure.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Do all things without murmurings and
disputings:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> That ye may be blameless and harmless,
the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Holding forth the word of life; that I
may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither
labored in vain.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And if I am even offered upon the
sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For the same cause also do ye joy, and
rejoice with me.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send
Timothy shortly to you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I know
your state.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For I have no man like-minded, who will
naturally care for your state.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For all seek their own, not the things of
Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But ye know the proof of him, that as a
son with the father, he hath served with me in the gospel.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Him therefore I hope to send presently,
so soon as I shall see how it will go with me.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But I trust in the Lord that I also
myself shall come shortly.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Yet I supposed it necessary to send to
you Epaphroditus, my brother, and companion in labor, and
fellow-soldier, but your messenger, and he that ministered to my wants.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> For he longed after you all, and was full
of heaviness, because ye had heard that he was sick.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> For indeed he was sick nigh to death: but
God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should
have sorrow upon sorrow.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> I sent him therefore the more speedily,
that, when ye see him again, ye may rejoice, and that I may be the less
sorrowful.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Receive him therefore in the Lord with
all gladness; and hold such in reputation:

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> Because for the work of Christ he was
nigh to death, not regarding his life, to supply the want of your
service towards me.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord.
To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for
you it is safe.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Beware of dogs, beware of evil-workers,
beware of the concision.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For we are the circumcision, who worship
God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the flesh.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Though I might also have confidence in the
flesh. If any other man thinketh that he hath reason to trust in the
flesh, I more:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of
Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of the Hebrews; with respect
to the law, a Pharisee;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Concerning zeal, persecuting the church;
with respect to the righteousness which is by the law, blameless.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But what things were gain to me, those I
counted loss for Christ.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Yes doubtless, and I count all things to be
loss for the excellence of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for
whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them to be
dung, that I may win Christ,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And be found in him, not having my own
righteousness, which is from the law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ, the righteousness which is from God by faith:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> That I may know him, and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made
conformable to his death;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> If by any means I may attain to the
resurrection of the dead.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Not as though I had already attained,
either were already perfect: but I pursue, if that I may apprehend that
for which also I am apprehended by Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Brethren, I count not myself to have
apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forward to those things which are before,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I press towards the mark for the prize of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Let us therefore, as many as are perfect,
be thus minded: and if in any thing ye are otherwise minded, God will
reveal even this to you.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Nevertheless, to what we have already
attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Brethren, be followers together of me,
and mark them who walk so as ye have us for an example.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> (For many walk, of whom I have told you
often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the
cross of Christ:

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Whose end is destruction, whose God is
their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly
things.)

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> For our conversation is in heaven; from
whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Who will change our vile body, that it
may be fashioned like to his glorious body, according to the working by
which he is able even to subdue all things to himself.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and
longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly
beloved.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche,
that they be of the same mind in the Lord.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And I entreat thee also, true yoke-fellow,
help those women who labored with me in the gospel, with Clement also,
and with other my fellow-laborers, whose names are in the book of life.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Rejoice in the Lord always: and again I
say, Rejoice.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Let your moderation be known to all men.
The Lord is at hand.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Be anxious for nothing; but in every thing
by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made
known to God.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And the peace of God, which passeth all
understanding, will keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Finally, brethren, whatever things are
true, whatever things are honest, whatever things are just, whatever
things are pure, whatever things are lovely, whatever things are of good
report; if there is any virtue, and if there is any praise, think on
these things.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Those things, which ye have both learned,
and received, and heard, and seen in me, do: and the God of peace will
be with you.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that
now at the last your care of me hath flourished again; wherein ye were
also careful, but ye lacked opportunity.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Not that I speak in respect of want: for
I have learned, in whatever state I am, with that to be content.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> I know both how to be abased, and I know
how to abound: every where and in all things I am instructed both to be
full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> I can do all things through Christ who
strengtheneth me.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Notwithstanding ye have done well, that
ye did communicate with my affliction.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Now, ye Philippians, know also, that in
the beginning of the gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church
communicated with me as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and
again to my necessity.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Not because I desire a gift: but I desire
fruit that may abound to your account.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But I have all, and abound: I am full,
having received from Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you,
an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> But my God will supply all your need
according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Now to God and our Father be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The
brethren who are with me greet you.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> All the saints salute you, chiefly they
that are of Cesar's household.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians](col.md)
