[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](psa)  [Next](ecc.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Proverbs

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The proverbs of Solomon the son of David,
king of Israel;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To know wisdom and instruction; to perceive
the words of understanding;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> To receive the instruction of wisdom,
justice, and judgment, and equity;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> To give subtilty to the simple, to the
young man knowledge and discretion.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> A wise man will hear, and will increase
learning; and a man of understanding shall attain to wise counsels:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> To understand a proverb, and the
interpretation; the words of the wise, and their dark sayings.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> The fear of the LORD is the beginning of
knowledge: but fools despise wisdom and instruction.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> My son, hear the instruction of thy father,
and forsake not the law of thy mother:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For they shalt be an ornament of grace to
thy head, and chains about thy neck.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> My son, if sinners entice thee, consent
thou not.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> If they say, Come with us, let us lay
wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause:

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Let us swallow them up alive as the
grave; and whole, as those that go down into the pit:

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> We shall find all precious substance, we
shall fill our houses with spoil:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Cast in thy lot among us; let us all have
one purse:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> My son, walk not thou in the way with
them; refrain thy foot from their path:

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For their feet run to evil, and make
haste to shed blood.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Surely in vain the net is spread in the
sight of any bird.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And they lay wait for their own blood;
they lurk privily for their own lives.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> So are the ways of every one that is
greedy of gain; who taketh away the life of its owners.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her
voice in the streets:

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> She crieth in the chief place of
concourse, in the openings of the gates: in the city she uttereth her
words, saying,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> How long, ye simple ones, will ye love
simplicity? and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate
knowledge?

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will
pour out my spirit to you, I will make known to you my words.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Because I have called, and ye refused; I
have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> But ye have set at naught all my counsel,
and rejected my reproof:

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> I also will laugh at your calamity; I
will mock when your fear cometh;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> When your fear cometh as desolation, and
your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh
upon you.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Then shall they call upon me, but I will
not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me:

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> For that they hated knowledge, and did
not choose the fear of the LORD:

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> They rejected my counsel: they despised
all my reproof.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of
their own way, and be filled with their own devices.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> For the turning away of the simple shall
slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> But whoever hearkeneth to me shall dwell
in safety, and shall be quiet from fear of evil.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and
hide my commandments with thee;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> So that thou incline thy ear to wisdom, and
apply thy heart to understanding;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Yes, if thou criest after knowledge, and
liftest up thy voice for understanding;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> If thou seekest her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hid treasures;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Then shalt thou understand the fear of the
LORD, and find the knowledge of God.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> For the LORD giveth wisdom: out of his
mouth cometh knowledge and understanding.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> He layeth up sound wisdom for the
righteous: he is a buckler to them that walk uprightly.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> He keepeth the paths of judgment, and
preserveth the way of his saints.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Then shalt thou understand righteousness,
and judgment, and equity; and every good path.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> When wisdom entereth into thy heart, and
knowledge is pleasant to thy soul;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Discretion shall preserve thee,
understanding shall keep thee:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> To deliver thee from the way of the evil
man, from the man that speaketh froward things;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Who leave the paths of uprightness, to
walk in the ways of darkness;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in
the frowardness of the wicked;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Whose ways are crooked, and they froward
in their paths:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> To deliver thee from the strange woman,
even from the stranger who flattereth with her words;

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Who forsaketh the guide of her youth, and
forgetteth the covenant of her God.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For her house inclineth to death, and her
paths to the dead.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> None that go to her return again, neither
do they take hold of the paths of life.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> That thou mayest walk in the way of good
men, and keep the paths of the righteous.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For the upright shall dwell in the land,
and the perfect shall remain in it.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But the wicked shall be cut off from the
earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> My son, forget not my law; but let thy
heart keep my commandments;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> For length of days, and long life, and
peace, shall they add to thee.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind
them about thy neck; write them upon the table of thy heart:

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> So shalt thou find favor and good
understanding in the sight of God and man.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Trust in the LORD with all thy heart; and
lean not to thy own understanding.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he
will direct thy paths.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Be not wise in thy own eyes: fear the LORD,
and depart from evil.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow
to thy bones.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Honor the LORD with thy substance, and with
the first-fruits of all thy increase:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> So shall thy barns be filled with plenty,
and thy presses shall burst out with new wine.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> My son, despise not the chastening of the
LORD; neither be weary of his correction:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> For whom the LORD loveth he correcteth;
even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and
the man that getteth understanding.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For the merchandise of it is better than
the merchandise of silver, and the gain of it than fine gold.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> She is more precious than rubies: and all
the things thou canst desire are not to be compared to her.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Length of days is in her right hand; and
in her left hand riches and honor.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and
all her paths are peace.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> She is a tree of life to them that lay
hold upon her: and happy is every one that retaineth her.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> The LORD by wisdom hath founded the
earth; by understanding hath he established the heavens.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> By his knowledge the depths are broken
up, and the clouds drop down the dew.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> My son, let not them depart from thy
eyes: keep sound wisdom and discretion:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> So shall they be life to thy soul, and
grace to thy neck.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then shalt thou walk in thy way safely,
and thy foot shall not stumble.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> When thou liest down, thou shalt not be
afraid: but thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of
the desolation of the wicked, when it cometh.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> For the LORD will be thy confidence, and
will keep thy foot from being taken.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Withhold not good from them to whom it is
due, when it is in the power of thy hand to do it.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Say not to thy neighbor, Go, and come
again, and to-morrow I will give; when thou hast it by thee.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Devise not evil against thy neighbor,
seeing he dwelleth securely by thee.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Strive not with a man without cause, if
he hath done thee no harm.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Envy thou not the oppressor, and choose
none of his ways.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> For the froward is abomination to the
LORD: but his secret is with the righteous.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> The curse of the LORD is in the house of
the wicked: but he blesseth the habitation of the just.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> Surely he scorneth the scorners: but he
giveth grace to the lowly.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> The wise shall inherit glory: but shame
shall be the promotion of fools.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Hear, ye children, the instruction of a
father, and attend to know understanding.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For I give you good doctrine, forsake ye
not my law.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For I was my father's son, tender and only
beloved in the sight of my mother.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> He taught me also, and said to me, Let thy
heart retain my words: keep my commandments, and live.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Get wisdom, get understanding: forget it
not; neither decline from the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Forsake her not, and she shall preserve
thee: love her, and she shall keep thee.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore
get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she
shall bring thee to honor, when thou dost embrace her.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> She shall give to thy head an ornament of
grace: a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings;
and the years of thy life shall be many.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I have taught thee in the way of wisdom;
I have led thee in right paths.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> When thou goest, thy steps shall not be
straitened; and when thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Take fast hold of instruction; let her
not go: keep her; for she is thy life.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Enter not into the path of the wicked,
and go not in the way of evil men.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it,
and pass away.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For they sleep not, except they have done
mischief; and their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For they eat the bread of wickedness, and
drink the wine of violence.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But the path of the just is as the
shining light, that shineth more and more to the perfect day.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The way of the wicked is as darkness:
they know not at what they stumble.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> My son, attend to my words; incline thy
ear to my sayings.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Let them not depart from thy eyes; keep
them in the midst of thy heart.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For they are life to those that find
them, and health to all their flesh.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Keep thy heart with all diligence; for
out of it are the issues of life.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Put away from thee a froward mouth, and
perverse lips put far from thee.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Let thy eyes look right on, and let thy
eyelids look straight before thee.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all
thy ways be established.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Turn not to the right hand nor to the
left: remove thy foot from evil.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> My son, attend to my wisdom, and bow thy
ear to my understanding:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> That thou mayest regard discretion, and
that thy lips may keep knowledge.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For the lips of a strange woman drop as a
honey-comb, and her mouth is smoother than oil:

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as
a two-edged sword.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Her feet go down to death; her steps take
hold on hell.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Lest thou shouldst ponder the path of life,
her ways are movable, that thou canst not know them.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Hear me now therefore, O ye children, and
depart not from the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Remove thy way far from her, and come not
nigh the door of her house:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Lest thou give thy honor to others, and thy
years to the cruel:

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth;
and thy labors be in the house of a stranger;

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And thou mourn at the last, when thy
flesh and thy body are consumed,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And say, How have I hated instruction,
and my heart despised reproof;

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And have not obeyed the voice of my
teachers, nor inclined my ear to them that instructed me!

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I was almost in all evil in the midst of
the congregation and assembly.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Drink waters out of thy own cistern, and
running waters out of thy own well.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad,
and rivers of waters in the streets.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Let them be only thy own, and not for
strangers with thee.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Let thy fountain be blessed: and rejoice
with the wife of thy youth.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Let her be as the loving hind and
pleasant roe; let her breasts satisfy thee at all times; and be thou
ravished always with her love.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And why wilt thou, my son, be ravished
with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger?

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> For the ways of man are before the eyes
of the LORD, and he pondereth all his goings.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> His own iniquities shall take the wicked
himself, and he shall be held with the cords of his sins.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> He shall die without instruction; and in
the greatness of his folly he shall go astray.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> My son, if thou art surety for thy friend,
if thou hast stricken thy hand with a stranger,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Thou art snared with the words of thy
mouth, thou art taken with the words of thy mouth.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself,
when thou art come into the hand of thy friend; go, humble thyself, and
make sure thy friend.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Give not sleep to thy eyes, nor slumber to
thy eyelids.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand of
the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her
ways, and be wise:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Provideth her provisions in the summer, and
gathereth her food in the harvest.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? when
wilt thou arise out of thy sleep?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a
little folding of the hands to sleep:

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> So shall thy poverty come as one that
traveleth, and thy want as an armed man.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> A naughty person, a wicked man, walketh
with a froward mouth.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> He winketh with his eyes, he speaketh
with his feet, he teacheth with his fingers;

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Frowardness is in his heart, he deviseth
mischief continually; he soweth discord.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Therefore shall his calamity come
suddenly; suddenly shall he be broken without remedy.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> These six things doth the LORD hate: yes,
seven are an abomination to him:

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands
that shed innocent blood.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> A heart that deviseth wicked
imaginations, feet that are swift in running to mischief,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> A false witness that speaketh lies, and
him that soweth discord among brethren.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> My son, keep thy father's commandment,
and forsake not the law of thy mother:

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Bind them continually upon thy heart, and
tie them about thy neck.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> When thou goest, it shall lead thee; when
thou sleepest, it shall keep thee; and when thou awakest, it shall talk
with thee.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For the commandment is a lamp; and the
law is light; and reproofs of instruction are the way of life:

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> To keep thee from the evil woman, from
the flattery of the tongue of a strange woman.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Lust not after her beauty in thy heart;
neither let her take thee with her eyelids.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> For by means of a lewd woman a man is
brought to a piece of bread: and the adulteress will hunt for the
precious life.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his
clothes not be burned?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet
not be burned?

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> So he that goeth in to his neighbor's
wife; whoever toucheth her shall not be innocent.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Men do not despise a thief, if he
stealeth to satisfy his soul when he is hungry;

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> But if he is found, he shall restore
seven-fold; he shall give all the substance of his house.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> But whoever committeth adultery with a
woman lacketh understanding: he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> A wound and dishonor shall he get; and
his reproach shall not be wiped away.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> For jealousy is the rage of a man:
therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> He will not regard any ransom; neither
will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> My son, keep my words, and lay up my
commandments with thee.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Keep my commandments, and live; and my law
as the apple of thy eye.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon
the table of thy heart.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Say to wisdom, Thou art my sister; and call
understanding thy kinswoman:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> That they may keep thee from the strange
woman, from the stranger which flattereth with her words.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For at the window of my house I looked
through my casement,

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And beheld among the simple ones, I
discerned among the youths, a young man void of understanding,

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Passing through the street near her corner;
and he went the way to her house.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> In the twilight, in the evening, in the
black and dark night:

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And behold, there met him a woman with
the attire of a harlot, and subtil of heart.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> (She is loud and stubborn; her feet abide
not in her house:

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Now is she without, now in the streets,
and lieth in wait at every corner.)

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> So she caught him, and kissed him, and
with an impudent face said to him,

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> I have peace-offerings with me; this day
have I paid my vows.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Therefore I came forth to meet thee,
diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I have decked my bed with coverings of
tapestry, with carved works, with fine linen of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes,
and cinnamon.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Come, let us take our fill of love until
the morning: let us solace ourselves with loves.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> For the good-man is not at home, he is
gone a long journey:

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> He hath taken a bag of money with him,
and will come home at the day appointed.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> With her much fair speech she caused him
to yield, with the flattering of her lips she impelled him.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> He goeth after her quickly, as an ox
goeth to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Till a dart striketh through his liver;
as a bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it is for his life.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Now therefore hearken to me, O ye
children, and attend to the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Let not thy heart decline to her ways, go
not astray in her paths.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> For she hath cast down many wounded: yes,
many strong men have been slain by her.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Her house is the way to hell, going down
to the chambers of death.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put
forth her voice?

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> She standeth on the top of high places, by
the way in the places of the paths.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> She crieth at the gates, at the entry of
the city, at the entrance of the doors.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> To you, O men, I call; and my voice is to
the sons of man.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> O ye simple, understand wisdom: and ye
fools, be ye of an understanding heart.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Hear; for I will speak of excellent things;
and the opening of my lips shall be right things.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For my mouth shall speak truth; and
wickedness is an abomination to my lips.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> All the words of my mouth are in
righteousness; there is nothing froward or perverse in them.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> They are all plain to him that
understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Receive my instruction, and not silver;
and knowledge rather than choice gold.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> For wisdom is better than rubies; and all
the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find
out knowledge of ingenious inventions.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> The fear of the LORD is to hate evil:
pride, and arrogance, and the evil way, and the froward mouth, do I
hate.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am
understanding; I have strength.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> By me kings reign, and princes decree
justice.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> By me princes rule, and nobles, even all
the judges of the earth.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> I love them that love me; and those that
seek me early shall find me.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Riches and honor are with me; durable
riches and righteousness.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> My fruit is better than gold, yes, than
fine gold; and my revenue than choice silver.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> I lead in the way of righteousness, in
the midst of the paths of judgment.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> That I may cause those that love me to
inherit substance; and I will fill their treasures.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> The LORD possessed me in the beginning of
his way, before his works of old.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> When there were no depths, I was brought
forth; when there were no fountains abounding with water.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> Before the mountains were settled, before
the hills was I brought forth.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> While as yet he had not made the earth,
nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the world.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> When he prepared the heavens, I was
there: when he set a compass upon the face of the depth:

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> When he established the clouds above:
when he strengthened the fountains of the deep:

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> When he gave to the sea his decree, that
the waters should not pass his commandment: when he appointed the
foundations of the earth:

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Then I was by him, as one brought up with
him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him;

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Rejoicing in the habitable part of his
earth; and my delights were with the sons of men.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> Now therefore hearken to me, O ye
children: for blessed are they that keep my ways.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse
it not.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Blessed is the man that heareth me,
watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> For whoever findeth me findeth life, and
shall obtain favor from the LORD.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> But he that sinneth against me wrongeth
his own soul: all they that hate me love death.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Wisdom hath built her house, she hath hewn
out her seven pillars:

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> She hath killed her beasts; she hath
mingled her wine; she hath also furnished her table.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> She hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth
upon the highest places of the city,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Whoever is simple, let him turn in hither:
as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him,

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the
wine which I have mingled.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Forsake the foolish, and live; and go in
the way of understanding.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> He that reproveth a scorner, getteth to
himself shame: and he that rebuketh a wicked man getteth himself a blot.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Reprove not a scorner, lest he shall hate
thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Give instruction to a wise man, and he will
be yet wiser: teach a just man, and he will increase in learning.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> The fear of the LORD is the beginning of
wisdom: and the knowledge of the holy is understanding.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> For by me thy days shall be multiplied,
and the years of thy life shall be increased.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> If thou art wise, thou shalt be wise for
thyself: but if thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> A foolish woman is clamorous: she is
simple, and knoweth nothing.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> For she sitteth at the door of her house,
on a seat in the high places of the city,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> To call passengers who go right on their
ways:

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Whoever is simple, let him turn in
hither: and as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him,

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten
in secret is pleasant.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> But he knoweth not that the dead are
there; and that her guests are in the depths of hell.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son
maketh a glad father: but a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Treasures of wickedness profit nothing:
but righteousness delivereth from death.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> The LORD will not suffer the soul of the
righteous to famish: but he casteth away the substance of the wicked.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> He becometh poor that dealeth with a
slack hand: but the hand of the diligent maketh rich.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> He that gathereth in summer is a wise
son: but he that sleepeth in harvest is a son that causeth shame.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Blessings are upon the head of the just:
but violence covereth the mouth of the wicked.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> The memory of the just is blessed: but
the name of the wicked shall perish.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> The wise in heart will receive
commandments: but a prating fool shall fall.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> He that walketh uprightly walketh surely:
but he that perverteth his ways shall be known.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> He that winketh with the eye causeth
sorrow: but a prating fool shall fall.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> The mouth of a righteous man is a well
of life: but violence covereth the mouth of the wicked.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Hatred stirreth up strifes: but love
covereth all sins.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> In the lips of him that hath
understanding wisdom is found: but a rod is for the back of him that is
void of understanding.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Wise men lay up knowledge: but the
mouth of the foolish is near destruction.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The rich man's wealth is his strong
city: the destruction of the poor is their poverty.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The labor of the righteous tendeth to
life: the fruit of the wicked to sin.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> He is in the way of life that keepeth
instruction: but he that refuseth reproof erreth.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> He that hideth hatred with lying lips,
and he that uttereth a slander, is a fool.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> In the multitude of words there wanteth
not sin: but he that restraineth his lips is wise.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> The tongue of the just is as choice
silver: the heart of the wicked is little worth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> The lips of the righteous feed many:
but fools die for want of wisdom.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> The blessing of the LORD, it maketh
rich, and he addeth no sorrow with it.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> It is as sport to a fool to do
mischief: but a man of understanding hath wisdom.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> The fear of the wicked, it shall come
upon him: but the desire of the righteous shall be granted.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> As the whirlwind passeth, so is the
wicked no more: but the righteous is an everlasting foundation.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke
to the eyes, so is the sluggard to them that send him.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> The fear of the LORD prolongeth days:
but the years of the wicked shall be shortened.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> The hope of the righteous shall be
gladness: but the expectation of the wicked shall perish.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> The way of the LORD is strength to the
upright: but destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> The righteous shall never be removed:
but the wicked shall not inhabit the earth.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> The mouth of the just bringeth forth
wisdom: but the froward tongue shall be cut out.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> The lips of the righteous know what is
acceptable: but the mouth of the wicked speaketh frowardness.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> A false balance is abomination to the
LORD: but a just weight is his delight.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> When pride cometh, then cometh shame: but
with the lowly is wisdom.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> The integrity of the upright shall guide
them: but the perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Riches profit not in the day of wrath:
but righteousness delivereth from death.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> The righteousness of the perfect shall
direct his way: but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> The righteousness of the upright shall
deliver them: but transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> When a wicked man dieth, his expectation
shall perish: and the hope of unjust men perisheth.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> The righteous is delivered out of
trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> A hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth his
neighbor: but through knowledge shall the just be delivered.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> When the righteous prosper, the city
rejoiceth: and when the wicked perish, there is shouting.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> By the blessing of the upright the city
is exalted: but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> He that is void of wisdom despiseth his
neighbor: but a man of understanding holdeth his peace.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> A tale-bearer revealeth secrets: but he
that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Where no counsel is, the people fall:
but in the multitude of counselors there is safety.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> He that is surety for a stranger shall
smart for it: and he that hateth suretiship is sure.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> A gracious woman retaineth honor: and
strong men retain riches.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> The merciful man doeth good to his own
soul: but he that is cruel troubleth his own flesh.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> The wicked worketh a deceitful work:
but to him that soweth righteousness shall be a sure reward.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> As righteousness tendeth to life: so he
that pursueth evil pursueth it to his own death.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> They that are of a froward heart are
abomination to the LORD: but such as are upright in their way are his
delight.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Though hand join in hand, the wicked
shall not be unpunished: but the seed of the righteous shall be
delivered.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout,
so is a fair woman who is without discretion.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> The desire of the righteous is only
good: but the expectation of the wicked is wrath.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> There is that scattereth, and yet
increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it
tendeth to poverty.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> The liberal soul shall be made fat: and
he that watereth shall be watered also himself.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> He that withholdeth corn, the people
shall curse him: but blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth
it.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> He that diligently seeketh good
procureth favor: but he that seeketh mischief, it shall come to him.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> He that trusteth in his riches shall
fall: but the righteous shall flourish as a branch.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> He that troubleth his own house shall
inherit the wind: and the fool shall be servant to the wise of heart.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> The fruit of the righteous is a tree of
life; and he that winneth souls is wise.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> Behold, the righteous shall be
recompensed upon the earth: much more the wicked and the sinner.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Whoever loveth instruction loveth
knowledge: but he that hateth reproof is brutish.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> A good man obtaineth favor from the LORD:
but a man of wicked devices he will condemn.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> A man shall not be established by
wickedness: but the root of the righteous shall not be moved.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> A virtuous woman is a crown to her
husband: but she that maketh ashamed is as rottenness in his bones.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> The thoughts of the righteous are right:
but the counsels of the wicked are deceit.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> The words of the wicked are to lie in
wait for blood: but the mouth of the upright shall deliver them.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> The wicked are overthrown, and are not:
but the house of the righteous shall stand.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> A man shall be commended according to his
wisdom: but he that is of a perverse heart shall be despised.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> He that is despised, and hath a servant,
is better than he that honoreth himself, and is destitute of bread.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> A righteous man regardeth the life of
his beast: but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> He that tilleth his land shall be
satisfied with bread: but he that followeth vain persons is void of
understanding.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The wicked desireth the net of evil
men: but the root of the righteous yieldeth fruit.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> The wicked is snared by the
transgression of his lips: but the just shall come out of trouble.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> A man shall be satisfied with good by
the fruit of his mouth: and the recompense of a man's hands shall be
rendered to him.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> The way of a fool is right in his own
eyes: but he that hearkeneth to counsel is wise.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> A fool's wrath is presently known: but
a prudent man covereth shame.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> He that speaketh truth showeth forth
righteousness: but a false witness, deceit.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> There is that speaketh like the
piercings of a sword: but the tongue of the wise is health.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> The lip of truth shall be established
for ever: but a lying tongue is but for a moment.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Deceit is in the heart of them that
imagine evil: but to the counselors of peace is joy.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> There shall no evil happen to the just:
but the wicked shall be filled with mischief.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Lying lips are abomination to the LORD:
but they that deal truly are his delight.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but
the heart of fools proclaimeth foolishness.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> The hand of the diligent shall bear
rule: but the slothful shall be under tribute.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Heaviness in the heart of man
depresseth it: but a good word maketh it glad.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> The righteous is more excellent than
his neighbor: but the way of the wicked seduceth them.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> The slothful man roasteth not that
which he took in hunting: but the substance of a diligent man is
precious.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> In the way of righteousness is life;
and in the path of it there is no death.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> A wise son heareth his father's
instruction: but a scorner heareth not rebuke.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> A man shall eat good by the fruit of his
mouth: but the soul of the transgressors shall eat violence.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> He that keepeth his mouth keepeth his
life: but he that openeth wide his lips shall have destruction.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> The soul of the sluggard desireth, and
hath nothing: but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> A righteous man hateth lying: but a
wicked man is lothsome, and cometh to shame.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Righteousness keepeth him that is upright
in the way: but wickedness overthroweth the sinner.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> There is that maketh himself rich, yet
hath nothing: there is that maketh himself poor, yet hath great riches.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> The ransom of a man's life is his riches:
but the poor heareth not rebuke.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> The light of the righteous rejoiceth: but
the lamp of the wicked shall be extinguished.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Only by pride cometh contention: but
with the well-advised is wisdom.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Wealth gotten by vanity shall be
diminished: but he that gathereth by labor shall increase.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Hope deferred maketh the heart sick:
but when the desire cometh, it is a tree of life.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Whoever despiseth the word shall be
destroyed: but he that feareth the commandment shall be rewarded.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> The law of the wise is a fountain of
life, to depart from the snares of death.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Good understanding giveth favor: but
the way of transgressors is hard.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Every prudent man dealeth with
knowledge: but a fool layeth open his folly.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> A wicked messenger falleth into
mischief: but a faithful embassador is health.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Poverty and shame shall be to him that
refuseth instruction: but he that regardeth reproof shall be honored.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> The desire accomplished is sweet to the
soul: but it is abomination to fools to depart from evil.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> He that walketh with wise men shall be
wise: but a companion of fools shall be destroyed.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Evil pursueth sinners: but to the
righteous good shall be repaid.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> A good man leaveth an inheritance to
his children's children: and the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the
just.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Much food is in the tillage of the
poor: but there is that is destroyed for want of judgment.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> He that spareth his rod hateth his son:
but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> The righteous eateth to the satisfying
of his soul: but the belly of the wicked shall want.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Every wise woman buildeth her house: but
the foolish plucketh it down with her hands.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> He that walketh in his uprightness
feareth the LORD: but he that is perverse in his ways despiseth him.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of
pride: but the lips of the wise shall preserve them.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Where no oxen are, the crib is clean: but
much increase is by the strength of the ox.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> A faithful witness will not lie: but a
false witness will utter lies.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> A scorner seeketh wisdom, and findeth it
not: but knowledge is easy to him that understandeth.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Go from the presence of a foolish man,
when thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> The wisdom of the prudent is to
understand his way: but the folly of fools is deceit.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Fools make a mock at sin: but among the
righteous there is favor.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> The heart knoweth its own bitterness;
and a stranger doth not intermeddle with its joy.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> The house of the wicked shall be
overthrown: but the tabernacle of the upright shall flourish.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> There is a way which seemeth right to a
man, but the end of it are the ways of death.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Even in laughter the heart is
sorrowful; and the end of that mirth is heaviness.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> The backslider in heart shall be filled
with his own ways: and a good man shall be satisfied from himself.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> The simple believeth every word: but
the prudent man looketh well to his going.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> A wise man feareth, and departeth from
evil: but the fool rageth, and is confident.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> He that is soon angry dealeth
foolishly: and a man of wicked devices is hated.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> The simple inherit folly: but the
prudent are crowned with knowledge.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> The evil bow before the good; and the
wicked at the gates of the righteous.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> The poor is hated even by his own
neighbor: but the rich hath many friends.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> He that despiseth his neighbor sinneth:
but he that hath mercy on the poor, happy is he.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Do they not err that devise evil? but
mercy and truth shall be to them that devise good.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> In all labor there is profit: but the
talk of the lips tendeth only to penury.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> The crown of the wise is their riches:
but the foolishness of fools is folly.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> A true witness delivereth souls: but a
deceitful witness speaketh lies.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> In the fear of the LORD is strong
confidence: and his children shall have a place of refuge.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> The fear of the LORD is a fountain of
life, to depart from the snares of death.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> In the multitude of people is the
king's honor: but in the want of people is the destruction of the
prince.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> He that is slow to wrath is of great
understanding: but he that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> A sound heart is the life of the flesh:
but envy the rottenness of the bones.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth
his Maker: but he that honoreth him hath mercy on the poor.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> The wicked is driven away in his
wickedness: but the righteous hath hope in his death.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> Wisdom resteth in the heart of him that
hath understanding: but that which is in the midst of fools is made
known.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> Righteousness exalteth a nation: but
sin is a reproach to any people.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> The king's favor is towards a wise
servant: but his wrath is against him that causeth shame.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> A soft answer turneth away wrath: but
grievous words stir up anger.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> The tongue of the wise useth knowledge
aright: but the mouth of fools poureth out foolishness.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> The eyes of the LORD are in every place,
beholding the evil and the good.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> A wholesome tongue is a tree of life: but
perverseness in it is a breach in the spirit.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> A fool despiseth his father's
instruction: but he that regardeth reproof is prudent.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> In the house of the righteous is much
treasure: but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> The lips of the wise diffuse knowledge:
but the heart of the foolish doeth not so.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the LORD: but the prayer of the upright is his delight.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> The way of the wicked is an abomination
to the LORD; but he loveth him that followeth after righteousness.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Correction is grievous to him that
forsaketh the way: and he that hateth reproof shall die.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Hell and destruction are before the
LORD: how much more then the hearts of the children of men?

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> A scorner loveth not one that reproveth
him: neither will he go to the wise.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> A merry heart maketh a cheerful
countenance: but by sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> The heart of him that hath
understanding seeketh knowledge: but the mouth of fools feedeth on
foolishness.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> All the days of the afflicted are evil:
but he that is of a merry heart hath a continual feast.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Better is little with the fear of the
LORD, than great treasure and trouble with it.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Better is a dinner of herbs where love
is, than a stalled ox and hatred with it.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> A wrathful man stirreth up strife: but
he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> The way of the slothful man is as a
hedge of thorns: but the way of the righteous is made plain.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> A wise son maketh a glad father: but a
foolish man despiseth his mother.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Folly is joy to him that is destitute
of wisdom: but a man of understanding walketh uprightly.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Without counsel purposes are
disappointed: but in the multitude of counselors they are established.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> A man hath joy by the answer of his
mouth: and a word spoken in due season, how good it is!

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> The way of life is above to the wise,
that he may depart from hell beneath.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> The LORD will destroy the house of the
proud: but he will establish the border of the widow.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> The thoughts of the wicked are an
abomination to the LORD: but the words of the pure are pleasant words.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> He that is greedy of gain troubleth his
own house; but he that hateth gifts shall live.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> The heart of the righteous studieth to
answer: but the mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> The LORD is far from the wicked: but he
heareth the prayer of the righteous.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> The light of the eyes rejoiceth the
heart; and a good report maketh the bones fat.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> The ear that heareth the reproof of
life abideth among the wise.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> He that refuseth instruction despiseth
his own soul: but he that heareth reproof getteth understanding.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> The fear of the LORD is the instruction
of wisdom: and before honor is humility.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> The preparations of the heart in man, and
the answer of the tongue, are from the LORD.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> All the ways of a man are clean in his
own eyes; but the LORD weigheth the spirits.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Commit thy works to the LORD, and thy
thoughts shall be established.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> The LORD hath made all things for
himself: yes, even the wicked for the day of evil.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Every one that is proud in heart is an
abomination to the LORD: though hand join in hand, he shall not be
unpunished.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> By mercy and truth iniquity is purged:
and by the fear of the LORD men depart from evil.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> When a man's ways please the LORD, he
maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Better is a little with righteousness,
than great revenues without right.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> A man's heart deviseth his way: but the
LORD directeth his steps.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> A divine sentence is in the lips of the
king: his mouth transgresseth not in judgment.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> A just weight and balance are the
LORD'S: all the weights of the bag are his work.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> It is an abomination to kings to commit
wickedness: for the throne is established by righteousness.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Righteous lips are the delight of
kings; and they love him that speaketh right.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> The wrath of a king is as messengers of
death: but a wise man will pacify it.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> In the light of a king's countenance is
life; and his favor is as a cloud of the latter rain.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> How much better is it to get wisdom
than gold? and to get understanding rather to be chosen than silver?

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> The highway of the upright is to depart
from evil: he that keepeth his way preserveth his soul.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Pride goeth before destruction, and a
haughty spirit before a fall.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Better it is to be of a humble spirit
with the lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> He that handleth a matter wisely shall
find good: and whoever trusteth in the LORD, happy is he.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> The wise in heart shall be called
prudent: and the sweetness of the lips increaseth learning.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Understanding is a well-spring of life
to him that hath it: but the instruction of fools is folly.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> The heart of the wise teacheth his
mouth, and addeth learning to his lips.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Pleasant words are as a honey-comb,
sweet to the soul, and health to the bones.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> There is a way that seemeth right to a
man, but the end of it is the ways of death.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> He that laboreth laboreth for himself;
for his mouth craveth it of him.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> An ungodly man diggeth up evil: and in
his lips there is as a burning fire.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> A froward man soweth strife: and a
whisperer separateth chief friends.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> A violent man enticeth his neighbor,
and leadeth him into the way that is not good.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> He shutteth his eyes to devise froward
things: moving his lips he bringeth evil to pass.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> The hoary head is a crown of glory, if
it is found in the way of righteousness.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> He that is slow to anger is better than
the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit, than he that taketh a city.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> The lot is cast into the lap: but the
whole disposing of it is from the LORD.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Better is a dry morsel, and quietness
with it, than a house full of sacrifices with strife.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> A wise servant shall have rule over a son
that causeth shame, and shall have part of the inheritance among the
brethren.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> The fining-pot is for silver, and the
furnace for gold: but the LORD trieth the hearts.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> A wicked doer giveth heed to false lips:
and a liar giveth ear to a naughty tongue.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> He that mocketh the poor reproacheth his
Maker; and he that is glad at calamities shall not be unpunished.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Children's children are the crown of old
men; and the glory of children is their fathers.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Excellent speech becometh not a fool:
much less do lying lips a prince.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes
of him that hath it: whithersoever it turneth, it prospereth.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> He that covereth a transgression seeketh
love; but he that repeateth a matter separateth very friends.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> A reproof entereth more into a wise man
than a hundred stripes into a fool.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> An evil man seeketh only rebellion:
therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a
man, rather than a fool in his folly.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Whoever rewardeth evil for good, evil
shall not depart from his house.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> The beginning of strife is as when one
letteth out water: therefore withdraw from contention, before it be
meddled with.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> He that justifieth the wicked, and he
that condemneth the just, even they both are abomination to the LORD.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Why is there a price in the hand of a
fool to get wisdom, seeing he hath no heart to it?

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> A friend loveth at all times, and a
brother is born for adversity.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> A man void of understanding striketh
hands, and becometh surety in the presence of his friend.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> He loveth transgression that loveth
strife: and he that exalteth his gate seeketh destruction.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> He that hath a froward heart findeth no
good: and he that hath a perverse tongue falleth into mischief.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> He that begetteth a fool doeth it to
his sorrow: and the father of a fool hath no joy.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> A merry heart doeth good like a
medicine: but a broken spirit drieth the bones.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> A wicked man taketh a gift out of the
bosom to pervert the ways of judgment.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Wisdom is before him that hath
understanding; but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> A foolish son is a grief to his father,
and bitterness to her that bore him.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> Also to punish the just is not good,
nor to strike princes for equity.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> He that hath knowledge spareth his
words: and a man of understanding is of an excellent spirit.

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace,
is counted wise: and he that shutteth his lips is esteemed a man of
understanding.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Through desire a man, having separated
himself, seeketh and intermeddleth with all wisdom.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> A fool hath no delight in understanding,
but that his heart may reveal itself.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> When the wicked cometh, then cometh also
contempt, and with ignominy reproach.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> The words of a man's mouth are as deep
waters, and the well-spring of wisdom as a flowing brook.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> It is not good to accept the person of
the wicked, to overthrow the righteous in judgment.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> A fool's lips enter into contention, and
his mouth calleth for strokes.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> A fool's mouth is his destruction, and
his lips are the snare of his soul.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> The words of a tale-bearer are as wounds,
and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> He also that is slothful in his work is
brother to him that is a great waster.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> The name of the LORD is a strong tower:
the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> The rich man's wealth is his strong
city, and as a high wall in his own conceit.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Before destruction the heart of man is
haughty, and before honor is humility.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> He that answereth a matter before he
heareth it, it is folly and shame to him.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> The spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> The heart of the prudent getteth
knowledge; and the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> A man's gift maketh room for him, and
bringeth him before great men.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> He that is first in his own cause
seemeth just; but his neighbor cometh and searcheth him.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> The lot causeth contentions to cease,
and parteth between the mighty.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> A brother offended is harder to be won
than a strong city: and their contentions are like the bars of a castle.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> A man's belly shall be satisfied with
the fruit of his mouth; and with the increase of his lips shall he be
filled.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Death and life are in the power of the
tongue: and they that love it shall eat the fruit of it.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Whoever findeth a wife findeth a good
thing, and obtaineth favor from the LORD.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> The poor useth entreaties; but the rich
answereth roughly.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> A man that hath friends must show
himself friendly: and there is a friend that sticketh closer than a
brother.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Better is the poor that walketh in his
integrity, than he that is perverse in his lips, and is a fool.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Also, that the soul be without knowledge,
it is not good; and he that hasteth with his feet sinneth.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> The foolishness of man perverteth his
way: and his heart fretteth against the LORD.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Wealth maketh many friends; but the poor
is separated from his neighbor.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> A false witness shall not be unpunished,
and he that speaketh lies shall not escape.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Many will entreat the favor of the
prince: and every man is a friend to him that giveth gifts.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> All the brethren of the poor do hate him:
how much more do his friends go far from him? he pursueth them with
words, yet they are wanting to him.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He that getteth wisdom loveth his own
soul: he that keepeth understanding shall find good.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> A false witness shall not be unpunished,
and he that speaketh lies shall perish.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Delight is not seemly for a fool; much
less for a servant to have rule over princes.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> The discretion of a man deferreth his
anger; and it is his glory to pass over a transgression.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> The king's wrath is as the roaring of a
lion; but his favor is as dew upon the grass.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> A foolish son is the calamity of his
father: and the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> House and riches are the inheritance of
fathers: and a prudent wife is from the LORD.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep;
and an idle soul shall suffer hunger.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> He that keepeth the commandment keepeth
his own soul; but he that despiseth his ways shall die.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> He that hath pity upon the poor,
lendeth to the LORD; and that which he hath given will he pay him again.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Chasten thy son while there is hope,
and let not thy soul spare for his crying.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> A man of great wrath shall suffer
punishment: for if thou deliver him, yet thou must do it again.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> Hear counsel, and receive instruction,
that thou mayest be wise in thy latter end.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> There are many devices in a man's
heart; nevertheless the counsel of the LORD, that shall stand.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> The desire of a man is his kindness:
and a poor man is better than a liar.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> The fear of the LORD tendeth to life:
and he that hath it shall abide satisfied; he shall not be visited with
evil.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> A slothful man hideth his hand in his
bosom, and will not so much as bring it to his mouth again.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Smite a scorner and the simple will
beware: and reprove one that hath understanding, and he will understand
knowledge.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> He that wasteth his father, and chaseth
away his mother, is a son that causeth shame, and bringeth reproach.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Cease, my son, to hear the instruction
that causeth to err from the words of knowledge.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> An ungodly witness scorneth judgment:
and the mouth of the wicked devoureth iniquity.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Judgments are prepared for scorners,
and stripes for the back of fools.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging:
and whoever is deceived by it is not wise.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> The fear of a king is as the roaring of a
lion: whoever provoketh him to anger sinneth against his own soul.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> It is an honor for a man to cease from
strife: but every fool will be meddling.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> The sluggard will not plow by reason of
the cold; therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Counsel in the heart of man is like deep
water; but a man of understanding will draw it out.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Most men will proclaim every one his own
goodness: but a faithful man who can find?

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> The just man walketh in his integrity:
his children are blessed after him.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> A king that sitteth on the throne of
judgment scattereth away all evil with his eyes.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Who can say, I have made my heart clean,
I am pure from my sin?

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Divers weights, and divers measures,
both of them are alike abomination to the LORD.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Even a child is known by his doings,
whether his work is pure, and whether it is right.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> The hearing ear, and the seeing eye,
the LORD hath made even both of them.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Love not sleep, lest thou come to
poverty; open thy eyes, and thou shalt be satisfied with bread.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> It is naught, it is naught, saith the
buyer: but when he is gone, then he boasteth.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> There is gold, and a multitude of
rubies: but the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Take his garment that is surety for a
stranger: and take a pledge of him for a strange woman.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Bread of deceit is sweet to a man; but
afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Every purpose is established by
counsel: and with good advice make war.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> He that goeth about as a tale-bearer
revealeth secrets; therefore meddle not with him that flattereth with
his lips.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Whoever curseth his father or his
mother, his lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> An inheritance may be gotten hastily at
the beginning; but the end of it shall not be blessed.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Say not thou, I will recompense evil;
but wait on the LORD, and he shall save thee.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Divers weights are an abomination to
the LORD; and a false balance is not good.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> Man's goings are of the LORD; how can a
man then understand his own way?

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> It is a snare to the man who devoureth
that which is holy, and after vows to make inquiry.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> A wise king scatterreth the wicked, and
bringeth the wheel over them.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> The spirit of man is the candle of the
LORD, searching all the inward parts of the belly.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Mercy and truth preserve the king: and
his throne is upheld by mercy.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> The glory of young men is their
strength: and the beauty of old men is the gray head.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> The blueness of a wound cleanseth away
evil: so do stripes the inward parts of the belly.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The king's heart is in the hand of the
LORD, as the rivers of water: he turneth it whithersoever he will.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Every way of a man is right in his own
eyes: but the LORD pondereth the hearts.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> To do justice and judgment is more
acceptable to the LORD than sacrifice.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> A high look, and a proud heart, and the
plowing of the wicked, is sin.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> The thoughts of the diligent tend only to
plenteousness; but of every one that is hasty only to want.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> The getting of treasures by a lying
tongue is a vanity tossed to and fro by them that seek death.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> The robbery of the wicked shall destroy
them; because they refuse to do judgment.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> The way of man is froward and strange:
but as for the pure, his work is right.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> It is better to dwell in a corner of the
house-top, than with a brawling woman in a wide house.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> The soul of the wicked desireth evil:
his neighbor findeth no favor in his eyes.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> When the scorner is punished, the
simple is made wise: and when the wise is instructed, he receiveth
knowledge.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> The righteous man wisely considereth
the house of the wicked: but God overthroweth the wicked for their
wickedness.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Whoever stoppeth his ears at the cry of
the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> A gift in secret pacifieth anger: and a
reward in the bosom, strong wrath.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> It is joy to the just to do judgment:
but destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> The man that wandereth out of the way
of understanding shall remain in the congregation of the dead.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor
man: he that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> The wicked shall be a ransom for the
righteous, and the transgressor for the upright.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> It is better to dwell in the
wilderness, than with a contentious and an angry woman.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> There is a treasure to be desired, and
oil in the dwelling of the wise; but a foolish man spendeth it up.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> He that followeth after righteousness
and mercy findeth life, righteousness, and honor.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> A wise man scaleth the city of the
mighty, and casteth down the strength of its confidence.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Whoever keepeth his mouth and his
tongue keepeth his soul from troubles.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Proud and haughty scorner is his name,
who dealeth in proud wrath.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> The desire of the slothful killeth him;
for his hands refuse to labor.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> He coveteth greedily all the day long:
but the righteous giveth and spareth not.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> The sacrifice of the wicked is
abomination: how much more, when he bringeth it with a wicked mind?

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> A false witness shall perish: but the
man that heareth speaketh constantly.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> A wicked man hardeneth his face: but as
for the upright, he directeth his way.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> There is no wisdom nor understanding
nor counsel against the LORD.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> The horse is prepared against the day
of battle: but safety is from the LORD.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> A good name is rather to be chosen than
great riches, and loving favor rather than silver and gold.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> The rich and poor meet together: the LORD
is the maker of them all.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and
hideth himself: but the simple pass on, and are punished.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> By humility and the fear of the LORD are
riches, and honor, and life.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Thorns and snares are in the way of the
froward: he that doth keep his soul shall be far from them.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Train up a child in the way he should go:
and when he is old, he will not depart from it.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> The rich ruleth over the poor, and the
borrower is servant to the lender.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> He that soweth iniquity shall reap
vanity: and the rod of his anger shall fail.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> He that hath a bountiful eye shall be
blessed; for he giveth of his bread to the poor.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Cast out the scorner, and contention
shall end; yes, strife and reproach shall cease.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> He that loveth pureness of heart, for
the grace of his lips the king shall be his friend.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> The eyes of the LORD preserve
knowledge, and he overthroweth the words of the transgressor.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> The slothful man saith, There is a lion
without, I shall be slain in the streets.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> The mouth of strange women is a deep
pit: he that is abhorred by the LORD shall fall therein.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Foolishness is bound in the heart of a
child; but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> He that oppresseth the poor to increase
his riches, and he that giveth to the rich, shall surely come to want.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Bow down thy ear, and hear the words of
the wise, and apply thy heart to my knowledge.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> For it is a pleasant thing if thou
keepest them within thee; they shall withal be fitted in thy lips.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> That thy trust may be in the LORD, I
have made known to thee this day, even to thee.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Have not I written to thee excellent
things in counsels and knowledge,

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> That I might make thee know the
certainty of the words of truth; that thou mightest answer the words of
truth to them that send to thee?

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Rob not the poor, because he is poor:
neither oppress the afflicted in the gate:

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> For the LORD will plead their cause,
and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Make no friendship with an angry man;
and with a furious man thou shalt not go:

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Lest thou learn his ways, and get a
snare to thy soul.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Be not thou one of them that strike
hands, or of them that are sureties for debts.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> If thou hast nothing to pay, why should
he take away thy bed from under thee?

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Remove not the ancient landmark, which
thy fathers have set.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Seest thou a man diligent in his
business? he shall stand before kings; he shall not stand before mean
men.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> When thou sittest to eat with a ruler,
consider diligently what is before thee:

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And put a knife to thy throat, if thou
art a man given to appetite.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Be not desirous of his dainties: for they
are deceitful food.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Labor not to be rich: cease from thy own
wisdom.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Wilt thou set thy eyes upon that which is
not? for riches certainly make to themselves wings; they fly away as an
eagle towards heaven.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Eat thou not the bread of him that hath
an evil eye, neither desire thou his dainties:

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> For as he thinketh in his heart, so is
he: Eat and drink, saith he to thee; but his heart is not with thee.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> The morsel which thou hast eaten shalt
thou vomit up, and lose thy sweet words.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Speak not in the ears of a fool: for he
will despise the wisdom of thy words.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Remove not the old landmark; and enter
not into the fields of the fatherless:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> For their redeemer is mighty; he will
plead their cause with thee.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Apply thy heart to instruction, and thy
ears to the words of knowledge.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Withhold not correction from the child:
for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and
shalt deliver his soul from hell.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> My son, if thy heart be wise, my heart
shall rejoice, even mine.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Yes, my reins shall rejoice, when thy
lips speak right things.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Let not thy heart envy sinners: but be
thou in the fear of the LORD all the day long.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> For surely there is an end; and thy
expectation shall not be cut off.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and
guide thy heart in the way.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Be not among wine-bibbers; among
riotous eaters of flesh:

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> For the drunkard and the glutton shall
come to poverty: and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> Hearken to thy father that begat thee,
and despise not thy mother when she is old.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Buy the truth, and sell it not; also
wisdom, and instruction, and understanding.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> The father of the righteous shall
greatly rejoice: and he that begetteth a wise child shall have joy of
him.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Thy father and thy mother shall be
glad, and she that bore thee shall rejoice.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> My son, give me thy heart, and let thy
eyes observe my ways.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> For a lewd woman is a deep ditch; and a
strange woman is a narrow pit.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> She also lieth in wait as for a prey,
and increaseth the transgressors among men.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath
contentions? who hath babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath
redness of eyes?

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> They that tarry long at the wine; they
that go to seek mixed wine.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Look not thou upon the wine when it is
red, when it giveth its color in the cup, when it moveth itself aright.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> At the last it biteth like a serpent,
and stingeth like an adder.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Thy eyes shall behold strange women,
and thy heart shall utter perverse things.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And thou shalt be as he that lieth down
in the midst of the sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> They have stricken me, wilt thou say,
and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not: when shall I
awake? I will seek it yet again.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Be not thou envious against evil men,
neither desire to be with them.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> For their heart studieth destruction, and
their lips talk of mischief.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Through wisdom is a house built; and by
understanding it is established:

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And by knowledge shall the chambers be
filled with all precious and pleasant riches.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> A wise man is strong; and a man of
knowledge increaseth strength.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> For by wise counsel thou shalt make thy
war: and in multitude of counselors there is safety.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> Wisdom is too high for a fool: he openeth
not his mouth in the gate.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> He that deviseth to do evil shall be
called a mischievous person.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> The thought of foolishness is sin: and
the scorner is an abomination to men.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> If thou faintest in the day of
adversity, thy strength is small.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> If thou forbearest to deliver them that
are drawn to death, and those that are ready to be slain;

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> If thou sayest, Behold, we knew it not;
doth not he that pondereth the heart consider it? and he that keepeth
thy soul, doth not he know it? and will not he render to every man
according to his works?

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> My son, eat thou honey, because it is
good; and the honey-comb, which is sweet to thy taste:

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> So shall the knowledge of wisdom be to
thy soul: when thou hast found it, then there shall be a reward, and thy
expectation shall not be cut off.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Lay not wait, O wicked man, against the
dwelling of the righteous; destroy not his resting-place:

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> For a just man falleth seven times, and
riseth again: but the wicked shall fall into mischief.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Rejoice not when thy enemy falleth, and
let not thy heart be glad when he stumbleth:

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Lest the LORD see it, and it displease
him, and he turn away his wrath from him.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Fret not thyself because of evil men,
neither be thou envious at the wicked;

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> For there shall be no reward to the
evil man; the candle of the wicked shall be extinguished.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> My son, fear thou the LORD and the
king: and meddle not with them that are given to change:

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> For their calamity shall rise suddenly;
and who knoweth the ruin of them both?

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> These things also belong to the wise.
It is not good to have respect of persons in judgment.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> He that saith to the wicked, Thou art
righteous; him shall the people curse, nations shall abhor him:

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> But to them that rebuke him shall be
delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> Every man shall kiss his lips that
giveth a right answer.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> Prepare thy work without, and make it
fit for thyself in the field; and afterwards build thy house.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> Be not a witness against thy neighbor
without cause; and deceive not with thy lips.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> Say not, I will do so to him as he hath
done to me: I will render to the man according to his work.

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> I went by the field of the slothful,
and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding;

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And lo, it was all grown over with
thorns, and nettles had covered the face of it, and its stone wall was
broken down.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> Then I saw, and considered it well: I
looked upon it, and received instruction.

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a
little folding of the hands to sleep:

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> So shall thy poverty come as one that
traveleth; and thy want as an armed man.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> These are also proverbs of Solomon, which
the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> It is the glory of God to conceal a
thing: but the honor of kings is to search out a matter.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> The heaven for hight, and the earth for
depth, and the heart of kings is unsearchable.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Take away the dross from the silver, and
there shall come forth a vessel for the finer.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Take away the wicked from before the
king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> Put not forth thyself in the presence of
the king, and stand not in the place of great men:

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> For better it is that it be said to thee,
Come up hither; than that thou shouldst be put lower in the presence of
the prince whom thy eyes have seen.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou
know not what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbor hath put thee
to shame.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Debate thy cause with thy neighbor
himself; and reveal not a secret to another:

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Lest he that heareth it put thee to
shame, and thy infamy turn not away.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> A word fitly spoken is like apples of
gold in pictures of silver.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> As an ear-ring of gold, and an ornament
of fine gold, so is a wise reprover upon an obedient ear.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> As the cold of snow in the time of
harvest, so is a faithful messenger to them that send him: for he
refresheth the soul of his masters.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> Whoever boasteth himself of a false
gift is like clouds and wind without rain.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> By long forbearing is a prince
persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Hast thou found honey? eat so much as
is sufficient for thee, lest thou be filled with it, and vomit it.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbor's
house; lest he be weary of thee, and so hate thee.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> A man that beareth false witness
against his neighbor is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Confidence in an unfaithful man in time
of trouble is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> As he that taketh away a garment in
cold weather, and as vinegar upon nitre; so is he that singeth songs to
a heavy heart.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> If thy enemy shall hunger, give him
bread to eat; and if he shall thirst, give him water to drink:

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> For thou shalt heap coals of fire upon
his head, and the LORD will reward thee.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> The north wind driveth away rain: so
doth an angry countenance a backbiting tongue.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> It is better to dwell in a corner of
the house-top, than with a brawling woman and in a wide house.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is
good news from a far country.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> A righteous man falling down before the
wicked is as a turbid fountain, and a corrupt spring.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> It is not good to eat much honey: so
for men to search their own glory is not glory.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> He that hath no rule over his own
spirit is like a city that is broken down, and without walls.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> As snow in summer, and as rain in
harvest; so honor is not seemly for a fool.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> As the bird by wandering, as the swallow
by flying, so the curse causeless shall not come.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> A whip for the horse, a bridle for the
ass, and a rod for the fool's back.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Answer not a fool according to his folly,
lest thou also be like him.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Answer a fool according to his folly,
lest he be wise in his own conceit.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> He that sendeth a message by the hand of
a fool cutteth off the feet, and drinketh damage.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> The legs of the lame are not equal: so is
a parable in the mouth of fools.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> As he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so
is he that giveth honor to a fool.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> As a thorn goeth up into the hand of a
drunkard, so is a parable in the mouth of fools.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> The great God that formed all things
both rewardeth the fool, and rewardeth transgressors.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> As a dog returneth to his vomit, so a
fool returneth to his folly.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Seest thou a man wise in his own
conceit? there is more hope of a fool than of him.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> The slothful man saith, There is a lion
in the way; a lion is in the streets.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> As the door turneth upon its hinges, so
doth the slothful upon his bed.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> The slothful hideth his hand in his
bosom; it grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> The sluggard is wiser in his own
conceit than seven men that can render a reason.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> He that passeth by, and meddleth with
strife belonging not to him, is like one that taketh a dog by the ears.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> As a mad man who casteth fire-brands,
arrows, and death,

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> So is the man that deceiveth his
neighbor, and saith, Am not I in sport?

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Where no wood is, there the fire goeth
out: so where there is no tale-bearer, the strife ceaseth.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> As coals are to burning coals, and wood
to fire; so is a contentious man to kindle strife.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> The words of a tale-bearer are as
wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> Burning lips and a wicked heart are
like a potsherd covered with silver dross.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> He that hateth dissembleth with his
lips, and layeth up deceit within him;

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> When he speaketh fair, believe him not:
for there are seven abominations in his heart.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his
wickedness shall be shown before the whole congregation.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> Whoever diggeth a pit shall fall into
it: and he that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> A lying tongue hateth those that are
afflicted by it; and a flattering mouth worketh ruin.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Boast not thyself of to-morrow; for thou
knowest not what a day may bring forth.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Let another man praise thee, and not thy
own mouth; a stranger, and not thy own lips.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty;
but a fool's wrath is heavier than both.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous;
but who is able to stand before envy?

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Open rebuke is better than secret love.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but
the kisses of an enemy are deceitful.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> The full soul lotheth a honey-comb; but
to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> As a bird that wandereth from her nest,
so is a man that wandereth from his place.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart:
so doth the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Thy own friend, and thy father's
friend, forsake not; neither go into thy brother's house in the day of
thy calamity: for better is a neighbor that is near, than a brother far
off.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> My son, be wise, and make my heart
glad, that I may answer him that reproacheth me.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and
hideth himself; but the simple pass on, and are punished.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Take his garment that is surety for a
stranger, and take a pledge of him for a strange woman.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> He that blesseth his friend with a loud
voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be counted a curse to him.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> A continual dropping in a very rainy
day and a contentious woman are alike.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Whoever hideth her hideth the wind, and
the ointment of his right hand which bewrayeth itself.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man
sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> He that keepeth the fig-tree shall eat
the fruit of it: so he that waiteth on his master shall be honored.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> As in water face answereth to face, so
the heart of man to man.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Hell and destruction are never full; so
the eyes of man are never satisfied.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> As the fining-pot for silver, and the
furnace for gold; so is a man to his praise.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Though thou shouldst bray a fool in a
mortar among wheat with a pestle, yet his foolishness will not depart
from him.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Be thou diligent to know the state of
thy flocks, and look well to thy herds.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> For riches are not for ever: and doth
the crown endure to every generation?

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> The plant appeareth, and the tender
grass showeth itself, and herbs of the mountains are gathered.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> The lambs are for thy clothing, and the
goats are the price of the field.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> And thou shalt have goats milk enough
for thy food, for the food of thy household, and for maintenance for thy
maidens.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> The wicked flee when no man pursueth: but
the righteous are bold as a lion.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> For the transgression of a land many are
its princes: but by a man of understanding and knowledge the state
thereof shall be prolonged.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> A poor man that oppresseth the poor is
like a sweeping rain which leaveth no food.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> They that forsake the law praise the
wicked: but such as keep the law contend with them.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Evil men understand not judgment: but
they that seek the LORD understand all things.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Better is the poor that walketh in his
uprightness, than he that is perverse in his ways, though he is rich.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> He who keepeth the law is a wise son: but
he that is a companion of riotous men shameth his father.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> He that by usury and unjust gain
increaseth his substance, he shall gather it for him that will pity the
poor.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> He that turneth away his ear from hearing
the law, even his prayer shall be abomination.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Whoever causeth the righteous to go
astray in an evil way, he shall fall himself into his own pit: but the
upright shall have good things in possession.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> The rich man is wise in his own
conceit; but the poor man that hath understanding searcheth him out.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> When righteous men rejoice, there is
great glory: but when the wicked rise, a man is hidden.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> He that covereth his sins shall not
prosper: but he who confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Happy is the man that feareth always:
but he that hardeneth his heart shall fall into mischief.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> As a roaring lion, and a ranging bear;
so is a wicked ruler over the poor people.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> The prince that wanteth understanding
is also a great oppressor: but he that hateth covetousness shall prolong
his days.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> A man that doeth violence to the blood
of any person shall flee to the pit; let no man stay him.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> He who walketh uprightly shall be
saved: but he that is perverse in his ways shall fall at once.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> He that tilleth his land shall have
plenty of bread: but he that followeth after vain persons shall have
poverty enough.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> A faithful man shall abound with
blessings: but he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> To have respect of persons is not good:
for, for a piece of bread that man will transgress.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> He that hasteth to be rich hath an evil
eye, and considereth not that poverty shall come upon him.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> He that rebuketh a man afterward shall
find more favor than he that flattereth with the tongue.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> He that robbeth his father or his
mother, and saith, It is no transgression; the same is the companion of
a destroyer.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> He that is of a proud heart stirreth up
strife: but he that putteth his trust in the LORD shall be made fat.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> He that trusteth in his own heart is a
fool: but whoever walketh wisely, he shall be delivered.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> He that giveth to the poor shall not
want: but he that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> When the wicked rise, men hide
themselves: but when they perish, the righteous increase.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> He, that being often reproved hardeneth
his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> When the righteous are in authority, the
people rejoice: but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> He that loveth wisdom rejoiceth his
father: but he that keepeth company with harlots spendeth his substance.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> The king by judgment establisheth the
land: but he that receiveth gifts overthroweth it.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> A man that flattereth his neighbor
spreadeth a net for his feet.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> In the transgression of an evil man there
is a snare: but the righteous doth sing and rejoice.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> The righteous considereth the cause of
the poor: but the wicked regardeth not to know it.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Scornful men bring a city into a snare:
but wise men turn away wrath.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> If a wise man contendeth with a foolish
man, whether he rageth or laugheth, there is no rest.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> The blood-thirsty hate the upright: but
the just seek his soul.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> A fool uttereth all his mind: but a
wise man keepeth it in till afterwards.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> If a ruler hearkeneth to lies, all his
servants are wicked.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> The poor and the deceitful man meet
together: the LORD enlighteneth both their eyes.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> The king that faithfully judgeth the
poor, his throne shall be established for ever.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> The rod and reproof give wisdom: but a
child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> When the wicked are multiplied,
transgression increaseth: but the righteous shall see their fall.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Correct thy son, and he shall give thee
rest; yes, he shall give delight to thy soul.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Where there is no vision, the people
perish: but he that keepeth the law, happy is he.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> A servant will not be corrected by
words: for though he understandeth, he will not answer.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Seest thou a man that is hasty in his
words? there is more hope of a fool than of him.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> He that delicately bringeth up his
servant from a child shall have him at length become his son.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> An angry man stirreth up strife, and a
furious man aboundeth in transgression.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> A man's pride shall bring him low: but
honor shall uphold the humble in spirit.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> Whoever is partner with a thief, hateth
his own soul: he heareth cursing, and discloseth it not.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> The fear of man bringeth a snare: but
he who putteth his trust in the LORD shall be safe.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> Many seek the ruler's favor; but every
man's judgment cometh from the LORD.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> An unjust man is an abomination to the
just: and he that is upright in the way is abomination to the wicked.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even
the prophecy: the man spoke to Ithiel, even to Ithiel and Ucal,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Surely I am more brutish than any man,
and have not the understanding of a man.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> I neither learned wisdom, nor have the
knowledge of the holy.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> Who hath ascended into heaven, or
descended? who hath gathered the wind in his fists? who hath bound the
waters in a garment? who hath established all the ends of the earth?
what is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst tell?

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Every word of God is pure: he is a shield
to them that put their trust in him.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Add thou not to his words, lest he
reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Two things have I required of thee; deny
them not to me before I die:

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Remove far from me vanity and lies; give
me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me:

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> Lest I be full, and deny thee, and say,
Who is the LORD? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my
God in vain.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Accuse not a servant to his master,
lest he curse thee, and thou be found guilty.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> There is a generation that curseth
their father, and doth not bless their mother.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> There is a generation that are pure in
their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthiness.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> There is a generation, O how lofty are
their eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> There is a generation, whose teeth are
as swords, and their jaw-teeth as knives, to devour the poor from off
the earth, and the needy from among men.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> The horse-leech hath two daughters,
crying, Give, give. There are three things that are never satisfied,
yes, four things say not, It is enough:

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> The grave; and the barren womb; the
earth that is not filled with water; and the fire that saith not, It is
enough.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> The eye that mocketh at its father, and
despiseth to obey its mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it
out, and the young eagles shall eat it.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> There are three things which are too
wonderful for me, yes, four which I know not:

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> The way of an eagle in the air; the way
of a serpent upon a rock; the way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and
the way of a man with a maid.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> Such is the way of an adulterous woman;
she eateth, and wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> For three things the earth is
disquieted, and for four which it cannot bear:

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> For a servant when he reigneth; and a
fool when he is filled with food.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> For an odious woman when she is
married; and a handmaid that is heir to her mistress.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> There are four things which are little
upon the earth, but they are very wise:

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> The ants are a people not strong, yet
they prepare their food in the summer;

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> The conies are but a feeble people, yet
they make their houses in the rocks;

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> The locusts have no king, yet go they
forth all of them by bands;

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> The spider taketh hold with her hands,
and is in king's palaces.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> There are three things which go well,
yes, four are comely in going:

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> A lion, which is strongest among
beasts, and turneth not away for any;

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> A greyhound; a he-goat also; and a
king, against whom there is no rising up.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> If thou hast done foolishly in lifting
up thyself, or if thou hast thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy mouth.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> Surely the churning of milk bringeth
forth butter, and the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood: so the
forcing of wrath bringeth forth strife.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> The words of king Lemuel, the prophecy
that his mother taught him.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> What, my son? and what, the son of my
womb? and what, the son of my vows?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Give not thy strength to women, nor thy
ways to that which destroyeth kings.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not
for kings to drink wine; nor for princes strong drink:

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Lest they drink, and forget the law, and
pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Give strong drink to him that is ready to
perish, and wine to those that are of heavy hearts.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Let him drink, and forget his poverty,
and remember his misery no more.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause
of all such as are appointed to destruction.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and
plead the cause of the poor and needy.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Who can find a virtuous woman? for her
price is far above rubies.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> The heart of her husband doth safely
trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoil.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> She will do him good and not evil all
the days of her life.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> She seeketh wool, and flax, and worketh
willingly with her hands.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> She is like the merchant's ships; she
bringeth her food from afar.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> She riseth also while it is yet night,
and giveth food to her household, and a portion to her maidens.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> She considereth a field, and buyeth it:
with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> She girdeth her loins with strength,
and strengtheneth her arms.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> She perceiveth that her merchandise is
good: her candle goeth not out by night.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> She layeth her hands to the spindle,
and her hands hold the distaff.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> She stretcheth out her hand to the
poor; yes, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> She is not afraid of the snow for her
household: for all her household are clothed with scarlet.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> She maketh herself coverings of
tapestry; her clothing is silk and purple.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> Her husband is known in the gates, when
he sitteth among the elders of the land.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> She maketh fine linen, and selleth it;
and delivereth girdles to the merchant.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> Strength and honor are her clothing;
and she shall rejoice in time to come.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and
on her tongue is the law of kindness.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> She looketh well to the ways of her
household, and eateth not the bread of idleness.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Her children rise up, and call her
blessed; her husband also, and he praiseth her.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> Many daughters have done virtuously,
but thou excellest them all.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain:
but a woman that feareth the LORD, she shall be praised.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Give her of the fruit of her hands; and
let her own works praise her in the gates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes](ecc.md)
