[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](act)  [Next](co1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Romans

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to
be an apostle, separated to the gospel of God,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> (Which he had promised before by his
prophets in the holy scriptures)

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
who was born of the seed of David according to the flesh.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And declared to be the Son of God, with
power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the
dead:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> By whom we have received grace and
apostleship for obedience to the faith among all nations for his name:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus
Christ:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> To all that are in Rome, beloved of God,
called to be saints: Grace to you, and peace from God our Father, and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ
for you all, that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For God is my witness, whom I serve with my
spirit in the gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of
you always in my prayers,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Making request (if by any means now at
length I may have a prosperous journey by the will of God) to come to
you.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For I long to see you, that I may impart
to you some spiritual gift, to the end ye may be established;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> That is, that I may be comforted together
with you, by the mutual faith both of you and me.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Now I would not have you ignorant,
brethren, that I have often purposed to come to you (but have been
hitherto hindered) that I might have some fruit among you also, even as
among other Gentiles.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I am debtor both to the Greeks, and to
the barbarians, both to the wise, and to the unwise.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> So, as much as in me is, I am ready to
preach the gospel to you that are at Rome also.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For I am not ashamed of the gospel of
Christ: for it is the power of God to salvation to every one that
believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For in this is the righteousness of God
revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, The just shall live by
faith.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, who hold the
truth in unrighteousness.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Because that which may be known of God,
is manifest in them; for God hath shown it to them.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For the invisible things of him from the
creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead; so that they are
without excuse:

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to
birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping animals.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Wherefore God also gave them up to
uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their
own bodies between themselves:

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Who changed the truth of God into a lie,
and worshiped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is
blessed for ever. Amen.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> For this cause God gave them up to vile
affections. For even their women did change the natural use into that
which is against nature:

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And likewise also the men, leaving the
natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one towards another; men
with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves
that recompense of their error which was meet.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And even as they did not like to retain
God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do
those things which are not convenient;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Being filled with all unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy,
murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful,
proud, boasters, inventers of evil things, disobedient to parents,

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> Without understanding, covenant-breakers,
without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful:

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> Who, knowing the judgment of God, that
they who commit such things are worthy of death; not only do the same,
but have pleasure in them that do them.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man,
whoever thou art, that judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou
condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest, doest the same things.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> But we are sure that the judgment of God is
according to truth, against them who commit such things.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest
them who do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the
judgment of God?

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering; not knowing that the
goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But after thy hardness and impenitent
heart, treasurest up to thyself wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Who will render to every man according to
his deeds:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> To them who by patient continuance in
well-doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality; eternal life:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But to them that are contentious, and do
not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness; indignation and wrath:

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of
man that doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But glory, honor, and peace, to every man
that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For there is no respect of persons with
God.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For as many as have sinned without law,
shall also perish without law: and as many as have sinned in the law,
shall be judged by the law,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> (For not the hearers of the law are just
before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For when the Gentiles, who have not the
law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these having not the
law, are a law to themselves.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Who show the work of the law written in
their hearts, their conscience also bearing testimony, and their
thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another)

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> In the day when God shall judge the
secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my gospel.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Behold, thou art called a Jew, and
restest in the law, and makest thy boast of God,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And knowest his will, and approvest the
things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the law,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And art confident that thou thyself art a
guide of the blind, a light of them who are in darkness,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> An instructor of the foolish, a teacher
of babes, who hast the form of knowledge, and of the truth in the law:

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Thou therefore who teachest another,
teachest thou not thyself? thou that preachest a man should not steal,
dost thou steal?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Thou that sayest a man should not commit
adultery, dost thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest idols, dost
thou commit sacrilege?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Thou that makest thy boast of the law,
through breaking the law dishonorest thou God?

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> For the name of God is blasphemed among
the Gentiles, through you, as it is written.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For circumcision verily profiteth, if
thou keepest the law; but if thou art a breaker of the law, thy
circumcision is made uncircumcision.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> Therefore, if the uncircumcision keepeth
the righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted
for circumcision?

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And shall not uncircumcision which is by
nature, if it fulfilleth the law, judge thee, who by the letter and
circumcision dost transgress the law?

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> For he is not a Jew, who is one
outwardly; neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh:

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> But he is a Jew who is one inwardly; and
circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter;
whose praise is not from men, but from God.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> What advantage then hath the Jew? or what
profit is there of circumcision?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Much every way: chiefly, because that to
them were committed the oracles of God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For what if some did not believe? will
their unbelief make the faith of God without effect?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> By no means: verily let God be true, but
every man a liar; as it is written, That thou mayest be justified in thy
sayings, and mayest overcome when thou art judged.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> But if our unrighteousness commendeth the
righteousness of God, what shall we say? Is God unrighteous who taketh
vengeance? (I speak as a man.)

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> By no means: for then how shall God judge
the world?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For if the truth of God hath more abounded
through my lie to his glory; why yet am I also judged as a sinner?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And not rather (as we are slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we say) Let us do evil, that good may
come? whose damnation is just.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> What then? are we better than they? No, in
no wise: for we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are
all under sin;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> As it is written, There is none
righteous, no, not one:

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> There is none that understandeth, there
is none that seeketh God.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> They are all gone out of the way, they
are together become unprofitable: there is none that doeth good, no, not
one.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Their throat is an open sepulcher; with
their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps is under their
lips:

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Their feet are swift to shed blood.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Destruction and misery are in their ways:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And the way of peace have they not known.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> There is no fear of God before their
eyes.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Now we know that whatever things the law
saith, it saith to them who are under the law: that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Therefore by the deeds of the law, there
shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the law is the
knowledge of sin.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> But now the righteousness of God without
the law is manifested, being testified by the law and the prophets;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Even the righteousness of God, which is
by faith of Jesus Christ to all, and upon all them that believe; for
there is no difference:

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> For all have sinned, and come short of
the glory of God;

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Being justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Whom God hath set forth to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness
for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God;

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> To declare, I say, at this time his
righteousness: that he may be just, and the justifier of him who
believeth in Jesus.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Where is boasting then? It is excluded.
By what law? of works? No; but by the law of faith.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Therefore we conclude, that a man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the law.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Is he the God of the Jews only? is he not
also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also:

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Seeing it is one God who will justify the
circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through faith.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Do we then make void the law through
faith? By no means: but we establish the law.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> What shall we then say that Abraham our
father, as pertaining to the flesh, hath found?

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For if Abraham were justified by works, he
hath whereof to glory, but not before God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For what saith the scripture? Abraham
believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Now to him that worketh, is the reward not
reckoned of grace, but of debt.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But to him that worketh not, but believeth
on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Even as David also describeth the
blessedness of the man to whom God imputeth righteousness without works,

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will
not impute sin.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Cometh this blessedness then upon the
circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also? For we say that
faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> How then was it reckoned? when he was in
circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in
uncircumcision.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And he received the sign of circumcision,
a seal of the righteousness of the faith, which he had yet being
uncircumcised: that he might be the father of all them that believe,
though they are not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to
them also;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And the father of circumcision to them
who are not of the circumcision only, but who also walk in the steps of
that faith of our father Abraham which he had being yet uncircumcised.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For the promise that he should be the
heir of the world was not to Abraham, or to his seed, through the law,
but through the righteousness of faith.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if they who are of the law are heirs,
faith is made void, and the promise made of no effect.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Because the law worketh wrath: for where
no law is, there is no transgression.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Therefore it is of faith, that it might
be by grace; to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed, not
to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith
of Abraham, who is the father of us all;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> (As it is written, I have made thee a
father of many nations) before him whom he believed, even God, who
reviveth the dead, and calleth those things which are not, as though
they were.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Who against hope believed with hope, that
he should become the father of many nations; according to that which was
spoken, So shall thy seed be.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And being not weak in faith, he
considered not his own body now dead, when he was about a hundred years
old, neither yet the deadness of Sarah's womb.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> He staggered not at the promise of God
through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God;

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And being fully persuaded, that what he
had promised, he was able also to perform.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And therefore it was imputed to him for
righteousness.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Now it was not written for his sake
alone, that it was imputed to him;

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> But for us also, to whom it will be
imputed, if we believe on him that raised Jesus our Lord from the dead,

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Who was delivered for our offenses, and
raised again for our justification.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Therefore being justified by faith, we have
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> By whom also we have access by faith into
this grace in which we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And not only so, but we glory in
tribulations also; knowing that tribulation worketh patience;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And patience, experience; and experience,
hope:

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And hope maketh not ashamed, because the
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Spirit which is
given to us.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For when we were yet without strength, in
due time Christ died for the ungodly.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For scarcely for a righteous man will one
die: yet perhaps for a good man some would even dare to die.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But God commendeth his love towards us, in
that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Much more then, being now justified by his
blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more, being reconciled,
we shall be saved by his life.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And not only so, but we also joy in God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
atonement.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Wherefore as by one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that
all have sinned.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For until the law, sin was in the world:
but sin is not imputed when there is no law.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to
Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's
transgression, who is the figure of him that was to come.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But not as the offense, so also is the
free gift. For if through the offense of one many are dead, much more
the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus
Christ, hath abounded to many.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And not as it was by one that sinned, so
is the gift. For the judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free
gift is of many offenses to justification.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For if by one man's offense death reigned
by one; much more they who receive abundance of grace, and of the gift
of righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Therefore, as by the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness
of one the free gift came upon all men to justification of life.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> For as by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Moreover the law entered, that the
offense might abound. But where sin abounded, grace did much more
abound:

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> That as sin hath reigned to death, even
so might grace reign through righteousness to eternal life, by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> What shall we say then? Shall we continue
in sin, that grace may abound?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> By no means: how shall we, that are dead to
sin, live any longer therein?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Know ye not, that so many of us as were
baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death?

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Therefore we are buried with him by baptism
into death: that as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For if we have been planted together in the
likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his
resurrection:

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Knowing this, that our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin may be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For he that is dead is freed from sin.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Now if we are dead with Christ, we believe
that we shall also live with him:

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Knowing that Christ, being raised from the
dead, dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For in that he died, he died to sin once:
but in that he liveth, he liveth to God.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be
dead indeed to sin, but alive to God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Let not sin therefore reign in your
mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts of it.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Neither yield ye your members as
instruments of unrighteousness to sin: but yield yourselves to God, as
those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of
righteousness to God:

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For sin shall not have dominion over you:
for ye are not under the law, but under grace.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> What then? shall we sin, because we are
not under the law, but under grace? By no means.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Know ye not, that to whom ye yield
yourselves servants in obedience, his servants ye are whom ye obey;
whether of sin to death, or of obedience to righteousness?

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But God be thanked, that ye were the
servants of sin; but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine
which was delivered you.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Being then made free from sin, ye became
the servants of righteousness.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> I speak after the manner of men, because
of the infirmity of your flesh: for as ye have yielded your members
servants to uncleanness and to iniquity, to (work) iniquity; even so now
yield your members servants to righteousness, to (work) holiness.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For when ye were the servants of sin, ye
were free from righteousness.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> What fruit had ye then in those things of
which ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> But now being made free from sin, and
having become servants to God, ye have your fruit to holiness, and the
end everlasting life.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For the wages of sin is death: but the
gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Know ye not, brethren, (for I speak to them
that know the law) that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he
liveth?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> For the woman who hath a husband, is bound
by the law to her husband so long as he liveth; but if the husband is
dead, she is loosed from the law of her husband.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> So then, if while her husband liveth, she
is married to another man, she shall be called an adulteress: but if her
husband is dead, she is free from that law; so that she is no
adulteress, though she be married to another man.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become
dead to the law by the body of Christ; that ye should be married to
another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring
forth fruit to God.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For when we were in the flesh, the motions
of sins, which were by the law, did work in our members to bring forth
fruit to death:

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But now we are delivered from the law, that
being dead by which we were held; that we should serve in newness of
spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> What shall we say then? Is the law sin? By
no means. No, I had not known sin, but by the law: for I had not known
lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> But sin, taking occasion by the
commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. For without the
law sin was dead.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> For I was alive without the law once: but
when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the commandment which was ordained to
life, I found to be to death.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> For sin, taking occasion by the
commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Wherefore the law is holy, and the
commandment holy, and just, and good.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Was then that which is good made death to
me? By no means. But sin, that it might appear sin, working death in me
by that which is good; that sin by the commandment might become
exceeding sinful.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For we know that the law is spiritual:
but I am carnal, sold under sin.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> For that which I do, I allow not: for
what I would, that I do not; but what I hate, that I do.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> If then I do that which I would not, I
consent to the law that it is good.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Now then it is no more I that do it, but
sin that dwelleth in me.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> For I know that in me (that is, in my
flesh,) dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but how
to perform that which is good, I find not.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> For the good that I would, I do not; but
the evil which I would not, that I do.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Now if I do that which I would not, it is
no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> I find then a law, that when I would do
good, evil is present with me.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For I delight in the law of God, after
the inward man:

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But I see another law in my members
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to
the law of sin which is in my members.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from the body of this death?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> I thank God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. So then, with the mind I myself serve the law of God; but with the
flesh the law of sin.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> There is therefore now no condemnation to
them who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not according to the flesh, but
according to the Spirit.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> For the law of the Spirit of life, in
Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the law of sin and death.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For what the law could not do, in that it
was weak through the flesh, God, sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh:

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> That the righteousness of the law may be
fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh, but according to
the Spirit.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> For they that are according to the flesh,
do mind the things of the flesh: but they that are according to the
Spirit, the things of the Spirit.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For to be carnally minded is death; but to
be spiritually minded is life and peace:

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Because the carnal mind is enmity against
God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> So then they that are in the flesh cannot
please God.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But ye are not in the flesh, but in the
Spirit, if the Spirit of God dwelleth in you. Now if any man hath not
the Spirit of Christ, he is not his.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And if Christ is in you, the body is dead
because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> But if the Spirit of him that raised
Jesus from the dead dwelleth in you, he that raised Christ from the dead
will also revive your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not
to the flesh, to live according to the flesh.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> For if ye live according to the flesh, ye
shall die: but if ye through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the body,
ye shall live.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, they are the sons of God.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> For ye have not received the spirit of
bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, by
which we cry, Abba, Father.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> The Spirit itself testifieth with our
spirit, that we are the children of God:

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And if children, then heirs; heirs of
God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if we suffer with him, that we may be
glorified together.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> For I reckon, that the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> For the earnest expectation of the
creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> For the creature was made subject to
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same
in hope:

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Because the creature itself also shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the children of God.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> For we know that the whole creation
groaneth, and travaileth in pain together until now:

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And not only they, but ourselves also,
who have the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within
ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> For we are saved by hope: But hope that
is seen, is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for?

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> But if we hope for what we see not, then
with patience we wait for it.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our
infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but
the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot
be uttered.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth
what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the
saints, according to the will of God.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And we know that all things work together
for good, to them that love God, to them who are the called according to
his purpose.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> For whom he did foreknow, he also did
predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be
the first-born among many brethren.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them
he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he
justified, them he also glorified.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> What shall we then say to these things?
If God is for us, who can be against us?

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give
us all things?

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Who will lay any thing to the charge of
God's elect? It is God that justifieth:

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ
that died, or rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand
of God, who also maketh intercession for us.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword?

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> As it is written, For thy sake we are
killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> But in all these things we are more than
conquerors, through him that loved us.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> For I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come,

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> Nor hight, nor depth, nor any other
creature, will be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my
conscience also bearing me testimony in the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> That I have great heaviness and continual
sorrow in my heart.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> For I could wish that myself were accursed
from Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Who are Israelites; to whom pertain the
adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law,
and the service of God, and the promises;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Whose are the fathers, and from whom
according to the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for
ever. Amen.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Not as though the word of God hath taken no
effect. For they are not all Israel, who are descendants from Israel?

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Neither because they are the seed of
Abraham, are they all children: but, In Isaac shall thy seed be called.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> That is, They who are the children of the
flesh, these are not the children of God; but the children of the
promise are counted for the seed.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For this is the word of promise, At this
time will I come, and Sarah shall have a son.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And not only this; but when Rebecca also
had conceived by one, even by our father Isaac,

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> (For the children being not yet born,
neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God, according
to election might stand, not of works, but of him that calleth)

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> It was said to her, The elder shall serve
the younger.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but
Esau have I hated.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> What shall we say then? Is there
unrighteousness with God? By no means.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will
have compassion.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> So then, it is not of him that willeth,
nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For the scripture saith to Pharaoh, Even
for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power
in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Therefore he hath mercy on whom he will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Thou wilt say then to me, Why doth he yet
find fault? for who hath resisted his will?

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> No, but, O man, who art thou that
repliest against God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it,
Why hast thou made me thus?

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Hath not the potter power over the clay
of the same lump to make one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor?

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> What if God, willing to show his wrath,
and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering the
vessels of wrath fitted to destruction:

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And that he might make known the riches
of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared for
glory,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Even us whom he hath called, not of the
Jews only, but also of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> As he saith also in Hosea, I will call
them My people, who were not my people; and her Beloved, who was not
beloved.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And it shall come to pass, that in the
place where it was said to them, Ye are not my people; there shall they
be called, The children of the living God.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Isaiah also crieth concerning Israel,
Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a
remnant shall be saved:

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> For he will finish the work, and cut it
short in righteousness: because a short work will the Lord make upon the
earth.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And as Isaiah said before, Except the
Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we had been as Sodom, and been made
like Gomorrah.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> What shall we say then? That the Gentiles
who followed not after righteousness, have attained to righteousness,
even the righteousness which is by faith:

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> But Israel, who followed after the law of
righteousness, hath not attained to the law of righteousness.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Why? Because they sought it not by faith,
but as it were by the works of the law. For they stumbled at that
stumbling-stone;

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> As it is written, Behold, I lay in Sion a
stumbling-stone, and rock of offense: and whoever believeth on him shall
not be ashamed.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Brethren, my heart's desire and prayer to
God for Israel is, that they may be saved.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> For I bear them testimony that they have
a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For they, being ignorant of God's
righteousness, and seeking to establish their own righteousness, have
not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believeth.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> For Moses describeth the righteousness
which is by the law, That the man who doeth these things shall live by
them.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But the righteousness which is by faith
speaketh on this wise, Say not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into
heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down.)

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Or, Who shall descend into the deep?
(that is, to bring Christ again from the dead.)

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But what saith it? The word is nigh thee,
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which
we preach:

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thy heart that God hath raised him
from the dead, thou shalt be saved.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> For with the heart man believeth to
righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made to salvation.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> For the scripture saith, whoever
believeth on him shall not be ashamed.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For there is no difference between the
Jew and the Greek: for the same Lord over all, is rich to all that call
upon him,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> For whoever shall call upon the name of
the Lord shall be saved.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> How then shall they call on him in whom
they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And how shall they preach, except they
be sent? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things?

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> But they have not all obeyed the
gospel. For Isaiah saith, Lord, who hath believed our report?

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> So then, faith cometh by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> But I say, Have they not heard? Yes
verily, their sound went into all the earth, and their words to the ends
of the world.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But I say, Did not Israel know? First,
Moses saith, I will provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people,
and by a foolish nation I will anger you.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> But Isaiah is very bold, and saith, I
was found by them that sought me not; I was made manifest to them that
asked not for me.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> But to Israel he saith, All day long I
have stretched forth my hands to a disobedient and gainsaying people.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> I say then, Hath God cast away his
people? By no means. For I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham,
of the tribe of Benjamin.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> God hath not cast away his people which
he foreknew. Know ye not what the scripture saith of Elijah? how he
maketh intercession to God against Israel, saying,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and
digged down thy altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my life.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But what saith the answer of God to him?
I have reserved to myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the
knee to Baal.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Even so then at this present time also
there is a remnant according to the election of grace.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And if by grace, then is it no more of
works: otherwise grace is no more grace. But if of works, then is it no
more grace: otherwise work is no more work.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> What then? Israel hath not obtained that
which he seeketh for; but the election hath obtained it, and the rest
were blinded.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> (According as it is written, God hath
given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and
ears that they should not hear;) to this day.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And David saith, Let their table be made
a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling-block, and a recompense to them:

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Let their eyes be darkened, that they
may not see, and bow down their back always.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> I say then, Have they stumbled that
they should fall? By no means: but rather through their fall salvation
is come to the Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Now if the fall of them be the riches
of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles;
how much more their fullness?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For I speak to you Gentiles, inasmuch
as I am the apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify my office:

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> If by any means I may incite to
emulation them who are my flesh, and may save some of them.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> For if the rejection of them be the
reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life
from the dead?

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> For if the first fruit is holy, the
lump is also holy: and if the root is holy, so are the branches.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And if some of the branches be broken
off, and thou, being a wild olive-tree, art ingrafted among them, and
with them partakest of the root and fatness of the olive-tree;

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Boast not against the branches. But if
thou boastest, thou bearest not the root, but the root thee.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Thou wilt say then, The branches were
broken off, that I might be ingrafted.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Well; because of unbelief they were
broken off, and thou standest by faith. Be not high-minded, but fear:

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> For if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Behold therefore the goodness and
severity of God: on them who fell, severity; but towards thee, goodness,
if thou shalt continue in his goodness: otherwise thou also shalt be cut
off.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And they also, if they abide not still
in unbelief, shall be ingrafted: for God is able to ingraft them again.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> For if thou wast cut out of the
olive-tree which is wild by nature, and wast ingrafted contrary to
nature into a good olive-tree; how much more shall these, which are the
natural branches, be grafted into their own olive-tree?

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> For I would not, brethren, that ye
should be ignorant of this mystery, (lest ye should be wise in your own
conceits) that blindness in part hath happened to Israel, until the
fullness of the Gentiles shall be come in.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And so all Israel shall be saved: as it
is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn
away ungodliness from Jacob:

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> For this is my covenant to them, when I
shall take away their sins.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> As concerning the gospel, they are
enemies for your sakes: but as concerning the election, they are beloved
for the father's sakes.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> For the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For as ye in times past have not
believed God, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief;

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> Even so have these also now not
believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> For God hath concluded them all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out!

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> For who hath known the mind of the
Lord? or who hath been his counselor?

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Or who hath first given to him, and it
shall be recompensed to him again?

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> For from him, and by him, and to him
are all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And be not conformed to this world: but
be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what
is that good and acceptable, and perfect will of God.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> For through the grace given to me, I say,
to every man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than
he ought to think; but to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to
every man the measure of faith.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> For as we have many members in one body,
and all members have not the same office:

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> So we, being many, are one body in
Christ, and every one members one of another.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Having then gifts differing according to
the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy
according to the proportion of faith;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Or ministry, let us wait on our
ministering: or he that teacheth, on teaching:

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Or he that exhorteth, on exhortation: he
that giveth, let him do it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with
diligence; he that showeth mercy, with cheerfulness.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Let love be without dissimulation. Abhor
that which is evil; cleave to that which is good.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Be kindly affectioned one to another
with brotherly love; in honor preferring one another;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Not slothful in business; fervent in
spirit; serving the Lord;

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Rejoicing in hope; patient in
tribulation; continuing earnest in prayer;

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Distributing to the necessity of
saints; given to hospitality.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Bless them who persecute you; bless,
and curse not.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Rejoice with them that rejoice, and
weep with them that weep.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Be of the same mind one towards
another. Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate. Be
not wise in your own conceits.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Recompense to no man evil for evil.
Provide things honest in the sight of all men.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> If it is possible, as much as lieth in
you, live peaceably with all men.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves,
but rather give place to wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I
will repay, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Therefore if thy enemy hungereth, feed
him; if he thirsteth, give him drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap
coals of fire on his head.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Be not overcome by evil, but overcome
evil with good.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers. For there is no power but from God: the powers that are, are
ordained by God.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Whoever therefore resisteth the power,
resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> For rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power; do
that which is good, and thou shalt have praise from the same:

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> For he is the minister of God to thee for
good. But if thou doest that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth
not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, an avenger to
execute wrath upon him that doeth evil.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> For, for this cause ye pay tribute also:
for they are God's ministers, attending continually upon this very
thing.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Render therefore to all their dues:
tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom
fear; honor to whom honor.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Owe no man any thing, but to love one
another: for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery,
Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false
witness, Thou shalt not covet; and if there is any other commandment, it
is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Love worketh no ill to one's neighbor:
therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And this, knowing the time, that now it
is high time to awake out of sleep: for now is our salvation nearer than
when we believed.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> The night is far spent, the day is at
hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on
the armor of light.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Let us walk honestly, as in the day;
not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in
strife and envying.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and make not provision for the lusts of flesh.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Him that is weak in the faith receive ye,
but not to doubtful disputations.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For one believeth that he may eat all
things: another, who is weak, eateth herbs.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Let not him that eateth, despise him that
eateth not; and let not him who eateth not, judge him that eateth: for
God hath received him.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Who art thou that judgest another man's
servant? to his own master he standeth or falleth: and he shall be held
up: for God is able to make him stand.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> One man esteemeth one day above another:
another esteemeth every day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in
his own mind.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> He that regardeth the day, regardeth it
to the Lord: and he that regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not
regard it. He that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks;
and he that eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God
thanks.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For none of us liveth to himself, and no
man dieth to himself.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> For whether we live, we live to the Lord;
and whether we die, we die to the Lord: whether we live therefore, or
die, we are the Lord's.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> For to this end Christ both died, and
rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and the
living.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But why dost thou judge thy brother? or
why dost thou set at naught thy brother? for we shall all stand before
the judgment-seat of Christ.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> For it is written, As I live, saith the
Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So then every one of us shall give
account of himself to God.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Let us not therefore judge one another
any more: but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling-block, or
an occasion to fall in his brother's way.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> I know, and am persuaded by the Lord
Jesus, that there is nothing unclean by itself: but to him that
esteemeth any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> But if thy brother is grieved with thy
food, now walkest thou not charitably. Destroy not him with thy food,
for whom Christ died.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Let not then your good be evil spoken
of:

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> For the kingdom of God is not food and
drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> For he that in these things serveth
Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved by men.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Let us therefore follow after the
things which make for peace, and things with which one may edify
another.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> For the sake of food, destroy not the
work of God. All things indeed are pure; but it is evil for that man who
eateth with offense.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to
drink wine, nor any thing by which thy brother stumbleth, or is
offended, or is made weak.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Hast thou faith? have it to thyself
before God. Happy is he that condemneth not himself in that thing which
he alloweth.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And he that doubteth is damned if he
eateth, because he eateth not from faith: for whatever is not from faith
is sin.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> We then that are strong ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Let every one of us please his neighbor
for his good to edification.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> For even Christ pleased not himself; but,
as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on
me.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> For whatever things were written
formerly, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the scriptures might have hope.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Now the God of patience and consolation
grant you to be like-minded one towards another according to Christ
Jesus:

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> That ye may with one mind and one mouth
glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Wherefore receive ye one another, as
Christ also received us to the glory of God.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Now I say that Jesus Christ was a
minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the
promises made to the fathers:

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And that the Gentiles might glorify God
for his mercy; as it is written, For this cause I will confess to thee
among the Gentiles, and sing to thy name.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And again he saith, Rejoice, ye
Gentiles, with his people.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And again, Praise the Lord, all ye
Gentiles; and laud him, all ye people.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And again Isaiah saith, There shall be
a root of Jesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles; in
him shall the Gentiles trust.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Now the God of hope fill you with all
joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the
power of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And I myself also am persuaded
concerning you, my brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, filled
with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Nevertheless, brethren, I have written
the more boldly to you in some sort, as putting you in mind, because of
the grace that is given to me from God.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> That I should be the minister of Jesus
Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the gospel of God, that the offering
up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I have therefore cause for glorying
through Jesus Christ, in those things which pertain to God.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> For I will not dare to speak of any of
those things which Christ hath not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles
obedient, by word and deed,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Through mighty signs and wonders, by
the power of the Spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem, and around to
Illyricum, I have fully preached the gospel of Christ.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And so have I strived to preach the
gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another
man's foundation:

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> But as it is written, They shall see to
whom he was not spoken of: and they that have not heard shall
understand.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> For which cause also I have been much
hindered from coming to you.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> But now having no more place in these
parts, and having a great desire these many years to come to you;

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Whenever I take my journey into Spain,
I will come to you: for I trust to see you in my journey, and to be
brought on my way thitherward by you, if first I shall be somewhat
filled with your company.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But now I go to Jerusalem to minister
to the saints.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> For it hath pleased them of Macedonia
and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor of the saints who
are at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> It hath pleased them verily; and their
debtors they are. For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their
spiritual things, their duty is also to minister to them in carnal
things.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> When therefore I have performed this,
and have sealed to them this fruit, I will go by you into Spain.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And I am sure that when I come to you,
I shall come in the fullness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> Now I beseech you, brethren, for the
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye strive
together with me in your prayers to God for me;

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> That I may be delivered from them in
Judea who do not believe; and that my service which I have for
Jerusalem, may be acceptable to the saints;

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> That I may come to you with joy by the
will of God, and may with you be refreshed.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> Now the God of peace be with you all.
Amen.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> I commend to you Phebe our sister, who is
a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea:

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> That ye receive her in the Lord, as it
becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatever business she hath
need of you: for she hath been a succorer of many, and of myself also.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in
Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Who have for my life laid down their own
necks: to whom not only I give thanks, but also all the churches of the
Gentiles.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Likewise greet the church that is in
their house. Salute my well-beloved Epenetus, who is the first-fruits of
Achaia to Christ.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Greet Mary, who bestowed much labor on
us.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Salute Andronicus and Junia my kinsmen,
and my fellow-prisoners, who are of note among the apostles, who also
were in Christ before me.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Salute Urbane, our helper in Christ, and
Stachys my beloved.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Salute Apelles approved in Christ.
Salute them who are of Aristobulus' household.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Salute Herodion my kinsman. Greet them
that are of the household of Narcissus, who are in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labor
in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, who labored much in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and
his mother and mine.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas,
Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren who are with them.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus,
and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints who are with them.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Salute one another with a holy kiss.
The churches of Christ salute you.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them
who cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have
learned; and avoid them.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> For they that are such serve not our
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> For your obedience is come abroad to
all men. I am glad therefore on your behalf: but yet I would have you
wise to that which is good, and simple concerning evil.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And the God of peace will soon bruise
Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Amen.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Timothy my work-fellow, and Lucius, and
Jason, and Sosipater my kinsmen, salute you.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> I Tertius, who wrote this epistle,
salute you in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> Gaius my host, and of the whole church,
saluteth you. Erastus the chamberlain of the city saluteth you, and
Quartus a brother.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> Now to him that is able to establish
you according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according
to the revelation of the mystery, which hath been kept secret since the
world began,

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> But now is made manifest, and by the
scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the
everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience of faith:

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> To God the only wise, be glory through
Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians](co1.md)
