[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sa1)  [Next](kg1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: 2 Samuel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now it came to pass after the death of
Saul, when David had returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and
David had abode two days in Ziklag;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> It came even to pass on the third day, that
behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent, and
earth upon his head: and so it was, when he came to David, that he fell
to the earth, and did obeisance.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And David said to him, From whence comest
thou? And he said to him, Out of the camp of Israel have I escaped.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And David said to him, How went the matter?
I pray thee, tell me. And he answered, That the people have fled from
the battle, and many of the people also have fallen, and are dead; and
Saul and Jonathan his son are dead also.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And David said to the young man that told
him, How knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan his son are dead?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And the young man that told him said, As I
happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul leaned upon his
spear; and lo, the chariots and horsemen followed hard after him.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And when he looked behind him, he saw me,
and called to me. And I answered, Here am I.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And he said to me, Who art thou? And I
answered him, I am an Amalekite.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> He said to me again, Stand, I pray thee,
upon me, and slay me: for anguish is come upon me, because my life is
yet whole in me.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> So I stood upon him, and slew him,
because I was sure that he could not live after that he had fallen: and
I took the crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was on
his arm, and have brought them hither to my lord.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then David took hold on his clothes, and
rent them; and likewise all the men that were with him:

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And they mourned and wept, and fasted
until evening, for Saul and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of
the LORD, and for the house of Israel; because they had fallen by the
sword.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And David said to the young man that told
him, Whence art thou? And he answered, I am the son of a stranger, an
Amalekite.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And David said to him, How wast thou not
afraid to stretch forth thy hand to destroy the LORD'S anointed?

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And David called one of the young men,
and said, Go near, and fall upon him. And he smote him that he died.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And David said to him, Thy blood be upon
thy head; for thy mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I have
slain the LORD'S anointed.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And David lamented with this lamentation
over Saul, and over Jonathan his son:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> (Also he bade them teach the children of
Judah the use of the bow: behold, it is written in the book of Jasher.)

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy
high places: how are the mighty fallen!

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in
the streets of Askelon; lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice,
lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no
dew, neither rain upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the
shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though
he had not been anointed with oil.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> From the blood of the slain, from the fat
of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of
Saul returned not empty.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Saul and Jonathan were lovely and
pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided: they
were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul,
who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put ornaments of
gold upon your apparel.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> How are the mighty fallen in the midst of
the battle! O Jonathan thou wast slain in thy high places.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> I am distressed for thee, my brother
Jonathan: very pleasant hast thou been to me: thy love to me was
wonderful, passing the love of women.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> How have the mighty fallen, and the
weapons of war perished!

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And it came to pass after this, that David
inquired of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up into any of the cities of
Judah? And the LORD said to him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I
go up? And he said, To Hebron.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> So David went up thither, and his two wives
also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail, Nabal's wife the Carmelite.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And his men that were with him did David
bring up, every man with his household: and they dwelt in the cities of
Hebron.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And the men of Judah came, and there they
anointed David king over the house of Judah. And they told David,
saying, That the men of Jabesh-gilead were they that buried Saul.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And David sent messengers to the men of
Jabesh-gilead, and said to them, Blessed be ye of the LORD, that ye have
shown this kindness to your lord, even to Saul, and have buried him.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And now the LORD show kindness and truth to
you: and I also will requite you this kindness, because ye have done
this thing.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Therefore now let your hands be
strengthened, and be ye valiant: for your master Saul is dead, and also
the house of Judah have anointed me king over them.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's
host, took Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, and brought him over to
Mahanaim;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And he made him king over Gilead, and over
the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin,
and over all Israel.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Ish-bosheth, Saul's son, was forty years
old when he began to reign over Israel, and he reigned two years: but
the house of Judah followed David.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And the time that David was king in
Hebron, over the house of Judah, was seven years and six months.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And Abner the son of Ner, and the
servants of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to
Gibeon.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the
servants of David went out, and met together by the pool of Gibeon: and
they sat down, the one on the one side of the pool, and the other on the
other side of the pool.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men
now arise, and play before us. And Joab said, Let them arise.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Then there arose, and went over by number
twelve of Benjamin, who pertained to Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, and
twelve of the servants of David.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And they caught every one his fellow by
the head, and thrust his sword in his fellow's side: so they fell down
together: wherefore that place was called Helkath-hazzurim, which is in
Gibeon.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And there was a very severe battle that
day; and Abner was defeated, and the men of Israel, before the servants
of David.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And there were three sons of Zeruiah
there, Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel: and Asahel was as light of foot as
a wild roe.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And Asahel pursued after Abner; and in
going he turned not to the right hand nor to the left from following
Abner.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Then Abner looked behind him, and said,
Art thou Asahel? And he answered, I am.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And Abner said to him, Turn thee aside to
thy right hand or to thy left, and lay hold on one of the young men, and
take to thee his armor. But Asahel would not turn aside from following
him.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thee
aside from following me: Why should I smite thee to the ground? how then
should I hold up my face to Joab thy brother?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> But he refused to turn aside: wherefore
Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him under the fifth rib,
that the spear came out behind him; and he fell down there, and died in
the same place: and it came to pass, that as many as came to the place
where Asahel fell down and died, stood still.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Joab also, and Abishai pursued Abner: and
the sun went down when they had come to the hill of Ammah, that lieth
before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And the children of Benjamin assembled
themselves after Abner, and became one troop, and stood on the top of a
hill.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> Then Abner called to Joab, and said,
Shall the sword devour for ever? knowest thou not that it will be
bitterness in the latter end? how long shall it be then, ere thou wilt
bid the people return from following their brethren?

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And Joab said, As God liveth, unless thou
hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up every
one from following his brother.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the
people stood still, and pursued Israel no more, neither fought they any
more.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> And Abner and his men walked all that
night through the plain, and passed over Jordan, and went through all
Bithron, and they came to Mahanaim.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> And Joab returned from following Abner:
and when he had assembled all the people, there lacked of David's
servants nineteen men, and Asahel.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> But the servants of David had smitten of
Benjamin, and of Abner's men, so that three hundred and sixty men died.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> And they took up Asahel, and buried him
in the sepulcher of his father, which was in Beth-lehem. And Joab and
his men went all night, and they came to Hebron at break of day.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now there was long war between the house of
Saul and the house of David: but David grew stronger and stronger, and
the house of Saul became weaker and weaker.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And to David were sons born in Hebron: and
his first-born was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And his second, Chileab, of Abigail the
wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah,
the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And the fourth, Adonijah the son of
Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah David's
wife. These were born to David in Hebron.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And it came to pass, while there was war
between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner made
himself strong for the house of Saul.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And Saul had a concubine, whose name was
Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah: and Ish-bosheth said to Abner, Why hast
thou gone in to my father's concubine?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Then was Abner very wroth for the words of
Ish-bosheth, and said, Am I a dog's head, who against Judah do show
kindness this day to the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren, and
to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of David, that
thou chargest me to-day with a fault concerning this woman?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> So do God to Abner, and more also, except,
as the LORD hath sworn to David, even so I do to him;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> To translate the kingdom from the house
of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah,
from Dan even to Beer-sheba.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And he could not answer Abner a word
again, because he feared him.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And Abner sent messengers to David on his
behalf, saying, Whose is the land? saying also, Make thy league with me,
and behold, my hand shall be with thee, to bring about all Israel to
thee.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And he said, Well; I will make a league
with thee: but one thing I require of thee, that is, Thou shalt not see
my face, except thou shalt first bring Michal, Saul's daughter, when
thou comest to see my face.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And David sent messengers to Ish-bosheth,
Saul's son, saying, Deliver to me my wife Michal, whom I espoused to me
for a hundred foreskins of the Philistines.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And Ish-bosheth sent, and took her from
her husband, even from Phaltiel the son of Laish.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And her husband went with her, weeping
behind her to Bahurim. Then said Abner to him, Go, return. And he
returned.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And Abner had communication with the
elders of Israel, saying, Ye sought for David in times past to be king
over you:

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Now then do it: for the LORD hath spoken
of David, saying, By the hand of my servant David I will save my people
Israel from the hand of the Philistines, and from the hand of all their
enemies.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And Abner also spoke in the ears of
Benjamin: and Abner went also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron
all that seemed good to Israel, and that seemed good to the whole house
of Benjamin.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> So Abner came to David in Hebron, and
twenty men with him: and David made Abner and the men that were with
him, a feast.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And Abner said to David, I will arise and
go, and will gather all Israel to my lord the king, that they may make a
league with thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thy heart
desireth. And David sent Abner away; and he went in peace.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And behold, the servants of David and
Joab came from pursuing a troop, and brought in a great spoil with them:
but Abner was not with David in Hebron; for he had sent him away, and he
had gone in peace.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> When Joab and all the host that was with
him had come, they told Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the
king, and he hath sent him away, and he hath gone in peace.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Then Joab came to the king, and said,
What hast thou done? behold, Abner came to thee; why is it that thou
hast sent him away, and he is quite gone?

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner, that
he came to deceive thee, and to know thy going-out and thy coming-in,
and to know all that thou doest.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And when Joab had come out from David, he
sent messengers after Abner, who brought him again from the well of
Sirah: but David knew it not.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> And when Abner had returned to Hebron,
Joab took him aside in the gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him
there under the fifth rib that he died, for the blood of Asahel his
brother.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> And afterward when David heard it, he
said, I and my kingdom are guiltless before the LORD for ever from the
blood of Abner the son of Ner:

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Let it rest on the head of Joab, and on
all his father's house; and let there not fail from the house of Joab
one that hath an issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff,
or that falleth on the sword, or that lacketh bread.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> So Joab and Abishai his brother slew
Abner, because he had slain their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the
battle.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> And David said to Joab, and to all the
people that were with him, Rend your clothes, and gird you with
sackcloth, and mourn before Abner. And king David himself followed the
bier.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> And they buried Abner in Hebron: and the
king lifted up his voice and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the
people wept.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> And the king lamented over Abner, and
said, Died Abner as a fool dieth?

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet
put into fetters: as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou.
And all the people wept again over him.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> And when all the people came to cause
David to eat food while it was yet day, David swore, saying, So do God
to me, and more also, If I taste bread or aught else, till the sun is
down.

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> And all the people took notice of it, and
it pleased them: as what ever the king did pleased all the people.

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> For all the people and all Israel
understood that day that it was not of the king to slay Abner the son of
Ner.

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> And the king said to his servants, Know
ye not that there hath a prince and a great man fallen this day in
Israel?

<span id="an_3:39">3:39</span> And I am this day weak, though anointed
king; and these men the sons of Zeruiah are too hard for me. The LORD
shall reward the doer of evil according to his wickedness.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And when Saul's son heard that Abner was
dead in Hebron, his hands were feeble, and all the Israelites were
troubled.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And Saul's son had two men that were
captains of bands: the name of the one was Baanah, and the name of the
other Rechab, the sons of Rimmon a Beerothite, of the children of
Benjamin: (For Beeroth also was reckoned to Benjamin:

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and
have been sojourners there until this day.)

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And Jonathan, Saul's son, had a son that
was lame of his feet: he was five years old when the tidings came of
Saul and Jonathan out of Jezreel, and his nurse took him up, and fled:
and it came to pass, as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became
lame. And his name was Mephibosheth.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite,
Rechab and Baanah, went, and came about the heat of the day to the house
of Ish-bosheth, who lay on a bed at noon.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And they came thither into the midst of the
house, as though they would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under
the fifth rib: and Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For when they came into the house, he lay
on his bed in his bed-chamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and
beheaded him, and took his head, and went away through the plain all
night.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And they brought the head of Ish-bosheth to
David to Hebron, and said to the king, Behold the head of Ish-bosheth
the son of Saul thy enemy, who sought thy life; and the LORD hath
avenged my lord the king this day of Saul and of his seed.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And David answered Rechab and Baanah his
brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said to them, As the
LORD liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> When one told me, saying, Behold, Saul is
dead, (thinking to have brought good tidings,) I took hold of him, and
slew him in Ziklag, who thought that I would have given him a reward for
his tidings:

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> How much more, when wicked men have slain
a righteous person in his own house upon his bed? shall I not therefore
now require his blood of your hand, and take you away from the earth?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And David commanded his young men, and
they slew them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged them
over the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ish-bosheth, and
buried it in the sepulcher of Abner in Hebron.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Then came all the tribes of Israel to David
to Hebron, and spoke, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Also in time past, when Saul was king over
us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the LORD
said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be a
captain over Israel.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> So all the elders of Israel came to the
king to Hebron; and king David made a league with them in Hebron before
the LORD: and they anointed David king over Israel.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> David was thirty years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned forty years.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years
and six months: and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over
all Israel and Judah.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And the king and his men went to Jerusalem
to the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land: who spoke to David,
saying, Except thou shalt take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt
not come in hither: thinking, David cannot come in hither.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Nevertheless, David took the strong hold of
Zion: the same is the city of David.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And David said on that day, Whoever getteth
up to the gutter, and smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind,
that are hated by David's soul, he shall be chief and captain: Wherefore
they said, The blind and the lame shall not come into the house.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> So David dwelt in the fort, and called it
the city of David. And David built around from Millo and inward.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And David went on, and grew great, and
the LORD God of hosts was with him.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to
David, and cedar-trees, and carpenters, and masons: and they built David
a house.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And David perceived that the LORD had
established him king over Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom
for his people Israel's sake.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And David took him more concubines and
wives out of Jerusalem, after he had come from Hebron: and there were
yet sons and daughters born to David.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And these are the names of those that
were born to him in Jerusalem; Shammuah, and Shobab, and Nathan, and
Solomon,

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Ibhar also, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and
Japhia,

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphalet.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> But when the Philistines heard that they
had anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines came up to seek
David; and David heard of it, and went down to the hold.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> The Philistines also came and spread
themselves in the valley of Rephaim.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And David inquired of the LORD, saying,
Shall I go up to the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into my hand?
And the LORD said to David, Go up: for I will doubtless deliver the
Philistines into thy hand.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And David came to Baal-perazim, and David
smote them there, and said, The LORD hath broken forth upon my enemies
before me, as the breach of waters. Therefore he called the name of that
place Baal-perazim.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And there they left their images, and
David and his men burned them.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And the Philistines came yet again, and
spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And when David inquired of the LORD, he
said, Thou shalt not go up: but fetch a compass behind them, and come
upon them over against the mulberry-trees.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And let it be, when thou hearest the
sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry-trees, that then thou shalt
bestir thyself: for then shall the LORD go out before thee, to smite the
host of the Philistines.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And David did so as the LORD had
commanded him; and smote the Philistines from Geba until thou comest to
Gazer.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Again, David assembled all the chosen men
of Israel, thirty thousand,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And David arose, and went with all the
people that were with him from Baale of Judah, to bring up from thence
the ark of God, whose name is called by the name of the LORD of hosts
that dwelleth between the cherubim.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And they set the ark of God upon a new
cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah:
and Uzzah and Ahio the sons of Abinadab drove the new cart.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And they brought it out of the house of
Abinadab, which was at Gibeah, accompanying the ark of God: and Ahio
went before the ark.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And David and all the house of Israel
played before the LORD on all manner of instruments made of fir wood,
even on harps, and on psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and
on cymbals.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And when they came to Nachon's
threshing-floor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took
hold of it: for the oxen shook it.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the anger of the LORD was kindled
against Uzzah, and God smote him there for his error; and there he died
by the ark of God.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And David was displeased, because the LORD
had made a breach upon Uzzah: and he called the name of the place
Perez-uzzah to this day.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And David was afraid of the LORD that day,
and said, How shall the ark of the LORD come to me?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> So David would not remove the ark of the
LORD to him into the city of David: but David carried it aside into the
house of Obed-edom the Gittite.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And the ark of the LORD continued in the
house of Obed-edom the Gittite three months: and the LORD blessed
Obed-edom and all his household.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And it was told king David, saying, The
LORD hath blessed the house of Obed-edom, and all that pertaineth to
him, because of the ark of God. So David went and brought up the ark of
God from the house of Obed-edom into the city of David with gladness.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And it was so, that when they that bore
the ark of the LORD had gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And David danced before the LORD with all
his might; and David was girded with a linen ephod.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> So David and all the house of Israel
brought up the ark of the LORD with shouting, and with the sound of the
trumpet.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And as the ark of the LORD came into the
city of David, Michal, Saul's daughter, looked through a window, and saw
king David leaping and dancing before the LORD; and she despised him in
her heart.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And they brought in the ark of the LORD,
and set it in its place, in the midst of the tabernacle that David had
pitched for it: and David offered burnt-offerings and peace-offerings
before the LORD.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And as soon as David had made an end of
offering burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, he blessed the people in
the name of the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And he dealt among all the people, even
among the whole multitude of Israel, as well to the women as men, to
every one a cake of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon of
wine. So all the people departed every one to his house.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Then David returned to bless his
household. And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and
said, How glorious was the king of Israel to-day, who uncovered himself
to-day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain
fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself!

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And David said to Michal, It was before
the LORD, who chose me before thy father, and before all his house, to
appoint me ruler over the people of the LORD, over Israel: therefore
will I play before the LORD.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And I shall yet be more vile than thus,
and shall be base in my own sight: and by the maid-servants which thou
hast spoken of, by them shall I be had in honor.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had
no child until the day of her death.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And it came to pass, when the king sat in
his house, and the LORD had given him rest around from all his enemies;

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> That the king said to Nathan the prophet,
See now, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of God dwelleth within
curtains.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all
that is in thy heart: for the LORD is with thee.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And it came to pass that night, that the
word of the LORD came to Nathan, saying,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Go and tell my servant David, Thus saith
the LORD, Wilt thou build me a house for me to dwell in?

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Whereas I have not dwelt in any house since
the time that I brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to
this day, but have walked in a tent, and in a tabernacle.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> In all the places in which I have walked
with all the children of Israel have I spoken a word with any of the
tribes of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people Israel, saying, Why
do ye not build me a house of cedar?

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Now therefore so shalt thou say to my
servant David, thus saith the LORD of hosts, I took thee from the
sheep-cote, from following the sheep, to be ruler over my people, over
Israel:

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And I was with thee whithersoever thou
wentest, and have cut off all thy enemies out of thy sight, and have
made thee a great name, like to the name of the great men that are in
the earth.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Moreover, I will appoint a place for my
people Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in a place of
their own, and move no more; neither shall the children of wickedness
afflict them any more, as formerly.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And as since the time that I commanded
judges to be over my people Israel, and have caused thee to rest from
all thy enemies. Also the LORD telleth thee that he will make thee a
house.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And when thy days shall be fulfilled, and
thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee,
which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> He shall build a house for my name, and I
will establish the throne of his kingdom for ever.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> I will be his father, and he shall be my
son. If he shall commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of
men, and with the stripes of the children of men:

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> But my mercy shall not depart from him,
as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before thee.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And thy house and thy kingdom shall be
established for ever before thee: thy throne shall be established for
ever.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> According to all these words, and
according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak to David.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Then king David went in, and sat before
the LORD, and he said, Who am I, O Lord GOD? and what is my house, that
thou hast brought me hitherto;

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And this was yet a small thing in thy
sight, O Lord GOD; but thou hast spoken also of thy servant's house for
a great while to come. And is this the manner of man, O Lord GOD?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And what can David say more to thee? for
thou, Lord GOD, knowest thy servant.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> For thy word's sake, and according to thy
own heart, hast thou done all these great things, to make thy servant
know them.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Wherefore thou art great, O LORD God: for
there is none like thee, neither is there any God besides thee,
according to all that we have heard with our ears.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And what one nation in the earth is like
thy people, even like Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to
himself, and to make him a name, and to do for you great things and
terrible, for thy land, before thy people which thou redeemedst to thee
from Egypt, from the nations and their gods?

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> For thou hast confirmed to thyself thy
people Israel to be a people to thee for ever: and thou, LORD, art
become their God.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And now, O LORD God, the word that thou
hast spoken concerning thy servant, and concerning his house, establish
it for ever, and do as thou hast said.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And let thy name be magnified for ever,
saying, The LORD of hosts is the God over Israel: and let the house of
thy servant David be established before thee.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> For thou, O LORD of hosts, God of Israel,
hast revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee a house:
therefore hath thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer to
thee.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And now, O Lord GOD, thou art that God,
and thy words are true, and thou hast promised this goodness to thy
servant:

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Therefore now let it please thee to bless
the house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before thee: for
thou, O Lord GOD, hast spoken it: and with thy blessing let the house of
thy servant be blessed for ever.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And after this it came to pass, that David
smote the Philistines, and subdued them: and David took Metheg-ammah out
of the hand of the Philistines.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And he smote Moab, and measured them with a
line, casting them down to the ground; even with two lines he measured
to put to death, and with one full line to keep alive. And so the
Moabites became David's servants, and brought gifts.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> David smote also Hadadezer, the son of
Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to recover his border at the river
Euphrates.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And David took from him a thousand
chariots, and seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and
David houghed all the chariot-horses, but reserved of them for a hundred
chariots.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And when the Syrians of Damascus came to
succor Hadadezer king of Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty
thousand men.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Then David put garrisons in Syria of
Damascus: and the Syrians became servants to David, and brought gifts.
And the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And David took the shields of gold that
were on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities
of Hadadezer, king David took very much brass.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> When Toi king of Hamath heard that David
had smitten all the host of Hadadezer,

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Then Toi sent Joram his son to king
David, to salute him, and to bless him, because he had fought against
Hadadezer, and smitten him: (for Hadadezer had wars with Toi) and Joram
brought with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of
brass:

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Which also king David dedicated to the
LORD, with the silver and gold that he had dedicated of all nations
which he subdued;

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the
children of Ammon, and of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the
spoil of Hadadezer son of Rehob, king of Zobah.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And David made him a name when he
returned from smiting of the Syrians in the valley of Salt, being
eighteen thousand men.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he put garrisons in Edom; throughout
all Edom he put garrisons, and all they of Edom became David's servants.
And the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And David reigned over all Israel; and
David executed judgment and justice to all his people.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the
host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and
Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests: and Seraiah was the
scribe;

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over
both the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David's sons were chief
rulers.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And David said, Is there yet any that is
left of the house of Saul, that I may show him kindness for Jonathan's
sake?

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And there was of the house of Saul a
servant whose name was Ziba. And when they had called him to David, the
king said to him, Art thou Ziba? And he said, Thy servant is he.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And the king said, Is there not yet any of
the house of Saul, that I may show the kindness of God to him? and Ziba
said to the king, Jonathan hath yet a son, who is lame in his feet.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And the king said to him, Where is he? And
Ziba said to the king, Behold, he is in the house of Machir, the son of
Ammiel, in Lo-debar.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Then king David sent, and brought him from
the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, from Lo-debar.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Now when Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan,
the son of Saul, had come to David, he fell on his face, and did
reverence. And David said, Mephibosheth. And he answered, Behold thy
servant!

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And David said to him, Fear not: for I will
surely show thee kindness for the sake of Jonathan thy father, and will
restore thee all the land of Saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread
at my table continually.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And he bowed himself, and said, What is thy
servant, that thou shouldst look upon such a dead dog as I am?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Then the king called to Ziba, Saul's
servant, and said to him, I have given to thy master's son all that
pertained to Saul, and to all his house.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Thou therefore, and thy sons, and thy
servants, shall till the land for him, and thou shalt bring in the
fruits, that thy master's son may have food to eat: but Mephibosheth thy
master's son shall eat bread always at my table. Now Ziba had fifteen
sons and twenty servants.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Then said Ziba to the king, According to
all that my lord the king hath commanded his servant, so shall thy
servant do. As for Mephibosheth, said the king, he shall eat at my
table, as one of the king's sons.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose
name was Micah. And all that dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants to
Mephibosheth.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> So Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem: for
he ate continually at the king's table; and was lame in both his feet.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And it came to pass after this, that the
king of the children of Ammon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his
stead.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Then said David, I will show kindness to
Hanun the son of Nahash, as his father showed kindness to me. And David
sent to comfort him by the hand of his servants for his father. And
David's servants came into the land of the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And the princes of the children of Ammon
said to Hanun their lord, Thinkest thou that David doth honor thy
father, that he hath sent comforters to thee? hath not David rather sent
his servants to thee, to search the city, and to spy it out, and to
overthrow it?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Wherefore Hanun took David's servants,
and shaved off the one half of their beards, and cut off their garments
in the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> When they told it to David, he sent to
meet them, because the men were greatly ashamed. And the king said,
Tarry at Jericho until your beards are grown, and then return.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And when the children of Ammon saw that
they had made themselves odious before David, the children of Ammon sent
and hired the Syrians of Beth-rehob, and the Syrians of Zoba, twenty
thousand footmen, and of king Maacah a thousand men, and of Ish-tob
twelve thousand men.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And when David heard of it, he sent Joab,
and all the host of the mighty men.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And the children of Ammon came out, and
put the battle in array at the entrance of the gate: and the Syrians of
Zoba, and of Rehob, and Ish-tob, and Maacah, were by themselves in the
field.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> When Joab saw that the front of the
battle was against him before and behind, he selected of all the choice
men of Israel, and put them in array against the Syrians:

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And the rest of the people he delivered
into the hand of Abishai his brother, that he might put them in array
against the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he said, If the Syrians shall be
too strong for me, then thou shalt help me: but if the children of Ammon
shall be too strong for thee, then I will come and help thee.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Be of good courage, and let us play the
men for our people, and for the cities of our God: and the LORD do that
which seemeth him good.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And Joab and the people that were with
him drew near to the battle against the Syrians: and they fled before
him.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And when the children of Ammon saw that
the Syrians had fled, then fled they also before Abishai, and entered
into the city. So Joab returned from the children of Ammon, and came to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And when the Syrians saw that they were
smitten before Israel, they assembled themselves.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the
Syrians that were beyond the river: and they came to Helam; and Shobach
the captain of the host of Hadarezer went before them.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And when it was told David, he
assembled all Israel, and passed over Jordan, and came to Helam. And the
Syrians set themselves in array against David, and fought with him.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And the Syrians fled before Israel; and
David slew the men of seven hundred chariots of the Syrians, and forty
thousand horsemen, and smote Shobach the captain of their host, who died
there.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And when all the kings that were
servants to Hadarezer saw that they were smitten before Israel, they
made peace with Israel, and served them. So the Syrians feared to help
the children of Ammon any more.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And it came to pass, after the year had
expired, at the time when kings go forth to battle, that David sent
Joab, and his servants with him, and all Israel; and they destroyed the
children of Ammon, and destroyed Rabbah. But David tarried still at
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And it came to pass in an evening, that
David arose from off his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's
house: and from the roof he saw a woman washing herself; and the woman
was very beautiful to look upon.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And David sent and inquired after the
woman. And one said, Is not this Bath-sheba, the daughter of Eliam, the
wife of Uriah the Hittite?

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And David sent messengers, and took her;
and she came in to him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from
her uncleanness: and she returned to her house.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And the woman conceived, and sent and
told David, and said, I am with child.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And David sent to Joab, saying, Send me
Uriah the Hittite. And Joab sent Uriah to David.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And when Uriah had come to him, David
inquired of him how Joab did, and how the people did, and how the war
prospered.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And David said to Uriah, Go down to thy
house, and wash thy feet. And Uriah departed out of the king's house,
and there followed him a mess of meat from the king.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> But Uriah slept at the door of the king's
house with all the servants of his lord, and went not down to his house.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And when they had told David, saying,
Uriah went not down to his house, David said to Uriah, Camest thou not
from thy journey? why then didst thou not go down to thy house?

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And Uriah said to David, The ark, and
Israel, and Judah, abide in tents; and my lord Joab, and the servants of
my lord are encamped in the open fields; shall I then go into my house,
to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy
soul liveth, I will not do this thing.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And David said to Uriah, Tarry here
to-day also, and to-morrow I will let thee depart. So Uriah abode in
Jerusalem that day and the morrow.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And when David had called him, he ate
and drank before him; and he made him drunk: and at evening he went out
to lie on his bed with the servants of his lord, but went not down to
his house.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And it came to pass in the morning,
that David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And he wrote in the letter, saying, Set
ye Uriah in the front of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him,
that he may be smitten, and die.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And it came to pass, when Joab observed
the city, that he assigned Uriah to a place where he knew that valiant
men were.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And the men of the city went out, and
fought with Joab: and there fell some of the people of the servants of
David; and Uriah the Hittite died also.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Then Joab sent and told David all the
things concerning the war;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And charged the messenger, saying, When
thou hast made an end of telling the matters of the war to the king,

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And if the king's wrath shall rise, and
he shall say to thee, Why approached ye so nigh to the city for the
fight? knew ye not that they would shoot from the wall?

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Who smote Abimelech the son of
Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him from
the wall, that he died in Thebez? why went ye nigh the wall? then say
thou, Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> So the messenger went, and came and
showed David all that Joab had sent him for.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And the messenger said to David, Surely
the men prevailed against us, and came out to us into the field, and we
were upon them even to the entrance of the gate.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And the shooters shot from off the wall
upon thy servants: and some of the king's servants are dead, and thy
servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Then David said to the messenger, Thus
shalt thou say to Joab, Let not this thing displease thee, for the sword
devoureth one as well as another: make thy battle more strong against
the city, and overthrow it: and encourage thou him.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And when the wife of Uriah heard that
Uriah her husband was dead, she mourned for her husband.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And when the mourning was past, David
sent and brought her to his house, and she became his wife, and bore him
a son. But the thing that David had done displeased the LORD.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And the LORD sent Nathan to David. And he
came to him, and said to him, There were two men in one city; the one
rich, and the other poor.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> The rich man had very numerous flocks and
herds:

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> But the poor man had nothing save one
little ewe-lamb, which he had bought and nourished: and it grew up
together with him, and with his children: it fed of his own meat, and
drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was to him as a
daughter.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And there came a traveler to the rich
man, and he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to
dress for the way-faring man that had come to him; but took the poor
man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that had come to him.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And David's anger was greatly kindled
against the man; and he said to Nathan, As the LORD liveth, the man that
hath done this thing shall surely die:

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And he shall restore the lamb four-fold,
because he did this thing, and because he had no pity.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And Nathan said to David, Thou art the
man. Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I anointed thee king over
Israel, and I delivered thee from the hand of Saul;

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And I gave thee thy master's house, and
thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and
of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover have given
to thee such and such things.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Why hast thou despised the commandment of
the LORD, to do evil in his sight? thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite
with the sword, and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain
him with the sword of the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Now therefore the sword shall never
depart from thy house; because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the
wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will
raise up evil against thee out of thy own house, and I will take thy
wives before thy eyes, and give them to thy neighbor, and he shall lie
with thy wives in the sight of this sun.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> For thou didst it secretly: but I will
do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And David said to Nathan, I have sinned
against the LORD. And Nathan said to David, The LORD also hath put away
thy sin; thou shalt not die.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> But, because by this deed thou hast
given great occasion to the enemies of the LORD to blaspheme, the child
also that is born to thee shall surely die.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And Nathan departed to his house. And
the LORD struck the child that Uriah's wife bore to David, and it was
very sick.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> David therefore besought God for the
child; and David fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the earth.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And the elders of his house arose, and
went to him, to raise him from the earth: but he would not, neither did
he eat bread with them.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And it came to pass on the seventh day,
that the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him that
the child was dead: for they said, Behold while the child was yet alive,
we spoke to him, and he would not hearken to our voice: how will he then
be grieved, if we tell him that the child is dead?

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> But when David saw that his servants
whispered, David perceived that the child was dead: therefore David said
to his servants, Is the child dead? And they said, He is dead.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Then David arose from the earth, and
washed, and anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and came into the
house of the LORD, and worshiped: then he came to his own house; and
when he required, they set bread before him, and he ate.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Then said his servants to him, What
thing is this that thou hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the
child, while it was alive; but after the child was dead, thou didst rise
and eat bread.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And he said, While the child was yet
alive, I fasted, and wept: for I said, Who can tell whether GOD will be
gracious to me, that the child may live?

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> But now he is dead, Why should I fast?
can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he will not return to
me.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> And David comforted Bath-sheba his
wife, and went in to her, and lay with her: and she bore a son, and he
called his name Solomon: and the LORD loved him.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And he sent by the hand of Nathan the
prophet; and he called his name Jedidiah, because of the LORD.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And Joab fought against Rabbah of the
children of Ammon, and took the royal city.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> And Joab sent messengers to David, and
said, I have fought against Rabbah, and have taken the city of waters.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Now therefore collect the rest of the
people, and encamp against the city, and take it: lest I take the city,
and it be called after my name.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And David collected all the people, and
went to Rabbah, and fought against it, and took it.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> And he took their king's crown from off
his head, the weight of which was a talent of gold with the precious
stones: and it was set on David's head. And he brought forth the spoil
of the city in great abundance.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> And he brought forth the people that
were in it, and put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and
under axes of iron, and made them pass through the brick-kiln: and thus
he did to all the cities of the children of Ammon. So David and all the
people returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And it came to pass after this, that
Absalom the son of David had a fair sister, whose name was Tamar; and
Amnon the son of David loved her.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And Amnon was so afflicted, that he fell
sick for his sister Tamar; for she was a virgin; and Amnon thought it
hard for him to do any thing to her.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> But Amnon had a friend, whose name was
Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother: and Jonadab was a very
subtil man.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And he said to him, Why art thou, being
the king's son, pining from day to day? wilt thou not tell me? And Amnon
said to him, I love Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And Jonadab said to him, Lay thee down on
thy bed, and make thyself sick: and when thy father cometh to see thee,
say to him, I pray thee, let my sister Tamar come, and give me food, and
dress the food in my sight, that I may see it, and eat it at her hand.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> So Amnon lay down and made himself sick:
and when the king came to see him, Amnon said to the king, I pray thee,
let Tamar my sister come, and make for me a couple of cakes in my sight,
that I may eat at her hand.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go
now to thy brother Amnon's house, and dress meat for him.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's
house; and he was laid down. And she took flour, and kneaded it, and
made cakes in his sight, and baked the cakes.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And she took a pan, and poured them out
before him; but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, Have out all men from
me. And they went out every man from him.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And Amnon said to Tamar, Bring the food
into the chamber, that I may eat from thy hand. And Tamar took the cakes
which she had made, and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her
brother.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And when she had brought them to him to
eat, he took hold of her, and said to her, Come, lie with me, my sister.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And she answered him, Nay, my brother,
do not force me; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel: do not
thou this folly.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And I, whither shall I cause my shame
to go? and as for thee, thou wilt be as one of the fools in Israel. Now
therefore, I pray thee, speak to the king; for he will not withhold me
from thee.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Howbeit, he would not hearken to her
voice: but being stronger than she, forced her, and lay with her.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Then Amnon hated her exceedingly; so
that the hatred with which he hated her was greater than the love with
which he had loved her. And Amnon said to her, Arise, be gone.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And she said to him, There is no cause:
this evil in sending me away is greater than the other that thou didst
to me. But he would not hearken to her.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Then he called his servant that
ministered to him, and said, Put now this woman out from me, and bolt
the door after her.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And she had a garment of divers colors
upon her: for with such robes were the king's daughters that were
virgins appareled. Then his servant brought her out, and bolted the door
after her.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And Tamar put ashes on her head, and
rent her garment of divers colors that was on her, and laid her hand on
her head, and went on crying.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And Absalom her brother said to her,
Hath Amnon thy brother been with thee? but hold now thy peace, my
sister: he is thy brother; regard not this thing. So Tamar remained
desolate in her brother Absalom's house.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> But when king David heard of all these
things, he was very wroth.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And Absalom spoke to his brother Amnon
neither good nor bad: for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his
sister Tamar.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And it came to pass after two full
years, that Absalom had sheep-shearers in Baal-hazor, which is beside
Ephraim: and Absalom invited all the king's sons.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And Absalom came to the king, and said,
Behold now, thy servant hath sheep-shearers; let the king, I beseech
thee, and his servants go with thy servant.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And the king said to Absalom, Nay, my
son, let us not all now go, lest we be chargeable to thee. And he
pressed him: yet he would not go, but blessed him.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Then said Absalom, If not, I pray thee,
let my brother Amnon go with us. And the king said to him, Why should he
go with thee?

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> But Absalom pressed him that he should
let Amnon and all the king's sons go with him.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> Now Absalom had commanded his servants,
saying, Mark ye now when Amnon's heart is merry with wine, and when I
say to you, Smite Amnon; then kill him, fear not: have I not commanded
you? be courageous, and be valiant.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And the servants of Absalom did to
Amnon as Absalom had commanded. Then all the king's sons arose, and
every man rode upon his mule, and fled.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> And it came to pass, while they were in
the way, that information came to David, saying, Absalom hath slain all
the king's sons, and there is not one of them left.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> Then the king arose, and tore his
garments, and lay on the earth; and all his servants stood by with their
clothes rent.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's
brother, answered and said, Let not my lord suppose that they have slain
all the young men the king's sons; for Amnon only is dead: for by the
appointment of Absalom this hath been determined from the day that he
forced his sister Tamar.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Now therefore let not my lord the king
take the thing to his heart, to think that all the king's sons are dead:
for Amnon only is dead.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> But Absalom fled. And the young man
that kept the watch lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold, there
came many people by the way of the hillside behind him.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> And Jonadab said to the king, Behold,
the king's sons come; as thy servant said, so it is.

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> And it came to pass, as soon as he had
made an end of speaking, that behold, the king's sons came, and lifted
up their voice and wept: and the king also and all his servants wept
exceedingly.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai,
the son of Ammihud, king of Geshur. And David mourned for his son every
day.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur,
and was there three years.

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> And the soul of king David longed to go
forth to Absalom: for he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was
dead.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived
that the king's heart was towards Absalom.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And Joab sent to Tekoah, and brought
thence a wise woman, and said to her, I pray thee, feign thyself to be a
mourner, and put on now mourning apparel, and anoint not thyself with
oil, but be as a woman that had a long time mourned for the dead:

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And come to the king, and speak in this
manner to him. So Joab put the words in her mouth.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And when the woman of Tekoah spoke to the
king, she fell on her face to the ground, and did obeisance, and said,
Help, O king.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And the king said to her, What aileth
thee? And she answered, I am indeed a widow woman, and my husband is
dead.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And thy handmaid had two sons, and they
two strove together in the field, and there was none to part them, but
the one smote the other and slew him.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And behold, the whole family hath risen
against thy handmaid, and they said, Deliver him that smote his brother,
that we may kill him, for the life of his brother whom he slew; and we
will destroy the heir also: and so they will quench my coal which is
left, and will not leave to my husband neither name nor remainder upon
the earth.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And the king said to the woman, Go to thy
house, and I will give charge concerning thee.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And the woman of Tekoah said to the king,
My lord, O king, the iniquity be on me, and on my father's house: and
the king and his throne be guiltless.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And the king said, Whoever saith aught
to thee, bring him to me, and he shall not touch thee any more.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Then said she, I pray thee, let the
king remember the LORD thy God, that thou wouldest not suffer the
revengers of blood to destroy any more, lest they destroy my son. And he
said, As the LORD liveth, there shall not one hair of thy son fall to
the earth.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Then the woman said, Let thy handmaid,
I pray thee, speak one word to my lord the king. And he said, Say on.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And the woman said, Why then hast thou
thought such a thing against the people of God? for the king doth speak
this thing as one who is faulty, in that the king doth not bring home
again his banished.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> For we must needs die, and are as water
spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again; neither doth God
respect any person: yet doth he devise means, that his banished be not
expelled from him.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Now therefore that I have come to speak
of this thing to my lord the king, it is because the people have made me
afraid: and thy handmaid said, I will now speak to the king; it may be
that the king will perform the request of his handmaid.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> For the king will hear, to deliver his
handmaid from the hand of the man that would destroy me and my son
together out of the inheritance of God.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Then thy handmaid said, The word of my
lord the king, will now be comfortable: for as an angel of God, so is my
lord the king to discern good and bad: therefore the LORD thy God will
be with thee.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> Then the king answered and said to the
woman, Hide not from me, I pray thee, the thing that I shall ask thee.
And the woman said, Let my lord the king now speak.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And the king said, Is not the hand of
Joab with thee in all this? And the woman answered and said, As thy soul
liveth, my lord the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left
from aught that my lord the king hath spoken: for thy servant Joab, he
bade me, and he put all these words in the mouth of thy handmaid:

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> To bring about this form of speech hath
thy servant Joab done this thing: and my lord is wise, according to the
wisdom of an angel of God, to know all things that are on the earth.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And the king said to Joab, Behold now,
I have done this thing: go therefore, bring the young man Absalom again.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And Joab fell to the ground on his
face, and bowed himself, and thanked the king: and Joab said, To-day thy
servant knoweth that I have found grace in thy sight, my lord, O king,
in that the king hath fulfilled the request of his servant.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and
brought Absalom to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And the king said, Let him turn to his
own house, and let him not see my face. So Absalom returned to his own
house, and saw not the king's face.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> But in all Israel there was none to be
so much praised as Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot
even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And when he polled his head, (for it
was at every year's end that he polled it: because the hair was heavy on
him, therefore he polled it:) he weighed the hair of his head at two
hundred shekels after the king's weight.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And to Absalom there were born three
sons, and one daughter, whose name was Tamar: she was a woman of a fair
countenance.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> So Absalom dwelt two full years in
Jerusalem, and saw not the king's face.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Therefore Absalom sent for Joab, that
he might send him to the king; but he would not come to him: and when he
sent again the second time, he would not come.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> Therefore he said to his servants, See,
Joab's field is near mine, and he hath barley there; go and set it on
fire. And Absalom's servants set the field on fire.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom,
to his house, and said to him, Why have thy servants set my field on
fire?

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And Absalom answered Joab, Behold, I
sent to thee, saying, Come hither, that I may send thee to the king, to
say, Why am I come from Geshur? it had been good for me had I been there
still: now therefore let me see the king's face; and if there is any
iniquity in me, let him kill me.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> So Joab came to the king, and told him:
and when he had called for Absalom, he came to the king, and bowed
himself on his face to the ground before the king: and the king kissed
Absalom.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And it came to pass after this, that
Absalom prepared him chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before
him.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And Absalom rose early, and stood beside
the way of the gate: and it was so, that when any man that had a
controversy came to the king for judgment, then Absalom called to him,
and said, Of what city art thou? And he said, Thy servant is one of the
tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And Absalom said to him, See, thy matters
are good and right; but there is no man deputed by the king to hear
thee.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Absalom said moreover, Oh that I were
made judge in the land, that every man who hath any suit or cause might
come to me, and I would do him justice!

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And it was so, that when any man came
nigh to him to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him,
and kissed him.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And in this manner did Absalom to all
Israel that came to the king for judgment: so Absalom stole the hearts
of the men of Israel.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And it came to pass after forty years,
that Absalom said to the king, I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow,
which I have vowed to the LORD, in Hebron.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode
at Geshur in Syria, saying, If the LORD shall bring me again indeed to
Jerusalem, then I will serve the LORD.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And the king said to him, Go in peace, So
he arose, and went to Hebron.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> But Absalom sent spies throughout all
the tribes of Israel, saying, As soon as ye hear the sound of the
trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom reigneth in Hebron.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And with Absalom went two hundred men
from Jerusalem, that were called; and they went in their simplicity, and
they knew not any thing.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the
Gilonite, David's counselor, from his city, even from Giloh, while he
offered sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong; for the people
increased continually with Absalom.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And there came a messenger to David,
saying, The hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And David said to all his servants that
were with him at Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flee; for we shall not
else escape from Absalom: make speed to depart, lest he should overtake
us suddenly, and bring evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of
the sword.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And the king's servants said to the
king, Behold, thy servants are ready to do whatever my lord the king
shall appoint.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And the king went forth, and all his
household after him. And the king left ten women who were concubines to
keep the house.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And the king went forth, and all the
people after him, and tarried in a place that was far off.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> And all his servants passed on by his
side; and all the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the
Gittites, six hundred men who came after him from Gath, passed on before
the king.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Then said the king to Ittai the
Gittite, Why goest thou also with us? return to thy place, and abide
with the king; for thou art a stranger, and also an exile.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Whereas thou camest but yesterday,
should I this day make thee go up and down with us? seeing I go whither
I may; return thou, and take back thy brethren: mercy and truth be with
thee.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And Ittai answered the king, and said,
As the LORD liveth, and as my lord the king liveth, surely in what place
my lord the king shall be, whether in death or life, even there also
will thy servant be.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And David said to Ittai, Go and pass
over. And Ittai the Gittite passed over, and all his men, and all the
little ones that were with him.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And all the country wept with a loud
voice, and all the people passed over: the king also himself passed over
the brook Kidron, and all the people passed over, towards the way of the
wilderness.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And lo, Zadok also, and all the Levites
were with him bearing the ark of the covenant of God: and they set down
the ark of God; and Abiathar went up, until all the people had done
passing out of the city.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And the king said to Zadok, Carry back
the ark of God into the city: if I shall find favor in the eyes of the
LORD, he will bring me again, and show me both it, and his habitation:

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> But if he shall thus say, I have no
delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as seemeth good to
him.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> The king said also to Zadok the priest,
Art not thou a seer? return into the city in peace, and your two sons
with you, Ahimaaz thy son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> See, I will tarry in the plain of the
wilderness, until word shall come from you to certify me.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried
the ark of God again to Jerusalem: and they tarried there.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And David went up by the ascent of
mount Olivet, and wept as he went, and had his head covered, and he went
barefoot: and all the people that were with him covered every man his
head, and they went up, weeping as they went.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And one told David, saying, Ahithophel
is among the conspirators with Absalom. And David said, O LORD, I pray
thee, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And it came to pass, that when David
had come to the top of the mount, where he worshiped God, behold, Hushai
the Archite came to meet him with his coat rent, and earth upon his
head;

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> To whom David said, If thou shalt pass
on with me, then thou wilt be a burden to me:

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> But if thou shalt return to the city,
and say to Absalom, I will be thy servant, O king; as I have been thy
father's servant hitherto, so will I now also be thy servant: then
mayest thou for me defeat the counsel of Ahithophel.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And hast thou not there with thee Zadok
and Abiathar the priests? therefore it shall be, that whatever thing
thou shalt hear out of the king's house, thou shalt tell it to Zadok and
Abiathar the priests.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> Behold, they have there with them their
two sons, Ahimaaz Zadok's son, and Jonathan Abiathar's son; and by them
ye shall send to me every thing that ye can hear.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> So Hushai David's friend came into the
city, and Absalom came into Jerusalem.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And when David was a little past the top
of the hill, behold, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him, with a
couple of asses saddled, and upon them two hundred loaves of bread, and
a hundred bunches of raisins, and a hundred of summer fruits, and a
bottle of wine.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And the king said to Ziba, What meanest
thou by these? And Ziba said, The asses are for the king's household to
ride on; and the bread and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and
the wine, that such as are faint in the wilderness may drink.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And the king said, And where is thy
master's son? And Ziba said to the king, Behold, he abideth at
Jerusalem: for he said, To-day shall the house of Israel restore to me
the kingdom of my father.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Then said the king to Ziba, Behold, thine
are all that pertained to Mephibosheth. And Ziba said, I humbly beseech
thee that I may find grace in thy sight, my lord, O king.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And when king David came to Bahurim,
behold, thence came out a man of the family of the house of Saul, whose
name was Shimei, the son of Gera: he came forth, and cursed still as he
came.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And he cast stones at David, and at all
the servants of king David: and all the people and all the mighty men
were on his right hand and on his left.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And thus said Shimei when he cursed, Come
out, come out, thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial:

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> The LORD hath returned upon thee all the
blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast reigned; and the
LORD hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son: and
behold, thou art taken in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah to
the king, Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go
over, I pray thee, and take off his head.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And the king said, What have I to do
with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? so let him curse, because the LORD hath
said to him, Curse David. Who shall then say, Why hast thou done so?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And David said to Abishai, and to all
his servants, Behold, my son, who came forth from my bowels, seeketh my
life: how much more now may this Benjaminite do it? let him alone, and
let him curse; for the LORD hath bidden him.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> It may be that the LORD will look on my
affliction, and that the LORD will requite me good for his cursing this
day.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And as David and his men went by the
way, Shimei went along on the hill's side over against him, and cursed
as he went, and threw stones at him, and cast dust.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And the king, and all the people that
were with him, came weary, and refreshed themselves there.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And Absalom, and all the people the men
of Israel, came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And it came to pass, when Hushai the
Archite, David's friend, had come to Absalom, that Hushai said to
Absalom, God save the king, God save the king.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And Absalom said to Hushai, Is this thy
kindness to thy friend? why wentest thou not with thy friend?

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And Hushai said to Absalom, Nay; but
whom the LORD, and this people, and all the men of Israel choose, his
will I be, and with him will I abide.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And again, whom should I serve? should
I not serve in the presence of his son? as I have served in thy father's
presence, so will I be in thy presence.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Then said Absalom to Ahithophel, Give
counsel among you what we shall do.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And Ahithophel said to Absalom, Go in
to thy father's concubines, which he hath left to keep the house; and
all Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred by thy father: then shall
the hands of all that are with thee be strong.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> So they spread Absalom a tent upon the
top of the house; and Absalom went in to his father's concubines in the
sight of all Israel.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he
counseled in those days, was as if a man had inquired at the oracle of
God: so was all the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with
Absalom.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Moreover Ahithophel said to Absalom, Let
me now choose out twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after
David this night;

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And I will come upon him while he is
weary and weak-handed, and will make him afraid: and all the people that
are with him shall flee; and I will smite the king only:

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And I will bring back all the people to
thee: the man whom thou seekest is as if all returned: so all the people
shall be in peace.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And the saying, pleased Absalom well, and
all the elders of Israel.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Then said Absalom, Call now Hushai the
Archite also, and let us hear likewise what he saith.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And when Hushai had come to Absalom,
Absalom spoke to him, saying, Ahithophel hath spoken after this manner:
shall we do after his saying? if not, speak thou.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And Hushai said to Absalom, The counsel
that Ahithophel hath given, is not good at this time.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> For, said Hushai, thou knowest thy father
and his men, that they are mighty men, and they are chafed in their
minds, as a bear robbed of her whelps in the field: and thy father is a
man of war, and will not lodge with the people.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in
some other place: and it will come to pass, when some of them are
overthrown at the first, that whosoever heareth it will say, There is a
slaughter among the people that follow Absalom.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And he also that is valiant, whose
heart is as the heart of a lion, will utterly melt: for all Israel
knoweth that thy father is a mighty man, and they who are with him are
valiant men.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Therefore I counsel that all Israel
should be generally gathered to thee, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, as
the sand that is by the sea for multitude; and that thou shouldst go to
battle in thy own person.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> So shall we come upon him in some place
where he shall be found, and we will light upon him as the dew falleth
on the ground: and of him and of all the men that are with him there
shall not be left so much as one.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Moreover, if he shall have entered into
a city, then shall all Israel bring ropes to that city, and we will draw
it into the river, until there is not one small stone found there.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And Absalom and all the men of Israel
said, The counsel of Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of
Ahithophel. For the LORD had appointed to defeat the good counsel of
Ahithophel, to the intent that the LORD might bring evil upon Absalom.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Then said Hushai to Zadok and to
Abiathar the priests, Thus and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and
the elders of Israel; and thus and thus have I counseled.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Now therefore send quickly, and tell
David, saying, Lodge not this night in the plains of the wilderness, but
speedily pass over; lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people
that are with him.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by
En-rogel; for they might not be seen to come into the city: and a maid
servant went and told them; and they went and told king David.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Nevertheless, a lad saw them, and told
Absalom: but they went both of them away quickly, and came to the house
of a man in Bahurim, who had a well in his court; into which they
descended.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And the woman took and spread a
covering over the well's mouth, and spread ground corn upon it; and the
thing was not known.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And when Absalom's servants came to the
woman to the house, they said, Where is Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And the
woman said to them, they have gone over the brook of water. And when
they had sought and could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> And it came to pass, after they had
departed, that they came out of the well, and went and told king David,
and said to David, Arise, and pass quickly over the water: for thus hath
Ahithophel counseled against you.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Then David arose, and all the people
that were with him, and they passed over Jordan: by the morning light
there lacked not one of them that had not gone over Jordan.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And when Ahithophel saw that his
counsel was not followed, he saddled his ass, and arose, and went home
to his house, to his city, and put his household in order, and hanged
himself, and died. and was buried in the sepulcher of his father.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Then David came to Mahanaim. And
Absalom passed over Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> And Absalom made Amasa captain of the
host instead of Joab: which Amasa was a man's son, whose name was Ithra,
an Israelite, that went in to Abigail the daughter of Nahash, sister to
Zeruiah, Joab's mother.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> So Israel and Absalom encamped in the
land of Gilead.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> And it came to pass, when David had
come to Mahanaim, that Shobi the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the children
of Ammon, and Machir the son of Ammiel of Lo-debar, and Barzillai the
Gileadite of Rogelim,

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> Brought beds, and basins, and earthen
vessels, and wheat, and barley, and flour, and parched corn, and beans,
and lentils, and parched pulse,

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> And honey, and butter, and sheep, and
cheese of cows, for David, and for the people that were with him, to
eat: for they said, The people are hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in
the wilderness.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And David numbered the people that were
with him, and set over them captains of thousands and captains of
hundreds.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And David sent forth a third part of the
people under the hand of Joab, and a third part under the hand of
Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother, and a third part under the
hand of Ittai the Gittite. And the king said to the people, I will
surely go forth with you myself also.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> But the people answered, Thou shalt not
go forth: for if we flee away, they will not care for us; neither if
half of us die, will they care for us: but now thou art worth ten
thousand of us: therefore now it is better that thou shouldst succor us
out of the city.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And the king said to them, What seemeth
to you best I will do. And the king stood by the gate side, and all the
people came out by hundreds and by thousands.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And the king commanded Joab and Abishai
and Ittai, saying, Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with
Absalom. And all the people heard when the king gave all the captains
charge concerning Absalom.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> So the people went out into the field
against Israel: and the battle was in the wood of Ephraim;

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> Where the people of Israel were slain
before the servants of David, and there was there a great slaughter that
day of twenty thousand men.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> For the battle was there scattered over
the face of all the country: and the wood devoured more people that day
than the sword devoured.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And Absalom met the servants of David.
And Absalom rode upon a mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs
of a great oak, and his head caught hold of the oak, and he was
suspended between the heaven and the earth; and the mule that was under
him went away.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And a certain man saw it, and told
Joab, and said, Behold, I saw Absalom hanging in an oak.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And Joab said to the man that told him,
And behold, thou sawest him, and why didst thou not smite him there to
the ground? and I would have given thee ten shekels of silver, and a
girdle.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And the man said to Joab, Though I
should receive a thousand shekels of silver in my hand, yet would I not
put forth my hand against the king's son: for in our hearing the king
charged thee and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Beware that none touch the
young man Absalom.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Otherwise I should have wrought
falsehood against my own life: for there is no matter hid from the king,
and thou thyself wouldst have set thyself against me.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Then said Joab, I may not tarry thus
with thee. And he took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through
the heart of Absalom, while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And ten young men that bore Joab's
armor compassed about and smote Absalom, and slew him.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And Joab blew the trumpet, and the
people returned from pursuing Israel: for Joab restrained the people.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And they took Absalom, and cast him
into a great pit in the wood, and laid a very great heap of stones upon
him: and all Israel fled every one to his tent.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Now Absalom in his life-time had taken
and raised for himself a pillar, which is in the king's dale: for he
said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance: and he called the
pillar after his own name: and it is called to this day, Absalom's
place.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, Let
me now run, and inform the king, how the LORD hath avenged himself of
his enemies.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And Joab said to him, Thou shalt not
bear tidings this day, but thou shalt bear tidings another day: but this
day thou shalt bear no tidings, because the king's son is dead.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Then said Joab to Cushi, Go, tell the
king what thou hast seen. And Cushi bowed himself to Joab, and ran.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet
again to Joab, But however, let me also, I pray thee, run after Cushi.
And Joab said, Why wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou hast no
tidings ready?

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> But however, said he, let me run. And
he said to him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and
outran Cushi.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And David sat between the two gates:
and the watchman went up to the roof over the gate to the wall, and
lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold a man running alone.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And the watchman called, and told the
king. And the king said, If he is alone there is tidings in his mouth.
And he came apace, and drew near.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And the watchman saw another man
running: and the watchman called to the porter, and said, Behold another
man running alone. And the king said, He also bringeth tidings.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And the watchman said, I think the
running of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok.
And the king said, He is a good man, and cometh with good news.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> And Ahimaaz called, and said to the
king, All is well. And he fell down to the earth upon his face before
the king, and said, Blessed be the LORD thy God, who hath delivered up
the men that raised their hand against my lord the king.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> And the king said, Is the young man
Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz answered, When Joab sent the king's servant,
and me thy servant, I saw a great tumult, but I knew not what it was.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> And the king said to him, Turn aside,
and stand here. And he turned aside, and stood still.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> And behold, Cushi came; and Cushi said,
Tidings, my lord the king: for the LORD hath avenged thee this day of
all them that rose up against thee.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> And the king said to Cushi, Is the
young man Absalom safe? And Cushi answered, May the enemies of my lord
the king, and all that rise against thee to do thee hurt, be as that
young man is.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> And the king was much moved, and went
up to the chamber over the gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said,
O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! O that I had died for thee, O
Absalom, my son, my son!

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And it was told to Joab, Behold, the king
weepeth and mourneth for Absalom.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And the victory that day was turned into
mourning to all the people: for the people heard it said that day how
the king was grieved for his son.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And the people withdrew by stealth that
day into the city, as people being ashamed steal away when they flee in
battle.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> But the king covered his face, and the
king cried with a loud voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my
son!

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And Joab came into the house to the king,
and said, thou hast shamed this day the faces of all thy servants, who
this day have saved thy life, and the lives of thy sons and of thy
daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and the lives of thy concubines;

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> In that thou lovest thy enemies, and
hatest thy friends. For thou hast declared this day, that thou regardest
neither princes nor servants: for this day I perceive, that if Absalom
had lived, and all we had died this day, then it had pleased thee well.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak
comfortably to thy servants: for I swear by the LORD, if thou shalt not
go forth, there will not tarry one with thee this night: and that will
be worse to thee than all the evil that hath befallen thee from thy
youth until now.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Then the king rose, and sat in the gate.
And they told to all the people, saying, Behold, the king doth sit in
the gate. And all the people came before the king: for Israel had fled
every man to his tent.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And all the people were at strife
throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, The king saved us from the
hand of our enemies, and he delivered us from the hand of the
Philistines; and now he hath fled out of the land for Absalom.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And Absalom, whom we anointed over us,
is dead in battle. Now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the
king back?

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And king David sent to Zadok and to
Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak to the elders of Judah, saying, Why
are ye the last to bring the king back to his house? seeing the speech
of all Israel is come to the king, even to his house.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and
my flesh: why then are ye the last to bring back the king?

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And say ye to Amasa, Art thou not of my
bone, and of my flesh? God do so to me, and more also, if thou be not
captain of the host before me continually in the room of Joab.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And he bowed the heart of all the men
of Judah, even as the heart of one man; so that they sent this word to
the king, Return thou, and all thy servants.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> So the king returned, and came to
Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the
king over Jordan.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And Shimei the son of Gera, a
Benjaminite, who was of Bahurim, hasted and came down with the men of
Judah to meet king David.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And there were a thousand men of
Benjamin with him, and Ziba the servant of the house of Saul, and his
fifteen sons and his twenty servants with him; and they went over Jordan
before the king.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And there went over a ferry-boat to
carry over the king's household, and to do what he thought good. And
Shimei the son of Gera fell down before the king, as he came over
Jordan;

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And said to the king, Let not my lord
impute iniquity to me, neither do thou remember that which thy servant
did perversely the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that
the king should take it to his heart.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> For thy servant doth know that I have
sinned: therefore behold, I have come the first this day of all the
house of Joseph to go down to meet my lord the king.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered
and said, Shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed
the LORD'S anointed?

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And David said, What have I to do with
you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries to me?
shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel? for do not I
know that I am this day king over Israel?

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> Therefore the king said to Shimei, Thou
shalt not die. And the king swore to him.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came
down to meet the king, and had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his
beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king departed until the
day he came again in peace.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And it came to pass, when he had come
to Jerusalem to meet the king, that the king said to him, Why didst thou
not go with me, Mephibosheth?

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And he answered, My lord, O king, my
servant deceived me: for thy servant said, I will saddle me an ass, that
I may ride on it, and go to the king; because thy servant is lame.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> And he hath slandered thy servant to my
lord the king; but my lord the king is as an angel of God: do therefore
what is good in thy eyes.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> For all of my father's house were but
dead men before my lord the king: yet didst thou set thy servant among
them that ate at thy own table. What right therefore have I yet to cry
any more to the king?

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And the king said to him, Why speakest
thou any more of thy matters? I have said, Thou and Ziba divide the
land.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And Mephibosheth said to the king, Yes,
let him take all, forasmuch as my lord the king hath come again in peace
to his own house.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> And Barzillai the Gileadite came down
from Rogelim, and went over Jordan with the king, to conduct him over
Jordan.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Now Barzillai was a very aged man, even
eighty years old: and he had provided the king with sustenance while he
lay at Mahanaim: for he was a very great man.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> And the king said to Barzillai, Come
thou over with me, and I will feed thee with me in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> And Barzillai said to the king, How
long have I to live, that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem?

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> I am this day eighty years old: and can
I discern between good and evil? can thy servant taste what I eat or
what I drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing-men and
singing-women? why then should thy servant be yet a burden to my lord
the king?

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> Thy servant will go a little way over
Jordan with the king: and why should the king recompense me with such a
reward?

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> Let thy servant, I pray thee, return
again, that I may die in my own city, and be buried by the grave of my
father and of my mother. But behold thy servant Chimham; let him go over
with my lord the king; and do to him what shall seem good to thee.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> And the king answered, Chimham shall go
over with me, and I will do to him that which shall seem good to thee:
and whatever thou shalt require of me, that will I do for thee.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> And all the people went over Jordan.
And when the king had come over, the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed
him; and he returned to his own place.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> Then the king went on to Gilgal, and
Chimham went on with him: and all the people of Judah conducted the
king, and also half the people of Israel.

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> And behold, all the men of Israel came
to the king, and said to him, Why have our brethren the men of Judah
stolen thee away, and have brought the king, and his household, and all
David's men with him, over Jordan?

<span id="an_19:42">19:42</span> And all the men of Judah answered the
men of Israel, Because the king is near of kin to us: why then are ye
angry for this matter? have we eaten at all at the king's cost? or hath
he given us any gift?

<span id="an_19:43">19:43</span> And the men of Israel answered the men
of Judah, and said, We have ten parts in the king, and we have also more
right in David than ye: why then did ye despise us, that our advice
should not be first had in bringing back our king? And the words of the
men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And there happened to be there a man of
Belial, whose name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjaminite: and he
blew a trumpet, and said, We have no part in David, neither have we
inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to his tents, O Israel.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> So every man of Israel, withdrawing from
David, followed Sheba the son of Bichri: but the men of Judah adhered to
their king, from Jordan even to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And David came to his house at Jerusalem;
and the king took the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep
the house, and put them in custody, and fed them, but went not in to
them. So they were shut up to the day of their death, living in
widowhood.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Then said the king to Amasa, Assemble to
me the men of Judah within three days, and be thou here present.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> So Amasa went to assemble the men of
Judah: but he tarried longer than the set time which he had appointed
him.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And David said to Abishai, Now shall
Sheba the son of Bichri do us more harm than did Absalom: take thou thy
lord's servants, and pursue him, lest he get for himself fortified
cities, and escape us.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And there went out after him Joab's men,
and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, and all the mighty men: and
they went out of Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> When they were at the great stone which
is in Gibeon, Amasa went before them. And Joab's garment that he had put
on was girded to him, and upon it a girdle with a sword fastened upon
his loins in its sheath; and as he went forth it fell out.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And Joab said to Amasa, Art thou in
health, my brother? And Joab took Amasa by the beard with the right hand
to kiss him.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> But Amasa took no heed to the sword
that was in Joab's hand: so he smote him in the fifth rib, and shed out
his bowels to the ground, and struck him not again; and he died. So Joab
and Abishai his brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And one of Joab's men stood by him, and
said, He that favoreth Joab, and he that is for David, let him go after
Joab.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And Amasa wallowed in blood in the
midst of the highway. And when the man saw that all the people stood
still, he removed Amasa out of the highway into the field, and cast a
cloth upon him, when he saw that every one that came by him stood still.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> When he was removed out of the highway,
all the people went on after Joab, to pursue after Sheba the son of
Bichri.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And he went through all the tribes of
Israel to Abel, and to Beth-maachah, and all the Berites: and they were
assembled, and went also after him.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And they came and besieged him in Abel
of Beth-maachah, and they cast up a bank against the city, and it stood
in the trench: and all the people that were with Joab battered the wall,
to throw it down.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Then cried a wise woman out of the
city, Hear, hear; say, I pray you, to Joab, Come near hither, that I may
speak with thee.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And when he was come near to her, the
woman said, Art thou Joab? And he answered, I am he. Then she said to
him, Hear the words of thy handmaid. And he answered, I do hear.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Then she spoke, saying, They were wont
to speak in old time, saying, They will surely ask counsel at Abel: and
so they ended the matter.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> I am one of them that are peaceable and
faithful in Israel: thou seekest to destroy a city and a mother in
Israel: why wilt thou swallow up the inheritance of the LORD?

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And Joab answered and said, Far be it,
far be it from me, that I should swallow up or destroy.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> The matter is not so: but a man of
mount Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand
against the king, even against David: deliver him only, and I will
depart from the city. And the woman said to Joab, Behold, his head shall
be thrown to thee over the wall.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Then the woman went to all the people
in her wisdom. And they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and
cast it out to Joab. And he blew a trumpet, and they retired from the
city, every man to his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem to the king.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Now Joab was over all the host of
Israel: and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and
over the Pelethites:

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> And Adoram was over the tribute: and
Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder:

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And Sheva was scribe: and Zadok and
Abiathar were the priests:

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And Ira also the Jairite was a chief
ruler about David.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Then there was a famine in the days of
David three years, year after year; and David inquired of the LORD. And
the LORD answered, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he
slew the Gibeonites.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And the king called the Gibeonites, and
said to them; (now the Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel,
but of the remnant of the Amorites; and the children of Israel had sworn
to them: and Saul sought to slay them, in his zeal to the children of
Israel and Judah.)

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Wherefore David said to the Gibeonites,
What shall I do for you? and with what shall I make the atonement, that
ye may bless the inheritance of the LORD?

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And the Gibeonites said to him, We will
have no silver nor gold of Saul, nor of his house; neither for us shalt
thou kill any man in Israel. And he said, What ye shall say, that will I
do for you.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And they answered the king, The man that
consumed us, and that devised against us that we should be destroyed
from remaining within the borders of Israel,

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Let seven men of his sons be delivered to
us, and we will hang them up to the LORD in Gibeah of Saul, whom the
LORD chose. And the king said, I will give them.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son
of Jonathan, the son of Saul, because of the LORD'S oath that was
between them, between David and Jonathan the son of Saul.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> But the king took the two sons of Rizpah
the daughter of Aiah, whom she bore to Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth;
and the five sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she brought up
for Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite:

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And he delivered them into the hands of
the Gibeonites, and they hanged them on the hill before the LORD: and
they fell all seven together, and were put to death in the days of
harvest, in the first days, in the beginning of barley harvest.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took
sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the rock, from the beginning of
harvest until water dropped upon them out of heaven, and suffered
neither the birds of the air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of
the field by night.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And it was told David what Rizpah the
daughter of Aiah the concubine of Saul had done.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And David went and took the bones of
Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabesh-gilead,
who had stolen them from the street of Beth-shan, where the Philistines
had hanged them, when the Philistines had slain Saul in Gilboa:

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And he brought up from thence the bones
of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son; and they gathered the bones
of them that were hanged.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And the bones of Saul and Jonathan his
son they buried in the country of Benjamin in Zelah, in the sepulcher of
Kish his father: and they performed all that the king commanded. And
after that God was entreated for the land.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> Moreover, the Philistines had yet war
again with Israel; and David went down, and his servants with him, and
fought against the Philistines: and David became faint.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And Ishbi-benob, who was of the sons of
the giant, the weight of whose spear was three hundred shekels of brass
in weight, he being girded with a new sword, thought to have slain
David.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> But Abishai the son of Zeruiah succored
him, and smote the Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of David
swore to him, saying, Thou shalt go out no more with us to battle, that
thou mayest not extinguish the light of Israel.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And it came to pass after this, that
there was again a battle with the Philistines at Gob: then Sibbechai the
Hushathite slew Saph, who was of the sons of the giant.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And there was again a battle in Gob
with the Philistines, where Elhanan the son of Jaareoregim, a
Beth-lehemite, slew the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the staff of
whose spear was like a weaver's beam.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And there was yet a battle in Gath,
where was a man of great stature, that had on every hand six fingers,
and on every foot six toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was
born to the giant.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the
son of Shimeah the brother of David slew him.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> These four were born to the giant in
Gath, and fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And David spoke to the LORD the words of
this song in the day that the LORD had delivered him from the hand of
all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul:

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And he said, The LORD is my rock, and my
fortress, and my deliverer;

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> The God of my rock; in him will I trust:
he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, and my
refuge, my preserver; thou savest me from violence.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> I will call on the LORD, who is worthy to
be praised: so shall I be saved from my enemies.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> When the waves of death compassed me, the
floods of ungodly-men made me afraid;

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> The sorrows of hell encompassed me; the
snares of death seized me;

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> In my distress I called upon the LORD,
and cried to my God: and he heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry
entered into his ears.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> Then the earth shook and trembled: the
foundations of heaven moved and shook, because he was wroth.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> There went up a smoke out of his
nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> He bowed the heavens also, and came
down; and darkness was under his feet.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And he rode upon a cherub, and flew:
and he was seen upon the wings of the wind.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And he made darkness pavilions around
him, dark waters, and thick clouds of the skies.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Through the brightness before him were
coals of fire kindled.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> The LORD thundered from heaven, and the
most High uttered his voice.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And he sent out arrows, and scattered
them; lightning, and discomfited them.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And the channels of the sea appeared,
the foundations of the world were laid open, at the rebuking of the
LORD, at the blast of the breath of his nostrils.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> He sent from above, he took me; he drew
me out of many waters;

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> He delivered me from my strong enemy,
from them that hated me: for they were too strong for me.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> They fell upon me in the day of my
calamity: but the LORD was my support.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> He brought me forth also into a large
place: he delivered me, because he delighted in me.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> The LORD rewarded me according to my
righteousness: according to the cleanness of my hands hath he
recompensed me.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> For I have kept the ways of the LORD,
and have not wickedly departed from my God.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> For all his judgments were before me:
and as for his statutes, I did not depart from them.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> I was also upright before him, and have
kept myself from my iniquity.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Therefore the LORD hath recompensed me
according to my righteousness; according to my cleanness in his
eye-sight.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> With the merciful thou wilt show
thyself merciful, and with the upright man thou wilt show thyself
upright.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> With the pure thou wilt show thyself
pure; and with the froward thou wilt contend.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And the afflicted people thou wilt
save: but thy eyes are upon the haughty, that thou mayest bring them
down.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> For thou art my lamp, O LORD: and the
LORD will lighten my darkness.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> For by thee I have run through a troop:
by my God have I leaped over a wall.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> As for God, his way is perfect; the
word of the LORD is tried: he is a buckler to all them that trust in
him.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> For who is God, save the LORD? and who
is a rock, save our God?

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> God is my strength and power: and he
maketh my way perfect.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> He maketh my feet like hinds' feet: and
setteth me upon my high places.

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> He teacheth my hands to war; so that a
bow of steel is broken by my arms.

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> Thou hast also given me the shield of
thy salvation: and thy gentleness hath made me great.

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> Thou hast enlarged my steps under me;
so that my feet have not slipped.

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> I have pursued my enemies, and
destroyed them; and turned not again until I had consumed them.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> And I have consumed them, and wounded
them, that they could not arise: yea, they have fallen under my feet.

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> For thou hast girded me with strength
to battle: them that rose up against me hast thou subdued under me.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> Thou hast also given me the necks of my
enemies, that I might destroy them that hate me.

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> They looked, but there was none to
save; even to the LORD, but he answered them not.

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> Then I beat them as small as the dust
of the earth, I stamped them as the mire of the street, and spread them
abroad.

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> Thou also hast delivered me from the
strivings of my people, thou hast kept me to be head of the heathen: a
people which I knew not shall serve me.

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> Strangers shall submit themselves to
me: as soon as they hear, they shall be obedient to me.

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> Strangers shall fade away, and they
shall tremble from their close places.

<span id="an_22:47">22:47</span> The LORD liveth; and blessed be my
rock; and exalted be the God of the rock of my salvation.

<span id="an_22:48">22:48</span> It is God that avengeth me, and that
bringeth down the people under me,

<span id="an_22:49">22:49</span> And that bringeth me forth from my
enemies: thou also hast lifted me up on high above them that rose up
against me: thou hast delivered me from the violent man.

<span id="an_22:50">22:50</span> Therefore I will give thanks to thee, O
LORD, among the heathen, and I will sing praises to thy name.

<span id="an_22:51">22:51</span> He is the tower of salvation for his
king: and he showeth mercy to his anointed, to David, and to his seed
for evermore.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Now these are the last words of David.
David the son of Jesse said, and the man who was raised on high, the
anointed of the God of Jacob, and the sweet psalmist of Israel, said,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> The Spirit of the LORD spoke by me, and
his word was on my tongue.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> The God of Israel said, the Rock of
Israel spoke to me, He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the
fear of God.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And he shall be as the light of the
morning, when the sun riseth, even a morning without clouds; as the
tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Although my house is not so with God; yet
he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and
sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he
maketh it not to grow.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> But the sons of Belial shall be all of
them as thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands:

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> But the man that shall touch them must be
fenced with iron and the staff of a spear; and they shall be utterly
burned with fire in the same place.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> These are the names of the mighty men
whom David had: The Tachmonite that sat in the seat, chief among the
captains; the same was Adino the Eznite: he lifted up his spear against
eight hundred, whom he slew at one time.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo
the Ahohite, one of the three mighty men with David, when they defied
the Philistines that were there assembled to battle, and the men of
Israel had gone away:

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> He arose, and smote the Philistines
until his hand was weary, and his hand adhered to the sword: and the
LORD wrought a great victory that day; and the people returned after him
only to plunder.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And after him was Shammah the son of
Agee the Hararite. And the Philistines were collected into a troop,
where was a piece of ground full of lentils: and the people fled from
the Philistines.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> But he stood in the midst of the
ground, and defended it, and slew the Philistines: and the LORD wrought
a great victory.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And three of the thirty chiefs went
down, and came to David in the harvest time to the cave of Adullam: and
the troop of the Philistines encamped in the valley of Rephaim.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And David was then in a hold, and the
garrison of the Philistines was then in Beth-lehem.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> And David longed, and said, Oh that one
would give me drink of the water of the well of Beth-lehem, which is by
the gate!

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And the three mighty men broke through
the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of
Beth-lehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to David:
nevertheless he would not drink of it, but poured it out to the LORD.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And he said, Be it far from me, O LORD,
that I should do this: is not this the blood of the men that went in
jeopardy of their lives? therefore he would not drink it. These things
did these three mighty men.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the
son of Zeruiah, was chief among three. And he lifted up his spear
against three hundred, and slew them, and had the name among three.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Was he not most honorable of three?
therefore he was their captain: yet he attained not to the first three.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the
son of a valiant man, of Kabzeel, who had done many acts, he slew two
lion-like men of Moab: he went down also and slew a lion in the midst of
a pit in time of snow:

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> And he slew an Egyptian, a goodly man:
and the Egyptian had a spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a
staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and slew him
with his own spear.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> These things did Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada, and had a name among three mighty men.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> He was more honorable than the thirty,
but he attained not to the first three. And David set him over his
guard.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Asahel the brother of Joab was one of
the thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo of Beth-lehem,

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Shammah the Harodite, Elika the
Harodite,

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of
Ikkesh the Tekoite,

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> Abiezer the Anethothite, Mebunnai the
Hushathite,

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the
Netophathite,

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Heleb the son of Baanah, a
Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai out of Gibeah of the children of
Benjamin,

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai of the
brooks of Gaash,

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Abi-albon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the
Barhumite,

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Eliahba the Shaalbonite, of the sons of
Jashen, Jonathan,

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of
Sharar the Hararite,

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son
of the Maachathite, Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the
Arbite,

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani,
the Gadite,

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the
Beerothite, armor-bearer to Joab the son of Zeruiah,

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> Ira an Ithrite, Gareb an Ithrite,

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> Uriah the Hittite: thirty and seven in
all.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And again the anger of the LORD was
kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them to say, Go
number Israel and Judah.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> For the king said to Joab the captain of
the host, who was with him, Go now through all the tribes of Israel,
from Dan even to Beer-sheba, and number ye the people, that I may know
the number of the people.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And Joab said to the king, Now the LORD
thy God add to the people, how many soever they may be, a hundred-fold,
and that the eyes of my lord the king may see it: but why doth my lord
the king delight in this thing?

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> Notwithstanding the king's word prevailed
against Joab, and against the captains of the host. And Joab and the
captains of the host went out from the presence of the king, to number
the people of Israel.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And they passed over Jordan, and pitched
in Aroer, on the right side of the city that lieth in the midst of the
river of Gad, and towards Jazer:

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Then they came to Gilead, and to the land
of Tahtim-hodshi; and they came to Dan-jaan, and about to Zidon,

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And came to the strong hold of Tyre, and
to all the cities of the Hivites, and of the Canaanites: and they went
out to the south of Judah, even to Beer-sheba.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> So when they had gone through all the
land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And Joab presented the sum of the number
of the people to the king: and there were in Israel eight hundred
thousand valiant men that drew the sword; and the men of Judah were five
hundred thousand men.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And David's heart smote him after that
he had numbered the people. And David said to the LORD, I have sinned
greatly in what I have done: and now, I beseech thee, O LORD, take away
the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> For when David had risen in the
morning, the word of the LORD came to the prophet Gad, David's seer,
saying,

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> Go and say to David, Thus saith the
LORD, I offer thee three things; choose thee one of them, that I may do
it to thee.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> So Gad came to David, and told him, and
said to him, Shall seven years of famine come upon thee in thy land? or
wilt thou flee three months before thy enemies, while they pursue thee?
or that there be three days' pestilence in thy land? Now consider, and
see what answer I shall return to him that sent me.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And David said to Gad, I am in a great
strait: let us fall now into the hand of the LORD; for his mercies are
great: and let me not fall into the hand of man.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> So the LORD sent a pestilence upon
Israel from the morning even to the time appointed: and there died of
the people from Dan even to Beer-sheba seventy thousand men.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And when the angel stretched out his
hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the LORD repented of the evil, and
said to the angel that destroyed the people, It is enough: stay now thy
hand. And the angel of the LORD was by the threshing-place of Araunah
the Jebusite.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And David spoke to the LORD when he saw
the angel that smote the people, and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have
done wickedly: but these sheep, what have they done? let thy hand, I
pray thee, be against me, and against my father's house.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And Gad came that day to David, and
said to him, Go up, rear an altar to the LORD in the threshing-floor of
Araunah the Jebusite.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And David, according to the saying of
Gad, went up as the LORD commanded.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> And Araunah looked, and saw the king
and his servants coming towards him: And Araunah went out, and bowed
himself before the king on his face upon the ground.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And Araunah said, Why is my lord the
king come to his servant? And David said, To buy the threshing-floor of
thee, to build an altar to the LORD, that the plague may be stayed from
the people.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And Araunah said to David, Let my lord
the king take and offer up what seemeth good to him: behold, here are
oxen for burnt-sacrifice, and threshing-instruments and other
instruments of the oxen for wood.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> All these things did Araunah, as a
king, give to the king. And Araunah said to the king, The LORD thy God
accept thee.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> And the king said to Araunah, No; but I
will surely buy it of thee at a price: neither will I offer
burnt-offerings to the LORD my God of that which doth cost me nothing.
So David bought the threshing-floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of
silver.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And David built there an altar to the
LORD, and offered burnt-offerings and peace-offerings. So the LORD was
entreated for the land, and the plague was stayed from Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings](kg1)
