[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ecc)  [Next](isa) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Song of Solomon

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The song of songs, which is Solomon's.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth: for thy love is better than wine.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Because of the savor of thy good ointments
thy name is as ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love
thee.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Draw me, we will run after thee: the king
hath brought me into his chambers; we will be glad and rejoice in thee,
we will remember thy love more than wine: the upright love thee.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> I am black, but comely, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Look not upon me, because I am black,
because the sun hath looked upon me: my mother's children were angry
with me; they made me the keeper of the vineyards; but my own vineyard
have I not kept.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where
thou feedest, where thou makest thy flock to rest at noon: for why
should I be as one that turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions?

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> If thou knowest not, O thou fairest among
women, go forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids beside
the shepherds tents.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> I have compared thee, O my love, to a
company of horses in Pharaoh's chariots.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Thy cheeks are comely with rows of
jewels, thy neck with chains of gold.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> We will make for thee borders of gold
with studs of silver.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> While the king sitteth at his table, my
spikenard sendeth forth its smell.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> A bundle of myrrh is my well beloved to
me; he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> My beloved is to me as a cluster of
camphor in the vineyards of En-gedi.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold,
thou art fair; thou hast doves' eyes.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yes,
pleasant: also our bed is green.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> The beams of our house are cedar, and our
rafters of fir.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I am the rose of Sharon, and the lily of
the valleys.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> As the lily among thorns, so is my love
among the daughters.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> As the apple-tree among the trees of the
wood, so is my beloved among the sons. I sat down under his shadow with
great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He brought me to the banqueting house, and
his banner over me was love.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Stay me with flagons, comfort me with
apples: for I am sick with love.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> His left hand is under my head, and his
right hand doth embrace me.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem,
by the roes, and by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not, nor awake
my love, till he please.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The voice of my beloved! behold, he cometh
leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> My beloved is like a roe, or a young hart:
behold, he standeth behind our wall, he looketh forth at the windows,
showing himself through the lattice.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> My beloved spoke, and said to me, Rise,
my love, my fair one, and come away.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For lo, the winter is past, the rain is
over and gone.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The flowers appear on the earth; the time
of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in
our land;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The fig-tree putteth forth her green
figs, and the vines with the tender grape give a good smell. Arise, my
love, my fair one, and come away.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> O my dove, that art in the clefts of the
rock, in the secret places of the stairs, let me see thy countenance,
let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is
comely.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Take for us the foxes, the little foxes,
that spoil the vines: for our vines have tender grapes.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> My beloved is mine, and I am his: he
feedeth among the lilies.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Until the day shall break, and the
shadows flee away, turn, my beloved, and be thou like a roe or a young
hart upon the mountains of Bether.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> By night on my bed I sought him whom my
soul loveth: I sought him, but I found him not.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> I will rise now, and go about the city in
the streets, and in the broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loveth:
I sought him, but I found him not.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The watchmen that go about the city found
me: to whom I said, Saw ye him whom my soul loveth?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> It was but a little that I passed from
them, but I found him whom my soul loveth: I held him, and would not let
him go, until I had brought him into my mother's house, and into the
chamber of her that conceived me.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem,
by the roes, and by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor
awake my love, till he please.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Who is this that cometh out of the
wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense,
with all powders of the merchant?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Behold his bed, which is Solomon's; sixty
valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> They all hold swords, being expert in war:
every man hath his sword upon his thigh because of fear in the night.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> King Solomon made himself a chariot of the
wood of Lebanon.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> He made its pillars of silver, the bottom
of it of gold, the covering of it of purple, the midst of it being paved
with love, for the daughters of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and
behold king Solomon with the crown with which his mother crowned him in
the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold,
thou art fair; thou hast doves' eyes within thy locks: thy hair is as a
flock of goats, that appear from mount Gilead.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that
are even shorn, which came up from the washing; all of which bear twins,
and none is barren among them.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and
thy speech is comely: thy temples are like a piece of pomegranate within
thy locks.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Thy neck is like the tower of David built
for an armory, on which hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty
men.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Thy two breasts are like two young roes
that are twins, which feed among the lilies.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Until the day shall break, and the shadows
flee away, I will repair to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of
frankincense.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Thou art all fair, my love; there is no
spot in thee.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with
me from Lebanon: look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and
Hermon, from the lions' dens, from the mountains of the leopards.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my
spouse; thou hast ravished my heart with one of thy eyes, with one chain
of thy neck.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> How fair is thy love, my sister, my
spouse! how much better is thy love than wine! and the smell of thy
ointments than all spices!

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the
honey-comb; honey and milk are under thy tongue; and the smell of thy
garments is like the smell of Lebanon.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> A garden inclosed is my sister, my
spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain sealed.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Thy plants are an orchard of
pomegranates, with pleasant fruits; camphor, with spikenard,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Spikenard and saffron; calamus and
cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all the
chief spices:

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> A fountain of gardens, a well of living
waters, and streams from Lebanon.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Awake, O north wind; and come, thou
south; blow upon my garden, that its spices may flow out. Let my beloved
come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> I have come into my garden, my sister, my
spouse: I have gathered my myrrh, with my spice; I have eaten my
honey-comb with my honey; I have drank my wine with my milk: eat, O
friends; drink, yes, drink abundantly, O beloved.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> I sleep, but my heart waketh: it is the
voice of my beloved that knocketh, saying, Open to me, my sister, my
love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is filled with dew, and my
locks with the drops of the night.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I have put off my coat; how shall I put it
on? I have washed my feet; how shall I defile them?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> My beloved put in his hand by the hole of
the door, and my bowels were moved for him.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> I rose up to open to my beloved: and my
hands dropped with myrrh, and my fingers with sweet-smelling myrrh, upon
the handles of the lock.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> I opened to my beloved; but my beloved had
withdrawn himself, and was gone: my soul failed when he spoke: I sought
him, but I could not find him; I called him, but he gave me no answer.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The watchmen that went about the city found
me, they smote me, they wounded me; the keepers of the walls took away
my vail from me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if
ye find my beloved, that ye tell him, that I am sick with love.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> What is thy beloved more than another
beloved, O thou fairest among women? what is thy beloved more than
another beloved, that thou dost so charge us?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> My beloved is white and ruddy, the chief
among ten thousand.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> His head is as the most fine gold, his
locks are bushy, and black as a raven.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the
rivers of waters, washed with milk, and fitly set.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as
sweet flowers: his lips like lilies, dropping sweet-smelling myrrh.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> His hands are as gold rings set with the
beryl: his belly is as bright ivory overlaid with sapphires.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> His legs are as pillars of marble, set
upon sockets of fine gold: his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as
the cedars.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> His mouth is most sweet: yes, he is
altogether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O
daughters of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest
among women? whither is thy beloved turned aside? that we may seek him
with thee.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> My beloved is gone down into his garden, to
the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather lilies.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine:
he feedeth among the lilies.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah,
comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an army with banners.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Turn away thy eyes from me, for they have
overcome me: thy hair is as a flock of goats that appear from Gilead.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go
up from the washing, of which every one beareth twins, and there is not
one barren among them.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> As a piece of pomegranate are thy temples
within thy locks.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> There are sixty queens, and eighty
concubines, and virgins without number.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> My dove, my undefiled is but one; she is
the only one of her mother, she is the choice one of her that bore her.
The daughters saw her, and blessed her; yes, the queens and the
concubines, and they praised her.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Who is she that looketh forth as the
morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army
with banners?

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> I went down into the garden of nuts to
see the fruits of the valley, and to see whether the vine flourished,
and the pomegranates budded.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Or ere I was aware, my soul made me like
the chariots of Amminadib.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Return, return, O Shulamite; return,
return, that we may look upon thee. What will ye see in the Shulamite?
As it were the company of two armies.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O
prince's daughter! the joints of thy thighs are like jewels, the work of
the hands of a skillful workman.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Thy navel is like a round goblet, which
wanteth not liquor: thy belly is like a heap of wheat set about with
lilies.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Thy two breasts are like two young roes
that are twins.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; thy eyes
like the fish-pools in Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim: thy nose is
as the tower of Lebanon which looketh towards Damascus.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Thy head upon thee is like Carmel, and the
hair of thy head like purple; the king is held in the galleries.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love,
for delights!

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> This thy stature is like to a palm tree,
and thy breasts to clusters of grapes.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> I said, I will go up to the palm tree, I
will take hold of its boughs: now also thy breasts shall be as clusters
of the vine, and the smell of thy nose like apples;

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And the roof of thy mouth like the best
wine for my beloved, that goeth down sweetly, causing the lips of those
that are asleep to speak.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> I am my beloved's, and his desire is
towards me.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Come, my beloved, let us go forth into
the field; let us lodge in the villages.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Let us get up early to the vineyards; let
us see if the vine flourisheth, whether the tender grape appeareth, and
the pomegranates bud forth: there will I give thee my loves.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> The mandrakes give a smell, and at our
gates are all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid
up for thee, O my beloved.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> O that thou wert as my brother, that was
nourished at the breasts of my mother! when I should find thee without,
I would kiss thee; yes, I should not be despised.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I would lead thee, and bring thee into my
mother's house, who would instruct me: I would cause thee to drink of
spiced wine of the juice of my pomegranate.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> His left hand should be under my head, and
his right hand should embrace me.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem,
that ye stir not, nor awake my love, until he please.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Who is this that cometh up from the
wilderness, leaning upon her beloved? I raised thee up under the
apple-tree: there thy mother brought thee forth: there she brought thee
forth that bore thee.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal
upon thy arm: for love is strong as death; jealousy is cruel as the
grave: the coals of it are coals of fire, which hath a most vehement
flame.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Many waters cannot quench love, neither can
the floods drown it: if a man would give all the substance of his house
for love, it would utterly be contemned.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> We have a little sister, and she hath no
breasts: what shall we do for our sister in the day when she shall be
spoken for?

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> If she is a wall, we will build upon her a
palace of silver: and if she is a door, we will inclose her with boards
of cedar.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> I am a wall, and my breasts like towers:
then was I in his eyes as one that found favor.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon; he
let out the vineyard to keepers; every one for the fruit of it was to
bring a thousand pieces of silver.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> My vineyard which is mine, is before me:
thou, O Solomon, must have a thousand, and those that keep the fruit of
it two hundred.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the
companions hearken to thy voice: cause me to hear it.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like
a roe or a young hart upon the mountains of spices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah](isa)
