[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](col)  [Next](th2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: 1 Thessalonians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, and Silvanus, and Timothy, to the
church of the Thessalonians which is in God the Father, and in the Lord
Jesus Christ: Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> We give thanks to God always for you all,
making mention of you in our prayers;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Remembering without ceasing your work of
faith, and labor of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ,
in the sight of God and our Father;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Knowing, brethren beloved by God, your
election.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For our gospel came not to you in word
only, but also in power, and in the Holy Spirit, and in much assurance;
as ye know what manner of men we were among you for your sake.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And ye became followers of us, and of the
Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy
Spirit:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> So that ye were examples to all that
believe, in Macedonia and Achaia.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For from you sounded out the word of the
Lord not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your
faith toward God is spread abroad; so that we need not to speak any
thing.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For they themselves show of us what manner
of entrance we had to you, and how ye turned to God from idols, to serve
the living and true God;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And to wait for his Son from heaven, whom
he raised from the dead, even Jesus, who delivered us from the wrath to
come.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> For yourselves, brethren, know our entrance
to you, that it was not in vain:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> But even after we had suffered before, and
were shamefully treated, as ye know, at Phillippi, we were bold in our
God to speak to you the gospel of God with much contention.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For our exhortation was not from deceit,
nor from impurity, nor in guile;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> But as we were allowed by God to be put in
trust with the gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God,
who trieth our hearts.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For neither at any time used we flattering
words, as ye know, nor a cloke of covetousness; God is witness:

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Nor from men sought we glory, neither from
you, nor yet from others, when we might have been burdensome, as the
apostles of Christ.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> But we were gentle among you, even as a
nurse cherisheth her children:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> So being affectionately desirous of you, we
were willing to have imparted to you, not the gospel of God only, but
also our own souls, because ye were dear to us.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For ye remember, brethren, our labor and
toil: for laboring night and day, because we would not be chargeable to
any of you, we preached to you the gospel of God.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Ye are witnesses, and God also, how
holily, and justly, and unblamably we behaved ourselves among you that
believe:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> As ye know how we exhorted, and
comforted, and charged every one of you, as a father doth his children,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> That ye would walk worthy of God, who
hath called you into his kingdom and glory.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For this cause also we thank God without
ceasing, because, when ye received the word of God which ye heard from
us, ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the
word of God, which effectually worketh also in you that believe.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For ye, brethren, became followers of the
churches of God which in Judea are in Christ Jesus: for ye also have
suffered like things from your own countrymen, even as they have from
the Jews:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their
own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are
contrary to all men:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles
that they may be saved, to fill up their sins always: for the wrath is
come upon them to the uttermost.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But we, brethren, being taken from you
for a short time in presence, not in heart, endeavored the more
abundantly to see your face with great desire.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Wherefore we would have come to you, even
I Paul, once and again; but Satan hindered us.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of
rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at
his coming?

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For ye are our glory and joy.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Wherefore, when we could no longer forbear,
we thought it good to be left at Athens alone;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And sent Timothy, our brother, and minister
of God, and our fellow-laborer in the gospel of Christ, to establish
you, and to comfort you concerning your faith:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> That no man should be moved by these
afflictions: for yourselves know that we are appointed to it.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For verily, when we were with you, we told
you before that we should suffer tribulation; even as it came to pass,
and ye know.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For this cause, when I could no longer
forbear, I sent to know your faith, lest by some means the tempter may
have tempted you, and our labor be in vain.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But now when Timothy came from you to us,
and brought us good tidings of your faith and charity, and that ye have
good remembrance of us always, desiring greatly to see us, as we also to
see you:

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Therefore, brethren, by your faith we were
comforted over you in all our affliction and distress:

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> For now we live, if ye stand fast in the
Lord.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For what thanks can we render to God again
for you, for all the joy with which we rejoice for your sakes before our
God;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Night and day praying exceedingly that we
may see your face, and may perfect that which is lacking in your faith?

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Now God himself and our Father, and our
Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way to you.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And the Lord make you to increase and
abound in love one towards another, and towards all men, even as we do
towards you:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> To the end he may establish your hearts
unblamable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Furthermore then we beseech you, brethren,
and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received from us how
ye ought to walk and to please God, so ye would abound more and more.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For ye know what commandments we gave you
by the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For this is the will of God, even your
sanctification, that ye should abstain from lewdness.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> That every one of you should know how to
possess his vessel in sanctification and honor;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as
the Gentiles who know not God:

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> That no man go beyond and defraud his
brother in any matter: because the Lord is the avenger of all such, as
we also have forewarned you and testified.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For God hath not called us to uncleanness,
but to holiness.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> He therefore that despiseth, despiseth not
man, but God, who hath also given to us his holy Spirit.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> But concerning brotherly love ye need not
that I write to you: for ye yourselves are taught by God to love one
another.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And indeed ye do it towards all the
brethren who are in all Macedonia: but we beseech you, brethren, that ye
increase more and more;

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And that ye study to be quiet, and to do
your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> That ye may walk honestly towards them
that are without, and that ye may have need of nothing.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But I would not have you to be ignorant,
brethren, concerning them who are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as
others who have no hope.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if we believe that Jesus died and
rose again, even so them also who sleep in Jesus will God bring with
him.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For this we say to you by the word of the
Lord, that we who are alive and remain to the coming of the Lord shall
not precede them who are asleep.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For the Lord himself will descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of an archangel, and with the
trumpet of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first:

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Then we who are alive and remain shall be
caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air:
and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Wherefore, comfort one another with these
words.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> But of the times and the seasons, brethren,
ye have no need that I write to you.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For yourselves know perfectly that the day
of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For when they shall say, Peace and safety;
then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with
child; and they shall not escape.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that
that day should overtake you as a thief.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Ye are all children of light, and children
of the day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Therefore let us not sleep, as do others;
but let us watch and be sober.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For they that sleep, sleep in the night;
and they that are drunken, are drunken in the night.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But let us, who are of the day, be sober,
putting on the breast-plate of faith and love; and for a helmet, the
hope of salvation.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but
to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Who died for us, that, whether we wake or
sleep, we should live together with him.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Wherefore, comfort yourselves together,
and edify one another, even as also ye do.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And we beseech you, brethren, to know
them who labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you;

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And to esteem them very highly in love
for their work's sake. And be at peace among yourselves.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them
that are disorderly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be
patient towards all men.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> See that none render evil for evil to any
man; but ever follow that which is good, both among yourselves, and to
all men.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Rejoice evermore.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Pray without ceasing.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> In every thing give thanks: for this is
the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Quench not the spirit.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Despise not prophesyings.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Prove all things; hold fast that which is
good.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Abstain from all appearance of evil.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And the very God of peace sanctify you
wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body may be
preserved blameless to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Faithful is he that calleth you, who also
will do it.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Brethren, pray for us.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Greet all the brethren with a holy kiss.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> I charge you by the Lord that this
epistle be read to all the holy brethren.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians](th2)
