[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th1)  [Next](ti1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: 2 Thessalonians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, and Silvanus, and Timothy, to the
church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you, and peace, from God our
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> We are bound to thank God always for you,
brethren, as it is meet, because your faith groweth exceedingly, and the
charity of every one of you all towards each other aboundeth;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> So that we ourselves glory in you in the
churches of God, for your patience and faith in all your persecutions
and tribulations that ye endure:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Which is a manifest token of the righteous
judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God,
for which ye also suffer:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And to you who are troubled, rest with us,
when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty
angels,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> In flaming fire taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his
power;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> When he shall come to be glorified in his
saints, and to be admired by all them that believe (because our
testimony among you was believed) in that day.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Wherefore also we pray always for you,
that our God would count you worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the
good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power:

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ
may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the grace of our
God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering to him.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be
troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as
that the day of Christ is at hand.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Let no man deceive you by any means: for
that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and
that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all
that is called God, or that is worshiped; so that he as God sitteth in
the temple of God, showing himself that he is God.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Remember ye not, that when I was yet with
you, I told you these things?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And now ye know what withholdeth that he
might be revealed in his time.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For the mystery of iniquity doth already
work: only he who now restraineth will restrain, until he be taken out
of the way.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And then shall that Wicked be revealed,
whom the Lord will consume with the spirit of his mouth, and will
destroy with the brightness of his coming:

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Even him, whose coming is after the working
of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And for this cause God will send them
strong delusion, that they should believe a lie:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> That they all may be damned who believed
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But we are bound to give thanks always to
God for you, brethren, beloved by the Lord, because God hath from the
beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit,
and belief of the truth:

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> To which he called you by our gospel, to
the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold
the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our
epistle.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and
God, even our Father, who hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting
consolation and good hope through grace,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Comfort your hearts, and establish you in
every good word and work.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the
word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified, even as it is
with you;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and wicked men: for all men have not faith.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> But the Lord is faithful, who will
establish you, and keep you from evil.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And we have confidence in the Lord
concerning you, that ye both do and will do the things which we command
you.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And the Lord direct your hearts into the
love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Now we command you, brethren, in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother
that walketh disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received
from us.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For yourselves know how ye ought to follow
us: for we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Neither did we eat any man's bread for
naught; but wrought with labor and toil night and day, that we might not
be chargeable to any of you:

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Not because we have not power, but to make
ourselves a pattern to you to follow us.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For even when we were with you, this we
commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For we hear that there are some who walk
among you disorderly, working not at all, but are busy-bodies.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Now them that are such we command and
exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat
their own bread.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But ye, brethren, be not weary in
well-doing.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And if any man obeyeth not our word by
this epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may
be ashamed.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Yet count him not as an enemy, but
admonish him as a brother.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Now the Lord of peace himself give you
peace always by all means. The Lord be with you all.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> The salutation of Paul with my own hand,
which is the token in every epistle: so I write.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy](ti1)
