[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th2)  [Next](ti2.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: 1 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the
commandment of God our Savior, and Lord Jesus Christ, who is our hope;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To Timothy, my own son in the faith: Grace,
mercy, and peace, from God our Father and Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> As I besought thee to abide still at
Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou mightest charge some that
they teach no other doctrine,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Neither give heed to fables and endless
genealogies, which minister questions, rather than godly edifying which
is in faith; so do.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Now the end of the commandment is charity
out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> From which some having swerved, have turned
aside to vain jangling;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Desiring to be teachers of the law;
understanding neither what they say, nor concerning what they affirm.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But we know that the law is good, if a man
useth it lawfully;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Knowing this, that the law is not made for
a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly
and for sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers, and
murderers of mothers, for man-slayers,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For lewd persons, for them that defile
themselves with mankind, for men-stealers, for liars, for perjured
persons, and if there is any other thing that is contrary to sound
doctrine,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> According to the glorious gospel of the
blessed God, which was committed to my trust.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who
hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the
ministry;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Who was before a blasphemer, and a
persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it
ignorantly in unbelief:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the grace of our Lord was exceeding
abundant with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> This is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners;
of whom I am chief.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> However, for this cause I obtained mercy,
that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for a
pattern to them who should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Now to the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, God the only wise, be honor and glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> This charge I commit to thee, son
Timothy, according to the prophecies which went before on thee, that
thou by them mayest war a good warfare;

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Holding faith and a good conscience;
which some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck:

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander; whom I
have delivered to Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I exhort therefore, that first of all
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For kings, and for all that are in
authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness
and honesty.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For this is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Who will have all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For there is one God, and one mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be
testified in due time.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For which I am ordained a preacher and an
apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not) a teacher of the
Gentiles in faith and verity.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I will therefore that men pray every where,
lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> In like manner also, that women adorn
themselves in decent apparel, with modesty and sobriety; not with
broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But (which becometh women professing
godliness) with good works.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Let the woman learn in silence with all
subjection.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to
usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For Adam was first formed, then Eve.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And Adam was not deceived, but the woman
being deceived was in the transgression.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Notwithstanding, she will be saved in
child-bearing, if they continue in faith, and charity, and holiness,
with sobriety.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> This is a true saying, If a man desireth
the office of a bishop, he desireth a good work.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> A bishop then must be blameless, the
husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to
hospitality, apt to teach;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy
of filthy lucre, but patient; not a brawler, not covetous;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> One that ruleth well his own house, having
his children in subjection with all gravity;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> (For if a man knoweth not how to rule his
own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?)

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Not a novice, lest being lifted up with
pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Moreover, he must have a good report of
them who are without; lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the
devil.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Likewise must the deacons be grave, not
double-tongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And let these also first be proved; then
let them use the office of a deacon, being found blameless.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Even so must their wives be grave, not
slanderers, sober, faithful in all things.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Let the deacons be the husbands of one
wife, ruling their children, and their own houses well.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For they that have used the office of a
deacon well, purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in
the faith, which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> These things I write to thee, hoping to
come to thee shortly:

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But if I tarry long, that thou mayest
know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is
the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And without controversy, great is the
mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the
Spirit, seen by angels, preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, received up into glory.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in
the latter times some will depart from the faith, giving heed to
seducing spirits and doctrines of demons;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their
conscience seared with a hot iron;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Forbidding to marry, and commanding to
abstain from meats, which God hath created to be received with
thanksgiving by them who believe and know the truth.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> For every creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused, if received with thanksgiving:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For it is sanctified by the word of God,
and prayer.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> If thou shalt put the brethren in
remembrance of these things, thou wilt be a good minister of Jesus
Christ, nourished by the words of faith and of good doctrine, to which
thou hast attained.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But refuse profane and old wives' fables,
and exercise thyself rather to godliness.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For bodily exercise profiteth little: but
godliness is profitable to all things, having promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> This is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptation.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For therefore we both labor and suffer
reproach, because we trust in the living God who is the Savior of all
men, especially of those that believe.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> These things command and teach.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou
an example of the believers, in word, in deportment, in charity, in
spirit, in faith, in purity.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Till I come, give attendance to reading,
to exhortation, to doctrine.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Neglect not the gift that is in thee,
which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the
presbytery.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Meditate upon these things; give thyself
wholly to them; that thy profiting may appear to all.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Take heed to thyself and to thy doctrine;
continue in them: for in doing this thou wilt both save thyself, and
them that hear thee.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Rebuke not an elder, but entreat him as a
father; and the younger men as brethren;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> The elder women as mothers; the younger as
sisters, with all purity.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Honor widows that are widows indeed.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But if any widow hath children or nephews,
let them learn first to show piety at home, and to requite their
parents: for that is good and acceptable before God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Now she that is a widow indeed, and
desolate, trusteth in God, and continueth in supplications and prayers
night and day.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> But she that liveth in pleasure, is dead
while she liveth.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And these things give in charge, that they
may be blameless.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But if any provideth not for his own, and
especially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is
worse than an infidel.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Let not a widow be taken into the number
under sixty years old, having been the wife of one man.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Well reported of for good works; if she
hath brought up children, if she hath lodged strangers, if she hath
washed the saints' feet, if she hath relieved the afflicted, if she hath
diligently followed every good work.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But the younger widows refuse: for when
they have begun to grow wanton against Christ, they will marry;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Having damnation, because they have cast
off their first faith.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And at the same time they learn to be
idle, wandering about from house to house, and not only idle, but
tattlers also, and busy-bodies, speaking things which they ought not.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I will therefore that the younger women
marry, bear children, guide the house, give no occasion to the adversary
to speak reproachfully.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> For some are already turned aside after
Satan.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If any man or woman that believeth hath
widows, let them relieve them, and let not the church be charged; that
it may relieve them that are widows indeed.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Let the elders that rule well, be counted
worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and
doctrine.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For the scripture saith, Thou shalt not
muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn. And, The laborer is worthy of
his reward.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Against an elder receive not an
accusation, but before two or three witnesses.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Them that sin rebuke before all, that
others also may fear.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> I charge thee before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things
without preferring one before another, doing nothing by partiality.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Impose hands hastily on no man, neither
be partaker of other men's sins: keep thyself pure.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Drink no longer water, but use a little
wine for thy stomach's sake, and thy frequent infirmities.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Some men's sins are open beforehand,
going before to judgment: and some men they follow after.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Likewise also the good works of some are
manifest beforehand; and they that are otherwise cannot be hid.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Let as many servants as are under the yoke
count their own masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and
his doctrine may not be blasphemed.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And they that have believing masters, let
them not despise them, because they are brethren; but rather do them
service, because they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the
benefit. These things teach and exhort.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> If any man teacheth otherwise, and
consenteth not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the doctrine which is according to godliness,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting
about questions and strifes of words, from which cometh envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Perverse disputings of men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of the truth, supposing gain to be godliness: from
such withdraw thyself.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But godliness with contentment is great
gain.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For we brought nothing into this world, and
it is certain we can carry nothing out.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And having food and raiment, with these let
us be content.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But they that will be rich, fall into
temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which
drown men in destruction and perdition.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For the love of money is the root of all
evil: which while some have coveted, they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> But thou, O man of God, flee from these
things; and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love,
patience, meekness.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold
on eternal life, to which thou art also called, and hast professed a
good profession before many witnesses.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> I give thee charge in the sight of God,
who maketh alive all things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius
Pilate testified a good confession;

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> That thou keep this commandment without
spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Which in his times he will show who is
the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Who only hath immortality, dwelling in
the light which no man can approach; whom no man hath seen, nor can see:
to whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Charge them that are rich in this world,
that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the
living God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> That they do good, that they be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate;

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal
life.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> O Timothy, keep that which is committed
to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of
science falsely so called;

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Which some professing, have erred
concerning the faith. Grace be with thee. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy](ti2.md)
