[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ti1)  [Next](tit) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: 2 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the
will of God, according to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To Timothy, my dearly beloved son: Grace,
mercy, and peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I thank God, whom I serve from my
forefathers with pure conscience, that without ceasing I have
remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful
of thy tears, that I may be filled with joy;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> When I call to remembrance the unfeigned
faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and
thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For which cause I put thee in remembrance,
that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the imposition of
my hands.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> For God hath not given us the spirit of
fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Be not thou therefore ashamed of the
testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner: but be thou partaker of
the afflictions of the gospel according to the power of God;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Who hath saved us, and called us with a
holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus before the
world began;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> But is now made manifest by the appearing
of our Savior Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and hath brought
life and immortality to light through the gospel:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> To which I am appointed a preacher, and
an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For which cause I also suffer these
things: nevertheless I am not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed,
and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to
him against that day.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Hold fast the form of sound words, which
thou hast heard from me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> That good thing which was committed to
thee keep by the Holy Spirit which dwelleth in us.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> This thou knowest, that all they who are
in Asia are turned away from me; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The Lord give mercy to the house of
Onesiphorus; for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain:

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But, when he was in Rome, he sought me
out very diligently, and found me.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> The Lord grant to him that he may find
mercy from the Lord in that day: and in how many things he ministered to
me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the
grace that is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the things that thou hast heard from me
among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be
able to teach others also.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good
soldier of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> No man that warreth entangleth himself with
the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to
be a soldier.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And if a man also striveth for masteries,
yet is he not crowned, except he striveth lawfully.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The husbandman that laboreth must be first
partaker of the fruits.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee
understanding in all things.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of
David was raised from the dead according to my gospel:

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> In which I suffer trouble, as an evil-doer,
even to bonds; but the word of God is not bound.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Therefore I endure all things for the
sake of the elect, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in
Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> It is a faithful saying: For if we are
dead with him, we shall also live with him:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> If we suffer, we shall also reign with
him: if we deny him, he also will deny us:

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> If we believe not, yet he abideth
faithful: he cannot deny himself.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Of these things put them in remembrance,
charging them before the Lord that they contend not about words to no
profit, but to the subverting of the hearers.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Study to show thyself approved to God, a
workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of
truth.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But shun profane and vain babblings: for
they will increase to more ungodliness.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And their word will eat as doth a canker:
of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Who concerning the truth have erred,
saying that the resurrection is past already; and overthrow the faith of
some.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Nevertheless the foundation of God
standeth firm, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his.
And, Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But in a great house there are not only
vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some
to honor, and some to dishonor.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> If a man therefore will cleanse himself
from these, he will be a vessel to honor, sanctified and meet for the
master's use, and prepared to every good work.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Flee also youthful lusts: but follow
righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord
out of a pure heart.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> But foolish and unlearned questions
avoid, knowing that they gender contentions.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And the servant of the Lord must not
contend; but be gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient,

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> In meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves; if God perhaps will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth:

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And that they may recover themselves out
of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> This know also, that in the last days
perilous times will come.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> For men will be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Without natural affection, truce-breakers,
false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Having a form of godliness, but denying its
power: from such turn away.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For of this sort are they who creep into
houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with
divers lusts;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Ever learning, and never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses,
so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> But they shall proceed no further: for
their folly will be manifest to all men, as theirs also was.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> But thou hast fully known my doctrine,
manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity, patience,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Persecutions, afflictions which came to
me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured: but
out of them all the Lord delivered me.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And all indeed that will live godly in
Christ Jesus will suffer persecution.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But evil men and seducers will become
worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But continue thou in the things which
thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing from whom thou hast
learned them;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And that from a child thou hast known the
sacred scriptures, which are able to make thee wise to salvation through
faith which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> All scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> That the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished to all good works.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> I charge thee therefore before God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who will judge the living and the dead at his
appearing and his kingdom;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Preach the word; be instant in season, out
of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For the time will come, when they will not
endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts will they multiply to
themselves teachers, having itching ears;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And they will turn away their ears from the
truth, and will be turned to fables.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But watch thou in all things, endure
afflictions, do the work of an evangelist, make full proof of thy
ministry.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For I am now ready to be offered, and the
time of my departure is at hand.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the faith:

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give me at
that day: and not to me only, but to all them also that love his
appearing.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Do thy diligence to come shortly to me:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved
this present world, and hath departed to Thessalonica; Crescens to
Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Luke only is with me. Take Mark, and
bring him with thee: for he is profitable to me for the ministry.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> The cloke that I left at Troas with
Carpus, when thou comest, bring with thee, and the books, but especially
the parchments.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Alexander the copper-smith did me much
evil: the Lord reward him according to his works:

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Of whom be thou aware also; for he hath
greatly withstood our words.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> At my first answer no man stood with me,
but all men forsook me: I pray God that it may not be laid to their
charge.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Notwithstanding, the Lord stood with me,
and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be fully known, and
that all the Gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth
of the lion.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And the Lord will deliver me from every
evil work, and will preserve me to his heavenly kingdom; to whom be
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the
household of Onesiphorus.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Erastus abode at Corinth: but Trophimus I
have left at Miletum sick.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Do thy diligence to come before winter.
Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the
brethren.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit.
Grace be with you. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus](tit)
