[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ti2)  [Next](plm) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Titus

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of
Jesus Christ, according to the faith of God's elect, and the
acknowledging of the truth which is according to godliness;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> In hope of eternal life, which God, who
cannot lie, promised before the world began;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> But hath in due times manifested his word
through preaching, which is committed to me according to the commandment
of God our Savior;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> To Titus, my own son after the common
faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ our Savior.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For this cause I left thee in Crete, that
thou shouldst set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain
elders in every city, as I had appointed thee:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> If any is blameless, the husband of one
wife, having faithful children, not accused of riot, or disorderly.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> For a bishop must be blameless, as the
steward of God; not self-willed, not soon angry, not given to wine, no
striker, not given to filthy lucre;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But a lover of hospitality, a lover of good
men, sober, just, holy, temperate;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Holding fast the faithful word as he hath
been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to
convince the gainsayers.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For there are many disorderly and vain
talkers and deceivers, specially they of the circumcision:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert
whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for the sake of
sordid gain.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> One of themselves, even a prophet of
their own, said, The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow
bellies.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> This testimony is true: wherefore rebuke
them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and
commandments of men that turn from the truth.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> To the pure all things are pure: but to
them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their
mind and conscience is defiled.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> They profess that they know God; but in
works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and to every
good work reprobate.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But speak thou the things which become
sound doctrine:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> That the aged men be sober, grave,
temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in patience;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> The aged women likewise, that they be in
behavior as becometh holiness, not false accusers, not given to much
wine, teachers of good things;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> That they may teach the young women to be
sober, to love their husbands, to love their children,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> To be discreet, chaste, keepers at home,
good, obedient to their own husbands, that the word of God be not
blasphemed.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Young men likewise exhort to be
sober-minded.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> In all things showing thyself a pattern of
good works: in doctrine showing incorruptness, gravity, sincerity,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Sound speech that cannot be condemned; that
he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to
say concerning you.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Exhort servants to be obedient to their own
masters, and to please them well in all things; not answering again;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Not purloining, but showing all good
fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all
things.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For the grace of God that bringeth
salvation hath appeared to all men,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Teaching us, that denying ungodliness,
and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and piously, in
this present world;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> These things speak, and exhort, and
rebuke with all authority. Let no man despise thee.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Put them in mind to be subject to
principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, to be ready to every
good work,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers,
but gentle, showing all meekness to all men.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For we ourselves also were sometimes
foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures,
living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But when the kindness and love of God our
Savior towards man appeared,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Spirit;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Which he shed on us abundantly, through
Jesus Christ our Savior;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> That being justified by his grace, we
should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> This is a faithful saying, and these things
I will that thou affirm constantly, that they who have believed in God
may be careful to maintain good works. These things are good and
profitable to men.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> But avoid foolish questions, and
genealogies, and contentions, and strivings about the law; for they are
unprofitable and vain.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> A man that is a heretic, after the first
and second admonition, reject;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Knowing that he who is such, is
subverted, and sinneth, being condemned by himself.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> When I shall send Artemas to thee, or
Tychicus, be diligent to come to me to Nicopolis: for I have determined
there to winter.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on
their journey diligently, that nothing may be wanting to them.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And let ours also learn to maintain good
works for necessary uses, that they may not be unfruitful.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> All that are with me salute thee. Greet
them that love us in the faith. Grace be with you all. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon](plm)
