[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hab)  [Next](hag.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Zephaniah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of the LORD which came to
Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the
son of Hizkiah, in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> I will utterly consume all things from off
the land, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I will consume man and beast; I will
consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the
stumbling-blocks with the wicked; and I will cut off man from off the
land, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> I will also stretch out my hand upon Judah
and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I will cut off the
remnant of Baal from this place, and the name of the Chemarims with the
priests;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And them that worship the host of heaven
upon the house-tops; and them that worship and that swear by the LORD,
and that swear by Malcham;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And them that have turned back from the
LORD; and those that have not sought the LORD, nor inquired for him.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord
GOD: for the day of the LORD is at hand: for the LORD hath prepared a
sacrifice, he hath invited his guests.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And it shall come to pass in the day of the
LORD'S sacrifice, that I will punish the princes, and the king's
children, and all such as are clothed with foreign apparel.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> In the same day also will I punish all
those that leap on the threshhold, who fill their masters' houses with
violence and deceit.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
saith the LORD, that there shall be the noise of a cry from the
fish-gate, and a howling from the second, and a great crashing from the
hills.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for all
the merchant people are cut down; all they that bear silver are cut off.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And it shall come to pass at that time,
that I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are
settled on their lees: that say in their heart, The LORD will not do
good, neither will he do evil.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Therefore their goods shall become a
booty, and their houses a desolation: they shall also build houses, but
not inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine
of them.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> The great day of the LORD is near, it is
near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the LORD: the
mighty man shall cry there bitterly.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> That day is a day of wrath, a day of
trouble and distress, a day of wasting and desolation, a day of darkness
and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> A day of the trumpet and alarm against
the fortified cities, and against the high towers.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And I will bring distress upon men, that
they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the
LORD: and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as
the dung.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Neither their silver nor their gold shall
be able to deliver them in the day of the LORD'S wrath; but the whole
land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he will make
even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Assemble yourselves, yes, assemble, O
nation not desired;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Before the decree bringeth forth, before
the day passeth as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the LORD cometh
upon you, before the day of the LORD'S anger cometh upon you.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Seek ye the LORD, all ye meek of the earth,
who have performed his judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it
may be ye will be hid in the day of the LORD'S anger.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon a
desolation: they shall drive out Ashdod at the noon day, and Ekron shall
be rooted up.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Woe to the inhabitants of the sea coasts,
the nation of the Cherethites! the word of the LORD is against you; O
Canaan, the land of the Philistines, I will even destroy thee, that
there shall be no inhabitant.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And the sea coast shall be dwellings and
cottages for shepherds, and folds for flocks.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And the coasts shall be for the remnant of
the house of Judah; they shall feed upon them: in the houses of Ashkelon
shall they lie down in the evening: for the LORD their God will visit
them, and turn away their captivity.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the
revilings of the children of Ammon, by which they have reproached my
people, and magnified themselves against their border.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore as I live, saith the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the
children of Ammon as Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettles, and
salt-pits, and a perpetual desolation: the residue of my people shall
lay them waste, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> This shall they have for their pride,
because they have reproached and magnified themselves against the people
of the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The LORD will be terrible to them: for he
will famish all the gods of the earth; and men shall worship him, every
one from his place, even all the isles of the heathen.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Ye Cushites also, ye shall be slain by my
sword.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he will stretch out his hand against
the north, and destroy Assyria; and will make Nineveh a desolation, and
dry like a wilderness.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And flocks shall lie down in the midst of
her, all the beasts of the nations: both the cormorant and the bittern
shall lodge in the upper lintels of it; their voice shall sing in the
windows; desolation shall be in the threshholds: for he shall uncover
the cedar work.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> This is the rejoicing city that dwelt in
security, that said in her heart, I am, and there is none besides me:
how is she become a desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in! every
one that passeth by her shall hiss, and wag his hand.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to
the oppressing city!

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> She obeyed not the voice; she received not
correction; she trusted not in the LORD; she drew not near to her God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Her princes within her are roaring lions;
her judges are evening wolves; they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Her prophets are light and treacherous
persons: her priests have polluted the sanctuary, they have done
violence to the law.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> The just LORD is in the midst of her; he
will not do iniquity: every morning doth he bring his judgment to light,
he faileth not; but the unjust knoweth no shame.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> I have cut off the nations: their towers
are desolate; I made their streets waste, that none passeth by: their
cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is no
inhabitant.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> I said, Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt
receive instruction; so their dwelling should not be cut off, however I
punished them: but they rose early, and corrupted all their doings.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the LORD,
until the day that I rise up to the prey: for my determination is to
gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them
my indignation, even all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be
devoured with the fire of my jealousy.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For then will I turn to the people a pure
language, that they may all call upon the name of the LORD, to serve him
with one consent.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> From beyond the rivers of Cush my
suppliants, even the daughter of my dispersed, shall bring my offering.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for
all thy doings, in which thou hast transgressed against me: for then I
will take away out of the midst of thee them that rejoice in thy pride,
and thou shalt no more be haughty because of my holy mountain.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> I will also leave in the midst of thee an
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the LORD.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The remnant of Israel shall not do
iniquity, nor speak lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in
their mouth: for they shall feed and lie down, and none shall make them
afraid.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Sing, O daughter of Zion; shout, O
Israel; be glad and rejoice with all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> The LORD hath taken away thy judgments,
he hath cast out thy enemy: the King of Israel, even the LORD, is in the
midst of thee: thou shalt not see evil any more.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> In that day it shall be said to
Jerusalem, Fear thou not: and to Zion, Let not thy hands be slack.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> The LORD thy God in the midst of thee is
mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest
in his love, he will joy over thee with singing.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> I will gather them that are sorrowful for
the solemn assembly, who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a
burden.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Behold, at that time I will undo all that
afflict thee: and I will save her that halteth, and gather her that was
driven out; and I will get them praise and fame in every land where they
have been put to shame.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> At that time will I bring you again, even
in the time that I gather you: for I will make you a name and a praise
among all people of the earth, when I turn back your captivity before
your eyes, saith the LORD.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai](hag.md)
