[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb00)  [Next](wfb02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Preface

 

THIS book has been prepared for youthful readers in general, and for
Welsh boys and girls in particular.

I found, when schoolmastering in South Wales, that all the fairy books
in the school library were in such constant demand that they rapidly
wore out. This led me to inquire whether the readers were familiar with
the fairy mythology of their own country. While, however, they were
learned in the folk-lore of other nations, they were, with few
exceptions, ignorant of the Fair Family and other legends of Wales.
Further inquiries convinced me that boys and girls throughout Wales were
generally in the same case.

When remonstrated with, my pupils excused themselves on the ground that
no Welsh fairy stories had been related to them, and that there was no
handy collection which they could read. On reflection, I had to
recognise that there was much more justice in this plea than in the vast
majority of excuses with which I had to deal. The practice of narrating
fairy stories has certainly almost died out in Wales, and strange as it
may appear in these days when young readers are so lavishly catered for,
it is a fact that no Welsh fairy book has been compiled for boys and
girls. After waiting in vain for a more competent editor to undertake
the work, I have prepared this book, primarily with the object of
depriving Welsh school children of the defence put forward by my quondam
disciples, but at the same time hoping that the Welsh variants of the
universal folk-tales will interest a wider circle of readers.

The sources of the stories are many and diverse in character: for
example, "Elidyr's Sojourn in Fairy-Land" is taken from Giraldus
Cambrensis: "Einion and the Lady of the Greenwood" hails from the lola
MSS.: while "The Drowning of the Bottom Hundred" comes, stripped of its
irony, from Thomas Love Peacock's "Misfortune's of Elphin." Here it may
be remarked that the style of the originals has been left largely
untouched.

I have been kindly permitted by Sir John Rhys and the Delegates of the
Oxford University Press to make use of "Celtic Folk-Lore: Welsh and
Manx" (it would be difficult to exaggerate the value to the scientific
folk-lorist of this great thesaurus): of Bliss Owen' "Welsh Folk-Lore,"
by Messrs. Woodall, Minshall, Thomas & Co.' Oswestry: of Wirt Sikes's
"British Goblins," by Messrs. Sampson Low, Marston & Co.: of "Bedd
Gelert: Its Facts, Fairies and Folk-Lore," by the Rev. D. B. Jenkins: of
"The Curse of Pantannas' and "The Llanfabon Changeling," by Mr. Isaac
Craigfryn Hughes. My warmest thanks are due to the above for their
courtesy.

It may be as well to add that, while in some stories it has been
necessary to piece scraps together, nothing has been inserted that is
not genuinely traditionary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on Welsh Pronunciation](wfb02)
