[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb04)  [Next](wfb06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Curse of Pantannas

<span id="img_04"></span> ![](img/04.jpg)

 

LONG, long ago, at the farm of Pantannas, in Glamorgan, there lived a
churlish old husbandman. He hated the Fair Folk who danced on his fields
to the light of the moon, and longed to discover some way of ridding his
land of them.

Not being able to think of any plan, he went to an old witch and told
her of his wish. She made him promise to give her one night's milking on
his farm, and then advised him thus:

"Wherever you see a fairy ring in your fields plough it and sow it with
corn," she said. "When the fairies find the greensward gone, they will
never revisit the spot."

The farmer took her advice. He yoked his oxen and drove his iron
ploughshare through every circle in which the fairies had danced at
night, and sowed it with corn. The nightly sounds of dance and song
ceased, and no fairy was afterwards seen in the fields of Pantannas.

The farmer rejoiced greatly, imagining vain things, until one evening in
the spring of the year, when the wheat was green in the fields. The
farmer was returning home in the red light of the setting sun, when a
tiny little man in a red coat came to him, unsheathed a little sword,
and directing the point towards him, said:

Dial a ddaw,         Vengeance cometh,     
Y mae gerilaw.     Fast it approacheth.

After saying this, the mannikin disappeared. The farmer tried to laugh;
but there was something in the angry, grim looks of the little man which
made him feel very uncomfortable.

Spring, however, turned into summer, and summer into autumn, without
anything happening, and the farmer thought that he had been very foolish
to fear the threat of the little man in the red coat.

In the autumn, when the corn was golden in the fields and ripe for the
sickle, the farmer and his family were one night going to bed. Suddenly
they heard a mighty noise, which shook the house as though it would
fall. As they trembled with fear, they heard a loud voice saying:

Daw dial.     Vengeance cometh.

Next morning, no. ear or straw was to be seen in the cornfields, only
black ashes. The fairies had burnt all the harvest.

The farmer was walking through his fields, gazing ruefully at the
destruction wrought by the fairies, when he was met by the same little
man as before. Pointing his sword threateningly, the elf said:

Nid yw ond dechrau.     It but beginneth.

The farmer's face turned as white as milk, and he began to plead for
pardon. He was quite willing, he said, to allow the fields where the
fairies had been wont to dance and sing to grow again into a greensward.

They could dance in their rings as often as they wished without
interference, provided only they would punish him no more.

"No," was the stern reply. "The word of the King has gone forth that he
will avenge himself on thee, and no power can recall it."

The farmer burst into tears, and begged so sorrowfully to be forgiven
for his fault that the little man at last pitied him and said that he
would speak to his lord. "I will come again at the hour of sunset three
days hence and bring thee my lord's behest."

When the time came on the third day, the sprite was awaiting the farmer
at the appointed spot. "The King's word," he said, "cannot be recalled,
and vengeance must come. Still, since thou repentest thee of thy fault
and art anxious to atone it, the curse shall not fall in thy time nor in
that of thy sons, but will await thy distant posterity."

This promise comforted the farmer. The dark-green circles of grass grew
again, the gay elves danced in them, and the sounds of music gladdened
the fields as of old. The dread voice came at times, repeating the
threat,

Daw dial,     Vengeance will come,

but the farmer passed away in peaceful old age, and his sons followed
him to the churchyard without feeling any effects of the curse
pronounced by the King of the fairies.

More than a hundred years after the first warning had been uttered,
Madoc, the heir of Pantannas, was betrothed to Teleri, the daughter of
the squire of Pen Craig Daf, and the wedding was to take place in a few
weeks. It was Christmas-tide, and they made a feast at Pantannas to
which Teleri and all her kin were bidden.

The feast sped merrily, and all were seated round the hearth, passing
the hours with tale and song. Suddenly, above the noise of the river
which flowed outside the house, they seemed to hear a voice saying:

Daeth amser ymddial.     The time for revenge is come.

A silence fell on the joyous company. They went out and listened if they
could hear the voice a second time; but long though they lingered, they
could make out no sound except the angry noise of the full river
plunging down its rocky bed. They went back into the house; gradually
their fears were chased away, and all was as before.

Again, above the sounds of mirth and the noise of the waters as they
boiled over the boulders was heard a clear voice:

Daeth yr amser.     The time is come.

A dread noise crashed around them, and the house shook to its
foundations. As they sat speechless with fear, behold, a shapeless hag
appeared at the window. Then one, bolder than the rest, said, "What dost
thou, ugly little thing, want here?"

"I have naught to do with thee, chatterer," said the hag. "I had come to
tell the doom which awaits this house and that other which hopes to be
allied with it, but as thou hast insulted me, the veil which conceals it
shall not be lifted by me." With that she vanished, no one knew how or
whither.

When she had gone, the voice proclaimed again, more loudly than before:

Daeth amser ymddial.     The time for vengeance is come.

Terror and gloom fell upon all. The guests before long parted and went
trembling home, and Madoc took his betrothed back to Pen Craig Daf,
doing all that a fond lover could to dispel her fears, for she had been
struck to the heart with nameless dread.

The hours of darkness succeeded one another wearily, and no Madoc
returned to Pantannas. Morning came, but still no Madoc; and his aged
parents, already shaken by the vision of the hag and the strange voices
which had interrupted their joyous feast, were almost beside themselves
with anxiety. As the day wore on, without any sign of Madoc, they sent
messengers in all directions to seek news of him, but all they could
discover was that he had turned his footsteps homewards after bidding
farewell to his betrothed at Pen Craig Daf. All the countryside turned
out to find him. With minute care they searched every hill and dale for
many miles around, and dragged the depths of every river, but never a
trace of him could they find.

When many weeks of unavailing search had gone by the father and mother
sought an aged hermit who dwelt in a cave high up the country, and asked
him when their lost son would come back to them. He told the lamenting
parents that the judgment threatened in olden times by the fairies had
overtaken the hapless youth, and bade them hope no more to see him,
whether he were alive or dead. It might perhaps come to pass that after
generations had gone by he would reappear, but not in their lifetime.

Time rolled on, weeks grew into months and months into years, and
gradually all came to believe that the hermit had spoken true. All, that
is to say, except one. The gentle maiden, Teleri, never ceased to
believe that her beloved was alive and would come again. Every morning
when the sun burst open the gates of dawn, she would stand upon the
summit of a high rock, looking over the landscape far and near. At even,
again, she would be seen at the same spot, seeking some sign of her
lover's return until the sun sank behind the battlements of the west.
Madoc's father and mother died, and their mortal remains were laid to
rest, but Teleri never failed of hope. Year after year she watched until
her bright eyes became dim and her chestnut hair was silvered. Worn out
with fruitless longing, she died before her time, and they buried her in
the graveyard of the old Chapel of the Fan. One by one those who had
known Madoc died, and his strange disappearance became only a faint
tradition.

Teleri's undying belief that her lover was still alive was, however,
true. This is what had happened to him. As he was returning home from
Pen Craig Daf, the sounds of the sweetest music he had ever heard in his
life came out of a cave in the Raven's Rift, and he stopped to listen.
The strains after a while seemed to recede further into the cave, and he
stepped inside to hear better. The melody retreated further and further,
and Madoc, forgetting everything else, followed it further and further
into the recesses of the cavern. After he had been listening for an hour
or two, as he thought, the music ceased, and suddenly remembering that
after the strange events of the night his parents would be anxious for
his return, he retraced his footsteps rapidly to the mouth of the cave.
When he issued forth from the hollow, the sun was high in the heavens,
and he realised that he had been listening to the music longer than he
had at first thought. He hastened towards Pantannas, opened the door and
went in. Sitting by the fire was an aged man who asked him, "Who art
thou that comest in so boldly?"

A sense of bewilderment came over Madoc. He looked round him. The inside
of the house seemed different from what he had been accustomed to. He
went to the window and looked out. There appeared to him to be several
curious differences in the aspect of the country also. He became dimly
conscious that some great change had passed over his life, and answered
faintly, "I am Madoc."

"Madoc?" said the aged man. "Madoc? I know thee not. There is no Madoc
living in this place, nor have I ever known any man of that name. The
only Madoc I have ever heard of was one who, my grandfather said,
disappeared suddenly from this place, nobody knew whither, many scores
of years ago."

Madoc sank on a chair and wept. The old man's heart went out to him in
his grief, and he rose to comfort him. He put his hand on his shoulder,
when lo! the weeping figure crumbled into thin dust.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Drowning of the Bottom Hundred](wfb06.md)
