[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb16)  [Next](wfb18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Green Isles of the Ocean

THE people of Pembrokeshire were for a long time puzzled to know where
the fairies, or the Children of Rhys the Deep, as they are called in
Little England beyond Wales, lived. They used to attend the markets at
Milford Haven and other places regularly. They made their purchases
without speaking, laid down their money and departed, always leaving the
exact sum required, which they seemed to know without asking the price
of anything. A certain Gruffydd ab Einion was wont to supply them with
more corn than anybody else, and there was one special butcher at
Milford Haven upon whom they bestowed their patronage exclusively. To
ordinary eyes they were invisible, but some keen-sighted persons caught
glimpses of them at the markets; no one, however, saw them coming or
going, and great was the curiosity as to where they lived, for even
fairies must make their home somewhere.

One day Gruffydd ab Einion was walking about St. David's churchyard,
when he saw islands far out at sea where he had never observed land
before. "Ah!" he said, "there are the Green Isles of Ocean, Gwerddonau
Llion, about which the poets sing. I will go to see them." He started to
go down to the seashore to get a nearer view, but the islands
disappeared. He went back to the place where he had seen the vision; he
could again see the islands quite distinctly, with houses dotted here
and there among green fields. Now, Gruffydd was a very acute man; he cut
the turf from which he espied the islands, and took it down to a boat.
He stood upon it, and, setting sail, before long landed on the shore of
one of the islands. The fairies welcomed him warmly and, after showing
him all the wonders of their home, sent him back loaded with presents.
They made him, however, leave behind the enchanted turf, and pointed out
an underground passage by which he could come to visit them. He
continued to be a great friend of Rhys the Deep's children as long as he
lived, and the gold they presented him with made him the richest man in
West Wales.

<span id="img_08"></span> ![](img/08.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: March's Ears](wfb18.md)
