[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb15)  [Next](wfb17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Einion and the Lady of the Greenwood

<span id="img_12"></span> ![](img/12.jpg)

EINION, the son of Gwalchmai, was one fine summer day walking in the
woods of Trefeilir, when he beheld a slender, graceful lady. Her
complexion surpassed every white and red in the morning dawn, and the
mountain snow, and every beautiful colour in the blossoms of wood, field
and hill. Feeling in his heart a vast love he saluted her, and, she
returned the salutation, by which he perceived that his society was not
disagreeable to her. He approached her in a courteous manner, and she
also approached him. When he came near to her he saw that she had hoofs
instead of feet, and would fain have fled. But she cast her glamour upon
him and said, "Thou must follow me whithersoever I go." She had him in
thrall, and he said he would go with her to the ends of the earth, but
he requested of her permission first to go and bid farewell to his wife
Angharad. This the Lady of the Greenwood agreed to, "but," said she, "I
shall be with thee, invisible to all but to thyself."

So he went, and the goblin (for the Lady of the Greenwood was none
other) went with him. When he saw Angharad his wife, she appeared an old
hag, but he retained the recollection of days past and still felt true
love for her, but he was not able to loose himself from the bond of his
enchantment. "It is necessary for me," said he, "to part from thee for a
time, I know not how long." They wept together and. broke a gold ring
between them: he kept one half and Angharad the other. They took their
leave of each other, and he went with the Lady of the Greenwood and knew
not whither: for a powerful spell was upon him, and he saw not any place
or person or object under its true and proper appearance, excepting the
half of the ring alone.

After being a long time, he knew not how long, with the Lady of the
Greenwood, he looked one morning, as the sun was rising, upon the half
of the ring, and he bethought him to place it in the most secret place
he could find. He resolved to put it under his eyelid: as he was
endeavouring to do so, he saw a man in white apparel and mounted on a
snow-white horse coming towards him. The horseman asked him what he did
there: Einion answered that he was cherishing the memory of his wife
Angharad. "Post thou desire to see her? " asked the man in white. "I
do," replied Einion, "above all things and all pleasures in the world."
"If so," said the man in white, "get upon this horse behind me." That
Einion did, and looking around he could not see any trace of the Lady of
the Greenwood, except the track of hoofs of monstrous size, as if
journeying towards the north. "What spell art thou under?" asked the man
in white. Then Einion answered him and told everything, how it occurred
betwixt him and the Lady of the Greenwood. "Take this white staff in thy
hand, and wish for whatsoever thou desirest," said the man in white.
Einion took it, and the first thing he wished was to see the Lady of the
Greenwood, for he was not yet completely delivered from her spell. A
hideous and uncanny beldam appeared to him, a thousand times more
repulsive of aspect than the most frightful thing on earth. Einion
uttered a cry of terror: the man in white cast his cloak over him, and
in less than a twinkling Einion alighted on the hill of Trefeilir, by
his own house, where he knew scarcely anyone, nor did anyone know him.

In the meantime, the goblin who had appeared to Einion as the Lady of
the Greenwood had gone to Trefeilir in the form of an honourable and
powerful nobleman, richly apparelled and wealthy. He placed a letter in
Augharad's hand, in which it was stated that Einion had died in Norway
more than nine years before. He cast his spell upon her, and she
listened to his words of love. Soon, seeing that she should become a
noble lady, higher than any in Wales, she named a day for her marriage
with him. There was a great preparation of every elegant and sumptuous
kind of apparel, and of meats and drinks, and of every excellence of
song and instruments of music and festive entertainment.

Now, there was in Angharad's hall a very beautiful harp: when the goblin
nobleman saw it, he wished to have it played, and the harpers who had
assembled, the best in Wales, tried to put it in tune, but were not
able. Just at this time Einion came into the house, and Angharad saw him
as an old, decrepit, withered, grey-haired man, stooping with age, and
dressed in rags. After the minstrels had failed to put the harp in tune,
Einion took it in his hand and tuned it, and played on it an air which
Angharad loved. She marvelled exceedingly, and asked him who he was. "I
am Einion, the son of Gwalchmai," said he; "see, the bright gold is my
token." And he gave her the ring. But she could not bring him to her
recollection. Upon that he placed the white staff in Angharad's hand.
Instantly the goblin, whom she had hitherto seen as a handsome and
honourable nobleman, appeared to her as a monster, inconceivably
hideous: she fainted from fear, and Einion supported her until she
revived. When she opened her eyes, she saw neither the goblin nor any of
the guests or minstrels, nothing except Einion and the harp and the
banquet on the table, casting its savoury odour around. They sat down to
eat, and exceeding great was their joy at the breaking of the spell
which the goblin had cast over them.

There is a moral to this story, but it does not signify.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Green Isles of the Ocean](wfb17.md)
