[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb09)  [Next](wfb11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Llanfabon Changeling

 

AT a farmhouse called Berth Gron, in the parish of Lianfabon, there once
lived a young widow. She had a little boy whom she loved more than her
own eyes*.* He was her only comfort, and she was afraid of letting the
sun shine on him, as the saying goes. Pryderi--that was the name she had
given him--was about three years old, and a fine child for his age.

At this time the parish of Llanfabon was full of fairies. On nights when
the moon was bright, they often used to keep the hard-working farmers
awake with their music until the cock crew in the morning. On nights
when the moon was dark, they delighted in luring men into desolate bogs
by displaying false lights. Even in the daytime they would play tricks
on people if they were not very careful.

The widow knew that the Fair Family were very fond of stealing babies
out of their cradles, and you can imagine how careful she was of her
little treasure. She hated leaving him out of her sight by night or day:
if ever she had to do so, she was miserable until she returned to him
and found him safe and sound.

One day when he was lying asleep in his cradle, she heard the cows in
the byre lowing piteously as if they were in great pain. As there was
nobody in the house but herself to look after her precious boy, she was
afraid at first of going out to see what was amiss. The lowing, however,
became more and more agonised, and she became frightened. Not being able
to stand it any longer, she rushed out, forgetting in her fright to
place the tongs crossways on the cradle.

When she got to the cow house, she was amazed to find that there was
nothing whatever the matter with the cattle: they were chewing their cud
placidly, and they turned their great meek eyes in mild surprise upon
her, evidently wondering why she had burst in upon them so
unceremoniously. Realising that she had been the victim of some
deception, she ran back to the house as fast as her feet could carry
her, and to the cradle. She was afraid of finding it empty, but bending
over it she found a little boy in it who greeted her with "Mother." She
looked hard at him: he was very like Pryderi, and yet there was a
something about him which made her think that he was different from him.
At last she said doubtingly, "You are not my child."

"I am truly," said the little one. "What do you mean, mother?"

But something kept whispering to her constantly that he was not her
child, and as time went on she became convinced that she was right. The
little boy after a while became cross and fretful, unlike Pryderi, who
was always as good as gold. In a whole year he never grew at all.

Pryderi, on the other hand, was a very growing child. Besides, the
little fellow seemed to get uglier every day, whereas Pryderi had been
getting prettier and prettier: at least his mother thought so. She did
not know what to do.

Now, there was in the parish of Llanfabon a man who had the reputation
of being well informed on matters which are dark to most people. This
reputation he had gained by living at a place called the Castle of the
Night. This castle had been built of stones from Llanfabon Church, and
was haunted. Many men had tried to live there, but had been compelled to
leave because ghosts plagued them so. That this man was able to dwell
there in seeming peace and comfort was proof positive, in the eyes of
the people of Llanfabon, that he had some control at least over the
powers of darkness.

The widow went to this wise man and laid her trouble before him. After
hearing her story he said to her, "If you follow my directions
faithfully and minutely, I think I shall be able to help you. At noon
to-morrow take an eggshell and prepare to brew some beer in it. See that
the boy watches what you are doing, but take care not to tell him to pay
attention. He will ask you what you are doing. You are to say, 'I am
brewing beer for the harvestmen.' Listen carefully to what he says when
he hears that, but pretend not to catch it. After you have put him to
bed to-morrow night, come and tell me all about it."

The widow returned home, and the next day at noon she followed the
cunning man's advice. She took an eggshell and got everything ready for
brewing beer. The boy stood by her, watching her as a oat watches a
mouse. Presently . he asked, "What are you doing, mother?" She said, "I
am brewing beer for the harvestmen, my boy." Then the boy said quietly
to himself:

"I am very old this day,  
I was living before my birth,  
I remember yonder oak  
An acorn in the earth,  
But I never saw, the egg of a hen  
Brewing beer for harvestmen."

The widow heard what he said, but pretended not to have caught it, and
asked, "What did you say, my son?" He said, "Nothing, mother." She then
turned round and saw that he was very cross, and the angry expression on
his face made him very repulsive to look upon.

After she had put him to bed that night, the widow went to the Castle of
the Night, as she had been ordered. As soon as she entered, the wise man
asked, "Were you able to catch what he said?"

"He spoke very quietly to himself," answered the widow, "but I am quite
sure that what he said was:

'I am very old this day,  
I was living before my birth,  
I remember yonder oak  
An acorn in the earth,  
But I never saw the egg of a hen  
Brewing beer for harvestmen.'"

"It is well," said the wise man. "If you follow my directions faithfully
and minutely, I think I shall be able to help you. The moon will be full
in four days, and you must go at midnight to where the four roads meet
above the Ford of the Bell. Hide yourself somewhere where you can see
everything that comes along any of the roads without being seen
yourself. Whatever happens, do not stir or utter a sound. If you do, my
plans will be frustrated and your own life will be in danger. Come to me
the day after and tell me what you see."

By midnight on the appointed day the widow had concealed herself
carefully behind a large bush near the cross-roads above the Ford of the
Bell, where she could see everything that came along any of the four
roads without being seen herself. For a long time there was nothing to
be seen or heard: the moon shone brightly, and the melancholy silence of
midnight lay over all. Before long dark clouds obscured the moon, and at
last the anxious widow heard the faint sounds of music in the far
distance. The strains came nearer and nearer, and she listened with rapt
attention. Before long the melody was close at hand, and she saw a
procession of fairies coming along one of the roads. Soon the vanguard
of the procession came up, and she saw that there were hundreds of
fairies marching along. They were singing the sweetest songs she had
ever heard, and she felt that she could listen to them for ever. Just as
the middle of the procession came opposite her hiding place, the moon
emerged from behind a black cloud, and in the clear, cold light which
then flooded the earth she beheld a sight which turned her pleasure into
bitter pain and made her heart beat almost out of her body. Walking
between two fairies was her own dear little boy. She nearly forgot
herself altogether, and was on the point of springing into the midst of
the fairies to snatch her darling from them. But she remembered in time
that the wise man had warned her that his plans would be upset and her
own life in danger if she carried out her intention, and controlling
herself by a supreme effort she neither stirred nor uttered a sound.
When the long procession had wound itself past and the music had died
away in the distance, she issued from her concealment and went home to
bed, but her heart was so full of longing for her lost child that she
never slept a wink all night.

On the morrow she went to the wise man early. He was expecting her, and
as she entered he perceived by her looks that she had seen something to
disturb her. She told him what she had witnessed at the cross-roads, and
he again said, "it is well. If you will follow my directions faithfully
and minutely, I think I shall be able to help you."

He then brought out a great book, bound in calf-skin, opened it, and
pored long over it. After much deliberation he said, "You must find a
black hen without a single white feather, or one of any other colour
than black. Do you burn peat or wood?"

"I burn peat," said the widow.

"After you have found the hen," resumed the wise man, "you must light a
wood fire and bake the hen before it, with its feathers and all intact.
After you have placed it to bake before the fire, close every passage
and hole in the wall, leaving only the chimney open. After that, avoid
looking at the boy, but watch the hen baking, and do not take your eyes
off it until the last feather has fallen off it."

Strange as the directions of the wise man appeared, she determined to
follow them as faithfully and minutely as she had the previous
directions. But oh, the weary tramp she had before she could find a
black hen without a single white feather or one of any other colour than
black. She tried every farm in the parish of Llanfabon in vain, and she
was nearly driven to the conclusion that if this breed of hens had ever
existed on the earth it had become extinct. It was weeks before she
secured the right hen, and it was at a farm miles away from Llanfabon
that she was successful in her search.

Her repeated disappointments were all the more bitter because she was
forced to hide her disgust with the little fellow who was there instead
of her boy. When he addressed her as "Mother," it was almost more than
she could bear, but she was just able to make no difference in her
behaviour towards him, though he seemed to be getting smaller, crosser
and uglier every day.

Having found the black hen, she built up a wood fire, and when it was
burning brightly she wrung the hen's neck and placed it as it was,
feathers and all, in front of the fire. She then closed every passage
and hole in the walls, leaving only the chimney open, and sat in front
of the fire to watch the hen baking. The little fellow called to her
several times, but though she answered him she was careful not to look
at him. After a bit she fell into a swoon. When she came out of it she
saw that all the feathers had fallen off the hen, and looking round the
house she saw that the changeling had disappeared. Then she heard the
strains of music outside the house, and they were the same as those she
had heard at the cross-roads. All of a sudden the music ceased, and she
heard a little boy's voice calling, "Mother." She rushed out, and lo!
and behold, who should be standing within a few paces of the threshold
but her own dear little boy.

She snatched him up in her arms and almost smothered him with kisses.
She laughed and wept in turn, and her joy was greater than words can
tell. When asked where he had been all this long while, the little boy
had no account to give of himself except that he had been listening to
lovely music. He was pale and wan and thin, but under his mother's
loving care he soon became his bonny self again, and mother and son
lived happily ever afterwards.

 

<span id="img_09"></span> ![](img/09.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Why the Red Dragon is the Emblem of Wales](wfb11)
