[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb12)  [Next](wfb14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Adventures of Three Farmers

THREE men who once went to Beddgelert Fair had strange adventures before
they reached home.

One of them was the farmer of the Gilwern. On his *way* home he came
across the Fair Family dancing. He looked on for hours, and the music
was so sweet that he felt certain that even in Heaven he would not hear
sweeter. But he forgot himself while listening and went too near. When
they noticed him the little people threw a kind of dust in his eyes, and
while he was wiping it away they betook themselves somewhere out of his
sight, so that he neither saw nor heard anything more of them.

This was what befell the second, the farmer of the Ffridd. He also saw a
company of fairies engaged in their revels, and while he was watching
them he fell asleep. As he slept they bound him so tightly that he could
not have stirred, and then they covered him over with a veil of
gossamer, so that nobody could see him in case he called for help. As he
did not return home his family made a minute search for him, in vain.
However, about the same time the following night the fairies came and
liberated him, and he shortly woke up after sleeping a whole night and a
day. After awaking he had no idea where on earth he was; he wandered
about on the slopes of the Gader and near the Gors Fawr until the cock
crew, when he found where he was, namely, less than a quarter of a mile
from his home.

The third was the farmer of Drws y Coed. He was going home along the old
road over the Gader, and when he was near the top he saw a fine,
handsome house, in which there was a rare merrymaking. He knew very well
that there was no such building anywhere on his way, and it made him
think that he had mistaken his road and gone astray. He therefore
resolved to turn into the house to ask for a night's lodging. His
request was readily granted, and when he entered he thought that a
wedding feast *(neithior)* was being celebrated, such was the jollity,
the singing and the dancing. The house was full of young men and women
and children, all disporting as merrily as could be. Presently the
company began to disperse one by one, and he asked if he might go to
bed. He was led into a beautiful bed-chamber, where there was a bed of
the softest down covered with bed-clothes as white as snow. He at once
undressed, went into bed, and slept. quietly enough until the morning.
He opened his eyes and found he was sleeping on the open bogland, with a
clump of rushes as his pillow and the blue sky as his coverlet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cadwaladr and his Goat](wfb14)
