[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb18)  [Next](wfb20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Fairy Harp

 

A COMPANY of fairies who lived in the recesses of Cader Idris were in
the habit of going about from cottage to cottage in that part of the
country to test the dispositions of the cottagers. Those who gave the
fairies an ungracious welcome were subject to bad luck during the rest
of their lives; but those who were good to the little folk who visited
them in disguise received substantial favours from them.

Old Morgan ap Rhys was sitting one night by himself in his own chimney
corner, solacing his loneliness with his pipe and some Llangollen ale.
The generous liquor made Morgan very light-hearted, and he began to
sing--at least he was under the impression that he was singing. His
voice, however, was anything but sweet, and a bard whom he had
offended--it is a very dangerous thing to fall foul of the bards in
Wales, because they often have such bitter tongues--had likened his
singing to the lowing of an old cow or the yelping of a blind dog which
has lost its way to the cowyard. His singing, however, gave Morgan
himself much satisfaction, and this particular evening he was especially
pleased with the harmony he was producing. The only thing which marred
his sense of contentment was the absence of an audience. Just as he was
coming to the climax of his song, he heard a knock at the door.
Delighted with the thought that there was someone to listen to him,
Morgan sang with all the fervour he was capable of, and his top note
was, in his opinion, a thing of beauty and a joy for ever. When he had
quite finished, he again heard a knock at the door, and shouted out,
"What is the door for but to come in by? Come in, whoever you are."
Morgan's manners, you will see, were not very polished.

The door opened and in came three travellers, travel-stained and
weary-looking. Now these were fairies from Cader Idris disguised in this
manner to see how Morgan treated strangers, but he never suspected they
were other than they appeared. "Good sir," said one of the travellers,
"we are worn and tired, but all we seek is a bite of food to put in our
wallets, and then we will go on our way."

"Brensiach," said Morgan, "is that all you want? Welt, there, look you,
is the loaf and the cheese, and the knife lies by them, and you cut what
you like. Eat your heartiest and fill your wallets, for never shall it
be said that Morgan ap Rhys denied bread and cheese to strangers that
came into his house." The travellers proceeded to help themselves, and
Morgan, determined not to fail in hospitality, sang to them while they
ate, moistening his throat occasionally with Llangollen ale when it
became dry.

The fairy travellers, after they had regaled themselves sufficiently,
got up to go and said, "Good sir, we thank you for our entertainment.
Since you have been so generous we will show that we are grateful. It is
in our power to grant you any one wish you may have: tell us what that
wish may be."

"Well, indeed," said Morgan, "the wish of my heart is to have a harp
that will play under my fingers, no matter how ill I strike it: a harp
that will play lively tunes, look you--no melancholy music for me. But
surely it's making fun of me you are."

But that was not the case: he had hardly finished speaking when, to his
astonishment, there on the hearth before him stood a splendid harp. He
looked round and found his guests had vanished. "That's the most
extraordinary thing I have ever seen in my life," said Morgan, "they
must have been fairies," and he was so flabbergasted that he felt
constrained to drink some more ale. This allayed to some extent his
bewilderment, and he proceeded to try the instrument he had been so
mysteriously presented with. As soon as his fingers touched the strings,
the harp began to play a mad and capering tune. Just then there was a
sound of footsteps, and in came his wife with some friends. No sooner
did they hear the strains of the harp than they began dancing, and as
long as Morgan's fingers were on the strings, they kept footing it like
mad creatures.

The news that Morgan had come into possession of a harp with some
mysterious power spread like wildfire over the whole country, and many
were the visitors who came to see him and it. Every time he played it
everyone felt irresistibly impelled to dance, and could not leave off
until Morgan stopped. Even lame people capered away, and a one legged
man who visited him danced as merrily as any biped.

One day, among the company who had come to see if the stories about the
harp were true, was the bard who had made such unpleasant remarks about
Morgan's singing. Morgan determined to pay him out, and instead of
stopping as usual after the dance had been going on for a few minutes,
he kept on playing. He played on and on until the dancers were exhausted
and shouted to him to stop. But Morgan was finding the scene much too
amusing to want to stop. He laughed until his sides ached and the tears
rolled down his cheeks at the antics of his visitors, and especially at
those of the bard. The longer he played the madder became the dance: the
dancers spun round and round, wildly knocking over the furniture, and
some of them bounded up against the roof of the cottage till their heads
cracked again. Morgan did not stop until the bard had broken his legs
and the rest had been jolted almost to pieces. By that time his revenge
was satisfied, and his sides and jaws were so tired with laughing that
he had to take his fingers away from the strings.

But this was the last time he was to have the chance of venting his
spite on his enemies. By next morning the harp had disappeared, and was
never seen again. The fairies, evidently displeased with the evil use to
which their gift had been put, must have taken it away in the night. And
this is a warning to all who abuse the gifts of the fairies.

<span id="img_09"></span> ![](img/09.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Guto Bach and the Fairies](wfb20.md)
