[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb23)  [Next](wfb25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Forbidden Mountain

THERE was once a boy of twelve years of age who was often sent by his
father to tend the sheep on the Frenni fach. Early one morning in June
he drove the sheep to their pasture for the day and looked carefully at
the top of the Frenni fawr to see which way the morning fog was
declining. Young as he was, he was weather-wise, and knew that if the
fog declined to the Pembroke-shire side it would be a fine day, whereas
if it went to the Cardiganshire side the weather would be foul. The fog
was going to the Pembrokeshire side, and the boy, delighted with the
prospect of a fine day, was whistling a merry tune and looking idly
about him, when he saw at a considerable distance away what seemed to be
a party of soldiers busily engaged in some operation, the nature of
which he could not make out at first.

"There cannot be any soldiers on the mountain as early as this," he
reflected, and going to the top of a little hillock, he perceived that
they were too small for soldiers. "I wonder whether they are the Fair
Family," he said. He had often heard of them and had seen their rings,
but he had never set eyes on the little people themselves. First of all,
he thought of running home to tell his father and mother, but reflecting
that they might disappear before he returned and that perhaps his
parents might even forbid him to come back--for many people were afraid
of the Fair Family--he dismissed that idea. After cogitating for a
little while he determined to go as near them as he could, and by
degrees he arrived within a short distance of the visitors, where he
remained for some time observing their motions. The visitors were tiny
little people of both sexes, and they were the most handsome people he
had ever seen. Some of them were dancing, whirling round and round in a
ring with joined hands. Others were chasing one another with surprising
swiftness, and others again were galloping about on small white horses.
Their dresses varied in colour, some being white and others scarlet. The
little men wore red tripled caps and the little women a light
head-dress, which waved fantastically in the breeze. All were laughing
gleefully, and as merry as could be.

Before long they noticed the boy, and, with laughing faces, beckoned him
to join them. So he gradually went nearer, till at length he ventured to
place one foot in the circle. No sooner had he done so than his ears
were charmed with the most melodious music in the world, and he moved
his other foot into the circle.

The instant he did this, he found himself, not in a fairy ring on the
mountain side, but in a magnificent palace glittering with gold and
pearls. Every form of beauty surrounded him, and every variety of
pleasure was offered him. He was free to range wherever he pleased, and
his every movement was waited on by maidens of matchless loveliness.
Instead of the tatws a llaeth (potatoes and butter-milk) and the
flummery to which he had hitherto been accustomed, here were the
choicest viands, served on silver plates, and instead of small beer, the
only kind of intoxicating liquor he had before tasted, here were red and
yellow wines of wondrous enjoyableness, brought in golden goblets richly
inlaid with gems. There was only one restriction on his freedom: he was
not to drink on any consideration from a certain fountain in the garden,
in which swam fishes of golden and other colours. Each day new joys were
provided for him; new pastimes were invented to charm him and new faces
presented themselves, more lovely, if possible, than those he had seen
before.

Possessing everything that mortal could desire, the boy still wanted the
one thing forbidden. Like Eve in the Garden of Eden, he was undone by
curiosity. One day he was near the fountain, gazing at the fishes
sporting in the water. There was nobody looking on, and he plunged his
hand into the fountain: the fishes all disappeared instantly. He put the
water to his mouth: a confused shriek ran through the garden. He drank:
the palace and all vanished, and he found himself on the mountain in the
very place where he first entered the ring. The sheep were grazing just
where he had left them, and the fog on the mountain had scarcely moved.
He thought he had been absent for many years, but he had only been away
so many minutes.

<span id="img_09"></span> ![](img/09.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tudur ap Einion](wfb25.md)
