[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb19)  [Next](wfb21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Guto Bach and the Fairies

 

GRUFFYDD was the name given at baptism to a little boy who once lived at
Llangybi, but everyone called him Guto Bach. One day, after he had been
up to the mountain to see his father's sheep, he brought home a number
of pieces, the size of crowns, with letters stamped on them and
resembling real crown pieces exactly, only that they were made of white
paper instead of silver. His mother asked him where he had got them. "I
played with some little children on the mountain," said little Guto,
"and they gave them to me." "Whose children? "asked the mother. "I don't
know," he replied; "they are very nice children, much nicer than I am."
But his mother knew they were fairies, and told him he must never go on
the mountain again by himself, because no good ever came of playing with
strange children.

But Guto was longing to have another game with the little children. One
day he disobeyed his mother and slipped away to the mountain. He did not
come back, and though every search was made for him, no trace of Guto
Bach could be found anywhere. Two years after, however, what should his
mother see on opening the door in the morning but little Guto sitting on
the threshold with a bundle under his arm. He was the very same size and
dressed in the same little clothes as on the day of his disappearance,
and he did not look a day older. "My child," said the astonished and
delighted mother, "where have you been this long, long while?" "Mother,"
said Guto, "I have not been long away; it was only yesterday that I went
to play with the little children. Look what pretty clothes they have
given me." The mother opened the bundle; it contained a dress of very
white paper without seam or sewing. As it had been given to him by the
fairies she burnt it, and Guto's long disappearance made her more sure
that no good could come of playing with strange children.

But she was wrong all the same. Guto Bach's friendship with the little
children, as he still thought they were, proved to be very advantageous.
Shortly after his reappearance his father and mother suffered a very
great loss. They had invested all their savings and all the money they
could raise in a ship sailing from Pwllheli, which had been making very
profitable voyages and bringing great wealth to those who had shares in
her. The vessel went down in a storm, and ruin stared Guto's parents in
the face. Now there was on Pentyrch, the hill above Llangybi, a great
rock under which there was said to be a great treasure of gold hidden.
Many men had tried to move the rocks but had failed because they were
undeserving. Guto's father determined to make another effort to dislodge
the stone, in the hope that the treasure underneath it would recoup his
losses. His neighbours sympathised with him, and brought all the horses
of the parish to help him. But the rock was so heavy and fixed so fast
in the ground that the combined efforts of all the men and horses of
Liangybi were unavailing. Guto's father's hopes had been high: whatever
the others might have been who had attempted to reach the treasure, he
at least, he thought, was deserving. The disappointment, therefore, was
all the harder to bear.

Seeing his parents grief, Guto remembered that the little children with
whom he had played had plenty of gold and silver, and he made up his
mind to ask them to help his father and mother in their distress. He
went again to the mountain and found the little children playing as
before. He told them his trouble, and asked them whether they could
spare him some of their money. "No," they said, "there is plenty of gold
and silver waiting for you under the rock on Pentyrch." "But,"
remonstrated little Guto, "it would not budge for all the men and horses
of Llangybi." "We are aware of that," said the little children, "but do
you try to move it and see what will happen."

Guto went home and told his parents what the little children had said to
him. They laughed at the idea that little Guto would succeed where the
full strength of Llangybi parish had failed. But they were in such a
desperate plight that they allowed Guto to do as the fairies had
directed. They took him to the rock. He put his little hand on it, and
the great mass trembled. He gave it a shove, and the huge stone crashed
down the hill. Underneath it there was found enough gold and silver not
only to replace all their losses, but to make Guto and his parents the
richest people in Carnarvonshire.

<span id="img_11"></span> ![](img/11.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ianto's Chase](wfb21.md)
