[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb29)  [Next](wfb31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pergrin and the Mermaiden

ONE fine September afternoon, about the beginning of the eighteenth
century, a fisherman of St. Dogmael's, whose name was Pergrin, was
rowing in his boat near Pen Cemmes. Looking up at the rocks casually, he
thought he saw a maiden in a recess of the cliff. Pergrin was an
inquisitive man, and he determined to see what the strange lady was
doing. He rowed ashore as quietly as he could, stepped out of his boat
and crawled up to a place where he could see into the recess without
being seen himself. He espied a lovely maiden--at least, above the waist
she was a lovely maiden, but below the waist she was a fish with fins
and spreading tail. She was combing her long hair so busily and intently
that she had no suspicion that she was being watched, and Pergrin gazed
upon her for a long time. During that time his mind was active, and he
determined to carry her away. Putting his resolve into action, Pergrin
rushed at her, and taking her up in his arms, carried her off to his
boat. There he fastened her securely, and turning his boat's nose in the
direction of Llandudoch (that is the Welsh for St. Dogmael's), began to
ply his oars vigorously. When she realised her situation, being a woman
(at least, as far as the waist) she wept, and begged Pergrin to let her
go. Pergrin, however, though he answered her very kindly, would not
accede to her tearful request, but carried her home and shut her up in a
room. He treated her very tenderly, but she refused all meat and drink
(she rejected even the best *cawl,* with hundreds of eyes in it), and
did nothing but shed tears and beseech Pergrin to release her. A famous
man once said that as much pity is to be taken of a woman weeping as of
a goose going barefoot, but Pergrin had never heard this saying: it
would have made no difference if he had, for he was soft-hearted, and
the sight of the beauteous half-woman's eyes becoming red, and her nose
swollen with the constant drip of salt water, affected him profoundly.
Moreover, as she persistently declined food, she became thin and
peakish. To add to his anxiety, a friend of his, who knew far too much
to be a pleasant companion, told him what had happened to a man in
Conway who caught a mermaid. She prayed him to place her tail at least
in the water, but he refused, and she died. Before dying she cursed her
captor and the place of her imprisonment. The captor had gone from bad
to worse, and had perished miserably: the people of Conway have been so
poor ever since, that when a stranger happens to bring a sovereign into
that harp-shaped town they have to send across the water to
Llansantffraid for change. So when the tearful prisoner at last said to
Pergrin, "If thou wilt let me go, Pergrin, I will give thee three shouts
in the time of thy greatest need," he accepted her offer. Carrying her
down to the strand of the sea, he put her in the water, and she
immediately plunged into the depths.

Days and weeks passed without Pergrin seeing her after this. But one
fine hot afternoon he was out fishing in his boat, and many of the
fishermen were similarly engaged. The sea was calm, and there was hardly
a cloud in the sky, so that no one had any thought of danger. Suddenly
the mermaiden emerged out of the blue, sunlit water and shouted in a
loud voice, "Pergrin, Pergrin, Pergrin, take up thy net, take up thy
net, take up thy net." Pergrin instantly obeyed, drew in his net with
great haste, and rowed over the bar homewards, amid the jeers of all the
others. By the time he had reached the Pwll Cam a dread storm overspread
the sea: the wind blew great guns and the waves ran mountain high.
Pergrin reached dry land safely, but all the other fishermen, eighteen
in number, found watery graves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Cave of the Young Men of Snowdonia](wfb31)
