[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb33)  [Next](wfb35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Helig's Hollow

MANY ages ago, the fair and fertile tract of country stretching from the
Gogarth (better known as the Great Orme) to Bangor, and from Llanfair
Fechan to Ynys Seiriol (Puffin Island is another and an uglier name for
this sea-girt knoll), was ruled by Helig ab Glannach, and was called
Tyno Helig, or Helig's Hollow.

Helig had a daughter, Gwendud: she was as fair as Gwenhwyfar, the wife
of Arthur, "when she appeared loveliest at the Offering on the day of
the Nativity, or at the feast of Easter," but she had an evil heart,
full of wickedness, cruelty and deceit.

She was loved and wooed by the son of one of the barons of Snowdon, and
she loved him in return as much as she was capable of loving anyone
other than Gwendud, the daughter of Helig. But she would not wed him
because he had no golden collar.

Tathal (that was her suitor's name) tried for a long time to win this
distinction fairly, but failed. Gwendud would not change her mind, so he
determined to procure a collar by foul means.

Rhun, the son of Maelgwn Gwynedd, had led an expedition into Strath
Clyde, and after burning and slaying had brought back many prisoners to
Caer Rhun, where he held them to ransom. The first captive whose liberty
was bought by his kinsmen was a young chieftain who had won a golden
collar in the wars against the Picts. Tathal went to him and offered his
services as guide. After conducting him through the Perfeddwlad, he
treacherously stabbed him and brought back his golden collar. His story
was that they had been set upon by a band of robbers, headed by an
outlaw noble, whom he had slain in fair fight. Gwendud now consented to
wed him, and Helig made a great feast, bidding to it all his own kinsmen
and those of the bridegroom.

A harper from Bangor was summoned to make music for the revel. The
harper had the gift of second sight, and he asked the cupbearer to tell
him if he saw anything out of the common when he went down to the cellar
to draw the mead. The night was yet young when the cupbearer came in
terror to the harper and said: "A stream of water is flowing into the
cellar, and hundreds of little fishes are swimming in it."

"Let us fly for our lives," said the harper. The twain fled through the
darkness towards the mountains. They were hardly out of the banqueting
hall when they heard the sullen roar of a great flood. Soon they heard
shrieks of terror, which made the blood run cold in their veins. Looking
back they could dimly see the foam of mighty breakers racing towards
them. Soon the water was lapping at their heels, and though they ran
until their hearts almost burst within their bodies, they were more than
once nearly overwhelmed by the vengeful deluge. At last they reached
Rhiwgyfylchi, breathless and exhausted with fatigue, and there, safe
from the pursuing waves, they waited for the morning. When the sun rose
it disclosed an expanse of rippling water where Helig's Hollow had been.
Nor has the sea ever given up its conquest.

Some men of Conway have, while fishing on July days when the water is
very calm, seen the ruins of Helig's Palace deep down below the surface,
but the sight is unlucky, for every man who has espied the drowned walls
and towers has died very soon after.

<span id="img_03"></span> ![](img/03.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Owen Goes A-Wooing](wfb35.md)
