[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb41)  [Next](wfb43.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sili go Dwt

AT Nant Corfan, in Cwm Tafolog, in Montgomeryshire, there once lived a
poor woman who had been left a widow, with a little baby. "Whosoever
hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance; but
whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he hath."
This was the case with the poor widow, for the Gwylliaid Cochion, the
Red Banditti, of Mawddwy, sent one of their number down her chimney,
although she had put scythes in it to prevent such an entry, and robbed
her of all the money which she had put by to pay the rent. Not content
with that, they drove away all her cattle to their lairs.

The poor woman was weeping as if her heart would break, when suddenly
there came a knock at the door, and a tall old lady, dressed in green,
came in with a long staff in her hand. "Why are you weeping?" asked the
green lady. And the widow told her of her great misfortunes.

"Be comforted," said the stranger, "for I have gold here more than
enough to pay your rent and to buy cattle to replace those which these
wicked robbers have taken away." With that she brought out a great bag
from under her cloak, and poured out a great heap of yellow gold on the
little round table by the fire. The widow's eyes glistened and her mouth
watered at the sight. "All this will I give you," said the green lady,
"if you will give me what I ask for." "I will give you anything I have
in my possession," said the widow: her belongings were so few that the
best of them, she thought, would be a very poor exchange for the gold
which was gleaming bright in the light of the peat fire. "I am not
unreasonable," said the green lady, "and I always like to do a good turn
for a small reward. All I ask is that little boy lying in the cradle
there."

The widow felt as if she had been stabbed to the heart, and she begged
and prayed the fairy (for such, it was now clear, she was) to take
anything rather than her little boy. "No," said the fairy, "you must let
me have your baby. I cannot by the law we live under take him until the
third day. I will come back with the gold the day after to-morrow, and
if you want the gold you know the condition. But stay, if you can then
tell me my right name I will not take your boy." With that she gathered
up the yellow metal into her bag and went out.

The poor widow was more wretched than ever. Much as she longed for the
fairy's money, she loved her little son more than all the gold on earth,
and the very thought of losing him kept her from sleeping all night. The
next day she went to some relatives at Llanbrynmair to see whether they
could help her in her trouble, but though they had the heart they had
not the means to succour her, and she had to return empty-handed. As she
was going through a wood she saw an open space among the trees, and in
the middle of it was a fairy ring. A little woman was dancing wildly
round this ring by herself and singing. The widow could not hear the
words of the song from where she was, so she crept as silently as a
mouse within hearing distance. Then she heard:

"How the widow would laugh if she was aware  
That Sill go Dwt is the name that I bear."

When the widow heard this she felt as if a ton weight had been lifted
off her heart: she stole away as noiselessly as she had approached, and
made for home as fast as her legs would carry her.

The next day the fairy came again, as she had said, in the guise of a
tall old lady as before, dressed in green and with a long staff in her
hand. She poured the gold on the little table by the fire once more, and
said that. the widow could have it if she either gave up her baby or
guessed her name. The widow thought that she would have some sport with
the fairy, and she asked:

"How many guesses will you give me?" "As many as you like," said the
fairy. Then the widow tried every strange name that she had ever heard
of, all the English names she remembered, and old Welsh names like
Garmy, Gorasgwrn, Rhelemon, Enrydreg, Creiddylad, Ellylw. Gwaedan,
Rathtyeu, Corth, Tybiau, Cywyllog, Peithian. But the fairy shook her
head at each. Then the widow said,." I will have one more guess. Is your
name Sili go Dwt, by any chance?" The fairy went up the chimney in a
blaze of fire, such was her rage and disappointment. With the gold she
left behind her the widow paid the rent and bought cattle, and there was
enough to fill an old stocking besides.

She lived happily ever afterwards, and the boy, when he grew up, had the
satisfaction of helping Baron Owen to hang a few dozens of the Red
Banditti, who had robbed his mother, on the trees of their forest lair.

<span id="img_02"></span> ![](img/02.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Another Changeling](wfb43.md)
