[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb45)  [Next](wfb47.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Richest Man

IN time long past there lived in a certain parish a great and wealthy
lord. He had gold and silver, houses and land, and every honour which
his country could give him.

One morning, after the cock had crowed three times, he heard a voice
proclaiming three times, "This very night shall the richest man in this
parish die." He was greatly troubled, and sent his servants in hot haste
for the best of physicians far and near. He took to his bed, and the
physicians watched unceasingly by his side, administering to him every
medicine and every support of life which their study of the healing art
had discovered.

The night came and wore away, although it appeared to the nobleman as
long as a man's life. The dawn broke, and the nobleman and the
physicians rejoiced exceedingly that he was still alive. While they
rejoiced, lo, the church bell tolled the knell of someone dead. They
sent to enquire who it was. The answer came that it was a poor old blind
beggar-man, who was often to be seen sitting more than hall-naked at the
roadside asking an alms. The nobleman said, "The voice proclaimed that
the greatest and richest man in the parish would die. The old beggar
must have been a cheat and impostor. As he has neither children nor
relatives, to me, the lord of this land, belongs by law the wealth which
he must have been possessed of." So he sent his servants to search the
hut in which the beggar had died. They found nothing but a truss of
straw and a bolster of rushes, with the old man lying dead upon them:
there was no food or drink or fire or clothes, and it was seen that the
beggar had perished from hunger and cold.

"What then meant the voice?" asked the nobleman. And one of the
physicians answered and said, "The blind beggar-man has laid up for
himself treasures in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt,
and where thieves do not break through and steal. Are these treasures
not greater than the uncertain and deceitful riches of this world?"

The nobleman was changed from that hour: he relieved poverty and want,
and endowed churches, hospitals and schools. On his death-bed he asked
that he should be buried in the beggar-man's grave.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St. Beuno and the Curlew](wfb47.md)
