[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb53)  [Next](wfb55.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Goronwy Tudor and the Witches of Llanddona

VERY few men in Anglesey in the olden days dared to cross any of the
Witches of Llanddona, and those who were bold enough to do so suffered
grievously for their rashness. But Goronwy Tudor, who lived not far from
Llanddona, was reckless enough to defy even Bella Fawr, Big Bella, the
most famous and most dreaded of all the witches of that uncanny village,
and he was not a ha'porth the worse.

Perhaps you do not know the history of the Llanddona witches. Long ago a
boat came ashore in Red Wharf Bay without rudder or oars, full of men
and women half dead with hunger and thirst. In early days it was the
custom to put evil-doers in a boat to drift oarless and rudderless on
the sea, and when this boat- was swept by wind and waves on the
beautiful sands of Llanddona, the good people who then lived there
prepared to drive it back into the sea, thinking it was manned by
criminals. But the strangers caused a spring of pure water to burst
forth on the sands (the well still remains), and this decided their
fate. They were allowed to stay and to build cottages. But they did not
change their evil natures. The men lived by smuggling, and the women
begged and practised witchcraft.

It was impossible to overcome the smugglers in a fray, for each of them
carried about with him a black fly tied in a knot of his neckerchief.
When their strength failed them in the fight they undid the knots of
their cravats, and the flies flew at the eyes of their opponents and
blinded them. The women used to visit the farmhouses, and when they
asked for a pound of butter, a loaf of bread, some potatoes, eggs, a
fowl, part of a pig, or what not, they were not denied, because they
cursed those who refused them. If they attended a fair or market, no one
ventured to bid against them for anything.

But Goronwy Tudor was not afraid of them. He had a birthmark above his
breast, which is a great protection against witchcraft, and he knew how
to break nearly every spell. He had the plant which is called Mary's
turnip growing in front of his house: he also nailed horseshoes above
every door, and put rings made of the mountain ash under the doorposts,
thus making his house and all his farm buildings safe. To make them
doubly sure he sprinkled earth from the churchyard in all his rooms, and
in his byre, stable and pigstye. When the animals were in the fields,
however, he had some difficulty in securing them from harm. One day when
he went to fetch his cows from the meadow to be milked he found them
sitting like cats before a fire, with their hind legs beneath them.
Goronwy took the skin of an adder, burnt it and scattered the ashes over
the horns of the cows. They got up at once, and walked off with their
usual dignity to the byre.

Another day the milk would not turn into butter, and a very unpleasant
smell arose from the churn. Goronwy took a crowbar, heated it red hot,
and put it in the milk. Out jumped a large hare, and ran away through
the open door of the dairy. After this the milk was churned into
beautiful butter.

Some time after the supply of milk began to decline, and the butter made
from it was so bad and evil-smelling that the very dogs would not touch
it. The milk became scantier and scantier, until at last it ceased
altogether, and the cows gave nothing but blood. Goronwy watched in the
fields at night and saw a hare going up to a cow and sucking it. She
squirted from her mouth and nostrils the milk she had sucked, and then
went on to another cow. She did the same with her and with all the other
cows. Goronwy knew that it was old Bella in the form of a hare, and he
prepared to stop her evildoing and to punish her. The next night he took
his gun, putting into it a silver coin instead of shot (shot cannot
penetrate a witch's body), and placed a bit of vervain under the stock.
When he saw the hare milking the cows he fired at her. The hare
immediately ran off in the direction of Bella's cottage, with Goronwy
after her. He was not so fleet of foot as puss, but he managed to keep
her in sight, and saw her jumping over the lower half of the door of the
house. Going up to the cottage he heard the sound of dreadful groans.
When he reached the door he went in. There was no hare to be seen, but
old Bella was sitting by the fire with blood streaming from her legs. He
was never again troubled by old Bella in the shape of a hare, and by
drawing blood from the bewitched kine he broke the spell.

Bella made one more attempt to injure him. She went to the Cold Well and
launched at him the great curse of the Witches of Llanddona:

May he wander for ages many,  
And at every step, a stile,  
At every stile, a fall;  
At every fall, a broken bone,  
Not the largest nor the least bone,  
But the chief neckbone, every time.

Goronwy felt in his bones that he had been cursed. He got some witch's
butter that grows on decayed trees and stuck pins in it. When the pain
inflicted by the pins penetrated her body, Bella had willy-nilly to
appear before him. She was screaming with pain, and Goronwy refused to
take the pins which were causing the anguish out of the butter until she
said: "Rhad Duw ac ar bopeth ar a feddi--God's blessing on thee and on
everything that thou possessest." After this neither Bella nor any of
her tribe had any power over Goronwy or his wife, or his man-servant or
his maid-servant, or his ox or his ass, or anything that was his.

<span id="img_06"></span> ![](img/06.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Robin's Return](wfb55.md)
