[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb60)  [Next](wfb62.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Grace's Well

AT the south-east corner of Glasfryn lake, in the parish of Llangybi, is
a well called Ffynnon Grassi, or Grace's Well. In the olden time it was
a fairy well, and Grassi was in charge of it. Her duty was to keep the
cover always on the well, except when water was being drawn. One evening
she forgot to close the well, and the water gushed out. It flowed
strongly and ceaselessly, but so noiselessly was the flow that the
fairies did not notice it. At last it overwhelmed one of their dancing
rings, and they perceived and stopped the overflow, not, however, before
Glasfryn lake had been formed.

When she saw the result of her negligence, Grassi, overcome with
remorse, walked to and fro on the piece of ground which is now called
Cae'r Ladi, "the Lady's Field," wringing her hands and weeping and
moaning. The fairies seized her and changed her into a swan. In this
form she haunted the lake which her forgetfulness had caused for six
score years, after which time the fairies allowed her to resume her
human shape. At any rate, there is to be seen about two hours after
midnight, on certain nights in the year, a tall lady with lovely
features and large bright eyes, dressed in white silk and a white velvet
bonnet, wandering up and down the high ground of Cae'r Lath, weeping and
wailing. If she is not Grassi, who is she?

<span id="img_06"></span> ![](img/06.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fairy Password](wfb62.md)
