[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb62)  [Next](wfb64) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

St Winifred's Well

IN the seventh century there lived a virgin of the name of Winifred, the
daughter of noble parents: her father, Thewith, was a powerful noble,
and her mother was sister to St. Beuno. After founding his monastery at
Clynnog, St. Beuno visited his relatives in Flintshire, and, obtaining
from his brother-in-law a piece of land, caused a church and convent to
be erected on it; in charge of the convent he placed his niece Winifred.

Caradoc, a neighbouring Prince, struck by her great beauty, tried to
gain her in marriage, but, having dedicated herself to the service of
God, Winifred would not listen to his suit. Thereupon the Prince
attempted to carry her off by force, but she escaped from his hands and
fled. Caradoc, enraged at his disappointment, pursued her, drew his
sword and cut off her head. He instantly received the reward of his
crime: he fell down dead, and the earth opening, swallowed his impious
corpse. The severed head bounded down the hill and stopped near the
church. Where it rested a great spring burst forth. St. Beuno, coming
out of the church, where he had been preaching, took up the head and
carried it to the corpse. After praying to God, he joined it to the
body, and the virgin was restored to life, nor was there any sign of the
wound to be seen other than a slender white line encircling her neck.
Winifred lived fifteen years after this, and became the abbess of a
convent at Gwytherin, in Denbighshire.

The spring which burst forth on the spot where her head rested is still
flowing, and its stones are annually spotted with blood in commemoration
of the miracle. Ever since it has been believed to have virtues like
those of the Pool of Bethesda, and great multitudes of sick folic,
blind, halt and withered step into it to be made whole of their
diseases.

<span id="img_08"></span> ![](img/08.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ancients of the World](wfb64)
