[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb65)  [Next](wfb67.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

An Adventure in the Big Bog

A YOUNG harper of Bala was asked to play at a wedding in a farmhouse
near Yspytty Ifan. When the joyous company broke up late at night he set
off for home like the rest, but he had a much longer way to go than
anyone else. When he was crossing the mountain a dense fog came on, and
he lost his way. He was wandering about trying to find the path again,
when he suddenly stepped into the Gors Fawr, "the big bog." The
treacherous crust swayed for an instant under his tread, and then it
broke. The soft mud oozed round his ankles, and he felt himself going
further and further down. He tried to raise himself on his harp, but the
only result of this was to plunge the beloved instrument into the bog,
and he himself sank lower and lower. At last, with a desperate effort,
he hurled himself full length upon the surface. The yielding crust caved
under his body, and he clutched at the surface grass, but he only
plucked the tufts from their roots. They gave him no hold. With every
fresh effort to save himself he sank deeper. The gurgling slime sucked
him down, down, down, and in the anguish of his soul he threw his head
back in one last wild scream.

His cry was just dying away when the fog suddenly cleared, and a little
man appeared on the brink of the bog. He threw a rope to the harper,
who, after a great struggle, fastened it round his body under the arms.
The little man pulled and pulled and gradually drew the harper out of
the mire. He took him to a house blazing with light hard by, where there
was singing and dancing and much revelry. The harper was given fine
clean clothes, and after drinking a flagon of delicious mead he
recovered sufficiently from the fright which the fall into the bog had
given him to join in the festivity which was going on. There was a
little lady there whom the company addressed as Olwen. She was the most
beautiful little lady that the harper had ever seen and the best dancer.
With her he danced hour after hour, and the only bitter in his cup of
sweet was the thought that his beloved harp was in the slimy blackness
of the Gors. When the whole company retired to rest he was put in a bed
as soft as the softest down, and he thought he had reached a very heaven
of delight.

But next morning he was awakened, not by a kiss from Olwen, but by the
Plas Drain shepherd's dog licking his lips: he found himself lying by
the wall of a sheepfold, and there was no trace of the house in which he
had spent such a happy night. His clothes were all caked with bog mud,
and his harp, which was in a clump of rushes at his feet, was black with
the same defilement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Pwca of the Trwyn](wfb67.md)
