[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wfb76)  [Next](wfb78) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hu Gadarn

<span id="img_27"></span> ![](img/27.jpg)

THE race of the Cymry have not always dwelt in the Isle of Britain. In
the dim past they inhabited the Summer Country called Deffrobani. While
they sojourned there a great benefactor arose among them, to whom the
name of Hu Gadarn, Hu the Mighty, was given. He invented the plough, and
taught them to cultivate the ground. He divided them into communities,
and gave them laws, whereby fighting and contention were lessened. Under
his guidance they left the Summer Country, and crossing the Mor Tawch in
coracles came to the Isle of Britain, and took possession of it under
the protection of God and His peace. Before that time no one lived
therein, but it was full of bears, wolves, beavers, and bannog oxen; no
one, therefore, has a right to the Isle of Britain but the Cymry, for
they first settled in it. They gave to it the name of the Honey Island,
on account of the great quantity of honey they found (Britain is a later
name). Hu ruled them with justice, establishing wise regulations and
religious rites, and those who through God's grace had received poetic
genius were made teachers of wisdom. Through their songs, history and
truth were preserved throughout the ages until the art of writing was
discovered.

Some time after they came to the Honey Island, the Cymry were much
troubled by a monster called an afanc, which broke the banks of Llyn
Llion, in which it dwelt, and flooded their lands. No spear, dart, or
arrow made any impression upon its hide, so Hu Gadarn resolved to drag
it from its abode and to place it where it could do no harm. A girl
enticed it from its watery haunt, and while it slept with its head on
her knees it was bound with long iron chains. When it woke and perceived
what had been done, it got up, and, tearing off its sweetheart's breast
in revenge, hurried to its old refuge. But the chains were fastened to
Hu Gadarn's team of bannog oxen, which pulled it out of the lake and
dragged it through the mountains to Llyn y Ffynnon Las, the Lake of the
Green Well, in Cwm Dyli, in Snowdonia. A pass through which they
laboured has ever since been called Bwlch Rhiw'r Ychen, the Pass of the
Slope of the Oxen. One of the oxen dropped one of its eyes through its
exertions in this defile, and the place is styled Gwaun Llygad Ych, the
Moor of the Ox's Eye. A pool was formed where the eye fell, which is
known as Pwll Llygad Ych, the Pool of the Ox's Eye; this pool is never
dry, though no water rises in it or flows into it except when rain
falls, and no water flows out of it, but it is always of the same depth,
reaching just to the knee-joint.

The afanc could not burst the banks of the Lake of the Green Well, but
it is still dangerous to go near it. If a sheep falls into the lake it
is at once dragged down to the bottom, and it is not safe even for a
bird to fly across it.

<span id="img_09"></span> ![](img/09.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Devil's Bridge](wfb78)
