[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb78)  [Next](wfb80.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Martyred Hound

PRINCE LLYWELYN had a favourite, greyhound named Gelert that had been
given him by his father-in-law, King John of England. He was as gentle
as a lamb at home, but a lion in the chase, so true and so brave that he
had no equal in the whole of his master's dominion. He fed only at
Llywelyn's board and sentinelled Llywelyn's bed.

One fine morning the Prince determined to go to the chase, and blew his
horn in front of the castle. All his other hounds came to the call, but
Gelert did not answer it. He blew a louder blast on his horn and
shouted, "Come, Gelert, come," saying to his huntsman that it was
strange that Gelert should be the last to hear his horn. But still the
greyhound did not come, and the chase had to ride on without him.

Llywelyn enjoyed the chase of hart and hare through the vales of Snowdon
but little that day, and the booty proved scant and small because Gelert
was not there. Disappointed and displeased he turned back to his castle,
and as he came to the gate whom should he see but Gelert bounding out to
greet him. When the hound came near him the Prince was startled to see
that he was smeared all over with gore, and that his lips and fangs were
dripping with blood. Llywelyn gazed at him with fierce surprise, and the
greyhound crouched and licked his feet, as if surprised or afraid at the
way his master received his greeting.

Now, Llywelyn had a little son about two years old with whom Gelert used
to play, and the thought that the hound seemed guilty of something or
other made him hurry towards the child's nursery, Gelert following at
his heels. Entering, he saw the floor and walls besprent with recent
blood, and, worst of all, the child's cradle was overturned; the
coverlet was torn and all was daubed with blood. Llywelyn called his
son, but no voice replied: he searched for him, wild with terror, but
nowhere could he find him. He jumped to the conclusion that Gelert had
destroyed his boy, and shouting, "Hell-hound, thou hast devoured my
child," the frantic father drew his sword and plunged it to the hilt in
the greyhound's side, who fell with a deep groan, gazing piteously in
his master's eyes. Gelert's dying groan was answered by a little child's
cry from beneath the overturned cradle. There concealed beneath a
tumbled heap which he had missed in his hurried search, Llywelyn found
his little son unharmed and glowing from his rosy sleep. Just beside him
lay the body of a great, gaunt wolf, all torn to pieces and stiff in
death. Too late, Llywelyn realised what had happened while he was at the
chase: Gelert had fought and slain the wolf which had come to destroy
Llywelyn's heir.

In vain was all Llywelyn's grief: he could not bring his faithful hound
to life again. So he buried him and raised a noble tomb over his bones,
repenting his rashness with many tears. He could never bear the thought
of the chase after this, and hung his horn and hunting spear at Gelert's
grave. To this day the place is called Bedd Gelert, or the Grave of
Gelert, and if you go there you will be shown the spot where the remains
of the martyred hound lie.

<span id="img_03"></span> ![](img/03.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Twm of the Fair Lies](wfb80.md)
