[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wfb71)  [Next](wfb73.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Syfaddon Lake

SYFADDON LAKE was once a beautiful estate belonging to a great lady. A
young warrior from Brecon, of gentle birth but no fortune, loved her,
but she would not marry him because he was poor. He, prizing her more
than the welfare of his soul, met a rich merchant in a lonely spot and
murdered him. Then, showing his lady love the gold and gems which he had
taken from the body of his victim, he again asked her to be his wife.
This time she consented. She was, however, curious to know how he had
procured his wealth, though she did not care whether honestly or
otherwise, and he told her. "Have you buried the corpse?" she asked.
"No," said he. "You must go this night," she said, "and inter it:
otherwise his kindred will find out that you have slain him, and they
will avenge his blood."

The young warrior returned to the place where he had committed the foul
deed and began to dig a grave. While he was delving he heard a loud
voice proclaiming "Vengeance will come." Three times the warning was
sounded, the second time more loudly than the first, and the third time
in a voice like thunder. He threw down his spade in terror, and, flying
to his lady love, told her what he had heard. "You must go back," she
said, "and if you hear the voice again, ask when the punishment will
fall." He obeyed, and this time he was allowed to bury the body in
peace, but as he was turning homewards the dread voice again cried
aloud, "Vengeance will come." The murderer plucked up courage to ask
when. "In the lifetime of thy grandsons, great-grandsons, ascensors, and
their children," was the answer. When he told his lady, "There is no
reason for us to fear," said she; "we shall be under the mould long
before."

The murderer and the lady felt safe enough, and their marriage was
celebrated. They had sons and daughters who in their turn married and
had children. These children multiplied, and the family became very
numerous, until at last a descendant of the sixth direct generation was
born. By this time the original pair were very old; but exulting in
their prosperity (for they had flourished like the green bay-tree), they
said one to the other, "We are great, rich and powerful, and our family
is very numerous. We have lived according to our heart's delight, and
have tasted of all the pleasures that life can give. Let us, before we
die, make a great and splendid feast to all our family, and make merry
with them before we bid them farewell."

A great and splendid feast was made, but when all the generations of the
family were banqueting together, and the gaiety and mirth were at their
height, the ground that was under them clave asunder and the earth
opened and swallowed them up. Not one soul of them escaped, and a deluge
of water overspread the place.

<span id="img_06"></span> ![](img/06.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Power of St Tegla's Well](wfb73.md)
