[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wcs04)  [Next](wcs06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

# CHAPTER III.

### CANON LAW.

    The earliest Saxon laws were almost entirely ecclesiastical,<span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) their basis seeming to have been payment of
titles to the Church and support of the pope through what was known as
the "hearth penny" to St. Peter. Marriage was by no means allowed to
escape general ecclesiastical control, its legitimacy being made to
depend upon the sanction and services of a priest.<span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md) This we learn from Reeves, whose authority
is indisputable,<span id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3.md) therefore we discover
that even long before marriage was constituted one of the sacraments,
celibacy or the confessional established, the Church had perceived the
great increase in its authority to be brought about by gaining control
of the marriage ceremony and making its legitimacy depend upon the
services of a priest. This was a material step

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

towards the subjugation of mankind; one whose die consequences have not
yet received due consideration. When Rome became a Christian State, and
the phallic cross triumphed over the gods and goddesses of old, the
condition of woman under the civil law became more degraded. The change
from ancient civilization to that renewed barbarism at an early age of
the Christian era, which so many writers note without perceiving its
cause, is to be found in the low conception of womanhood inculcated by
the Church.

    Ignorance, superstition, falsehood and forgery united in creating
new codes of law, new customs of society, new habits of thought, which,
having for centuries been imposed upon mankind by the united force of
the Church and the State, still continue their impress upon modern life
and law.

    Among general canons we find that "No woman may approach the altar."
"A woman may not baptize without extreme necessity." "Woman may not
receive the Eucharist under a black veil." "Woman may not receive the
Eucharist in *morbo suo menstrule*."

    At the Synod or Council of Elvira,<span id="fr_4"></span>[4](#fn_4.md)
305 or 306, several restrictive canons were formulated against woman.
Under Canon 81, she was forbidden to write in her own name to lay
Christians, but only in the name of her husband. Women were not to
receive letters of friendship from any one addressed only to themselves.

    From the commencement of the fifth century, the Christian clergy
acquired a powerful influence in Rome. Bishops and priests were the
municipal magistrates of the Roman Empire, of which little now remained
except its municipal government; thus the Church in

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

reality became Rome, and Rome the Church. It has been declared difficult
to fix with precision the period at which ecclesiastics first began to
claim exemption from civil jurisdiction. The Synod of Paris, 615, seems
to have secured to the clergy the privilege of being brought before
mixed tribunals in all cases which had theretofore belonged to the civil
judge alone. Bishops acquired greater power from having an oversight
over the whole administration of justice committed to them, while their
spiritual judgments were rendered more effective by the addition of
excommunication to civil punishments. The State, at first holding
repression over the Church, added to its powers by relieving the clergy
from all civil duties,<span id="fr_5"></span>[5](#fn_5.md) thus tending to
make of them a body exterior to the civil government. This division was
farther increased through the emperors giving confirmation to the
decisions pronounced by bishops in ecclesiastical affairs, and also when
they were chosen umpires in civil suits; the tendency of this action was
towards the creation of an ecclesiastical law with separate powers from
the civil law. Another step towards the separation of civil from
ecclesiastical law and the supremacy of the latter, was made when in
cases of discipline the clergy were allowed to come under the authority
and supervision of the Spiritual Courts.<span
id="fr_6"></span>[6](#fn_6.md)

    As soon as Christianity became the religion of the State, this power
was still farther increased by the permission accorded ecclesiastics to
accept gifts, inherit and hold property; the purity of clerical motives
being thereby greatly lessened, as covetous and unscrupulous

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

persons were forthwith attracted to this profession. The law of tithes
was introduced by Charlemagne, and his edicts largely increased clerical
power. The compilation of a Code of Canon Law was begun as early as the
ninth century,<span id="fr_7"></span>[7](#fn_7.md) by which period the
olden acknowledged rights of the clergy, those of superintending morals
and interference on behalf of the unfortunate, had largely been lost
sight of, or diverted from their proper course by a system of
ecclesiastical tyranny which created an order of morals, whose sole
design was that of building up priestly power.

    The complete inferiority and subordination of the female sex was
maintained both by civil and common law. It was a principle of common
law that sons should be admitted to an inheritance before
daughters.<span id="fr_8"></span>[8](#fn_8.md) This distinction created by
the Church in the interests of the class which was alone admitted to the
priesthood, thus placing the possession of wealth in the hands of man,
did much towards keeping woman in a subordinate condition. In accordance
with natural law, the person not owning property is less interested in
the welfare of the State than the one possessing it, a denial of the
rights of ownership acting prejudicially upon the individual.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

    Ecclesiastical or Canon Law<span id="fr_9"></span>[9](#fn_9.md) made
its greatest encroachments at the period when Chivalry<span
id="fr_10"></span>[10](#fn_10.md) was at its height; the outward show of
respect and honor to woman under chivalry keeping pace in its false
pretence with the destruction of her legal rights. The general
conception in regard to woman was so degraded at this period that a
"Community of Women" was proposed, to whom all men should act in the
relation of husbands.<span id="fr_11"></span>[11](#fn_11.md) This plan was
advocated by Jean de Meting, the "Poet of Chivalry," in his famous
*Roman de la Rose*. Christine of Pisa, a woman of learning and
remarkable force of character, the first strictly literary woman of
western Europe, wrote a work in defense of her sex against the general
libidinous character of the age.<span id="fr_12"></span>[12](#fn_12.md) Her
opposition to the debasing theories of the "Romance" marks the later
period of woman's entrance into literature, and is an era from which
dates the modern intellectual development of Europe.<span
id="fr_13"></span>[13](#fn_13.md) Efforts to utterly crush the moral
rectitude

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

of women through the adoption of those base ideas of phallic origin,
having been the systematic course of the Church, the State and society
through many hundred years, it is a most notable proof of her innate
disbelief in this teaching, that woman's first literary work of modern
times was written in opposition to such a powerfully sustained theory as
to her innate depravity. Christine asserted the common humanity of
woman, entirely repudiating the sensual ideas of the times.

    To the credit of mankind it must be recorded that the laity did not
unresistingly yield to priestly power, but made many attempts to take
their temporal concerns from under priestly control. But under the
general paucity of education, and the abnegation of the will so
sedulously inculcated by the Church as the supreme duty of the laity,
its dread power brought to bear in the enforcement of its teaching by
terrifying threats of excommunication and future eternal torment, the
rights of even the male portion of the people were gradually lost. The
control of the priesthood over all things of a temporal as well as of a
spiritual nature, tended to make them a distinct body from the laity. In
pursuance of its aims for universal dominion, the Church saw the
necessity of assuming control of temporal affairs. Rights were divided
into those pertaining to persons and things; the rights of persons
belonged to the priesthood alone, but inasmuch as every man, whatever
his condition, could become a priest, and no woman however learned or
pious or high in station could be admitted to its ranks, the whole
tendency of ecclesiastical law was to divide mankind into a holy or
divine sex, and an unholy or impious one.<span
id="fr_14"></span>[14](#fn_14.md) Thus Canon Law still farther separated

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

those whose interests were the same, creating an antagonism in the minds
of all men against all women, which bearing upon all business of
ordinary life between men and women, fell with its greatest weight upon
women. It corrupted the Common Law of England, and perverted the civil
codes of other nations. Under Canon Law wives were deprived of the
control of both person and property, while sisters were not allowed to
inherit with brothers; property, according to old ecclesiastical
language, going "to the worthiest of blood." Blackstone acknowledges
that this distinction between brothers and sisters reflects shame upon
England, and was no part of the old Roman law, under which the children
of a family inherited equally without distinction of sex.<span
id="fr_15"></span>[15](#fn_15.md) It was as late as 1879 before the Canon
Law in regard to the sole inheritance of sons was repealed in one of the
Swiss Cantons. The influence of this law in creating selfishness was
manifested by the opposition it met, brothers piteously asserting ruin
to themselves by this act of justice to their sisters. Whenever the
Canon Law is analyzed it is found destructive to the higher moral
sentiments of humanity. A woman was prohibited the priesthood, and as
the property of men entering orders became forfeited to the Church, the
real intent of this law--that of obtaining control of property--which
otherwise might have escaped the grasping hand of, the church, is easily
discernible. From its first theory Of woman's inferiority to its last
struggle for power at the present day, the influence and action of the
Patriarchate is clearly seen. The touch of the Church upon family life,
inheritance and education, increased the Power of the Patriarchate.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

    As celibacy proved a lucrative method of bringing wealth into its
coffers, so marriage was early made a source of revenue to the Church,
Canon Law creating it a sacrament to be performed at the church door.
Owing, however, to the innate sinfulness of marriage, this sacrament was
not for many years allowed to take place within the sacred building
dedicated to God, and deemed too holy to permit the entrance of a woman
within its sacred walls at certain periods of her life. In order to
secure full control of this relation marriage unblessed by a priest was
declared to be concubinage, and carried with it deprivation of church
privileges, which the ignorance of the people held to be of vital
importance. In entering this relation the wife was compelled to
relinquish her name, her property, the control of her person, her own
sacred individuality, and to promise obedience to her husband in all
things. Certain hours of the day to suit the convenience of priests were
set aside as canonical, after which time no marriage could be
celebrated.

    Nor has this priestly control of marriage been confined to the
Catholics alone. Similar laws were extant after the Reformation. In
England 1603, Canon 62 instituted that under penalty of suspension
people could not marry except between the hours of eight and twelve in
the forenoon, nor was marriage then allowed in any private place but
must be performed at the church door.<span
id="fr_16"></span>[16](#fn_16.md) The rapid growth of the Canon Law in
England must be ascribed to avarice; the denial to wives of any right of
property in the marital union being an example. At this period Canon Law

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

began to take cognizance of crimes, establishing an equivalent in money
for every species of wrong doing. The Church not only remitted penalty
for crimes already committed, but sold indulgences for the commission of
new ones. Its touch soon extended to all relations of life. Marriages
within the seventh degree were forbidden by the Church as
incestuous,<span id="fr_17"></span>[17](#fn_17.md) but to those able to pay
for such indulgences a dispensation for such "incestuous" marriage was
readily granted. No crime so great it could not be condoned for money.
Thus through Canon Law was seen the anomaly of legal marriage between
the laity pronounced concubinage, while the concubines of priests were
termed "wives." As soon as the legality of marriage was made dependent
upon priestly sanction the door of gross immorality was widely
opened.<span id="fr_18"></span>[18](#fn_18.md) All restrictions connected
with this relation were made to fall with heaviest weight upon woman.
Husbands were secured the right of separation for causes not freeing
wives; even the adultery of the husband was not deemed sufficient cause
unless he brought his mistress into the same house with his wife.<span
id="fr_19"></span>[19](#fn_19.md)Church and State sustained each other.
Conviction of the husband for a capital crime gave the wife no release
from the marriage bond, yet in case of the husband's treason, his
innocent wife and children were robbed of all share in the estate of the
criminal husband and father and were reduced to beggary, his estate
escheating to the State.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

As under civil law so under ecclesiastical, the Church recognized but
slight difference in the guilt of a contumacious husband and that of his
pious wife and children." It was a principle of the Church that the
innocent must suffer for the guilty, especially when the innocent were
women and children powerless to aid themselves. At its every step Canon
Law injured woman. The clergy assuming to be an order of spiritual
beings, claimed immunity from civil law and allowed for themselves an
"arrest of judgment" ultimately enlarged so as to include all male
persons who could read and write. This arrest known as "benefit of
clergy" was denied to all women, who were liable to sentence of death
for the first crime of simple larceny, bigamy, etc.<span
id="fr_21"></span>[21](#fn_21.md) Men who by virtue of sex could become
priests if able to read, were for the same crimes punished by simple
branding in the hand, or a few months imprisonment, while a woman was
drawn and burned alive. Did not history furnish much proof of this
character it would be impossible to believe that such barbaric injustice
was part of English law down to the end of the eighteenth century. Woman
first rendered ineligible to the priesthood, was then punished for this
ineligibility.

Blackstone recognizes as among the remarkable legal events of the
kingdom, the great alteration in the laws through the separation of
ecclesiastical courts from the civil. Matrimonial causes, or injuries
respecting the rights of marriage are recognized by him as quite an
undisturbed branch of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, from the Church
having so early converted this

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

contract into a sacramental ordinance.<span
id="fr_22"></span>[22](#fn_22.md) During many centuries education was
denied to woman in Christian countries for reasons connected with her
ineligibility to the priesthood. The art of reading is by scholars
believed to have been one of the ancient mysteries taught at Eleusis and
other olden temples; learning, then, as at later periods, was in the
hands of priests; therefore the fact of being able to read was
synonymous with the right of entering the priesthood. This right
appertained to women in many ancient nations even under the
Patriarchate. Higgins shows that the word *Liber* from which our words
liberty, freedom, are derived, is one and the same as liber, a book, and
had close connection with the intellectual, literary, and priestly
class. As under Christian doctrine the priesthood was denied to woman,
so under the same rule learning was prohibited to her.<span
id="fr_23"></span>[23](#fn_23.md) To permit woman's education under
Christianity would have been a virtual concession of her right to the

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

priesthood. In not allowing her "benefit of clergy" the priests were but
consistent with themselves and their pretensions as to the superior
holiness of the male sex. That a woman should be burned alive for a
crime whose only punishment for a man was a few months imprisonment, was
in unison with the whole teaching of the Christian Church regarding
woman. Under Canon Law many of the shields theretofore thrown about
women were removed. Punishment for crimes against them lessened, while
crimes committed by them were more severely punished. Rape, which in
early English history was termed felony, its penalty, death, was
regarded in a less heinous light under clerical rule.

    Under the political constitutions of the Saxons, bishops had seats
in the national council and all laws were prefaced by a formal
declaration of their consent. By their influence it became a general law
that a woman could never take of an inheritance with a man, unless
perhaps by the particular And ancient customs of some cities or towns;
while daughters at a father's death could be left totally unprovided
for. A law was enacted in the reign of Edward VI. that no son should be
passed over in his father's will unless disinherited in plain terms and
a just cause given. In case of daughters, sex was deemed "a just cause"
for leaving them in poverty. The earlier laws of the Danish Knut, or
Canute, show that the estate was then divided among all the children.
Under Canon Law, the testimony of a woman was not received in a court of
justice. She was depicted by the Church as the source of all evil, the
mother of every ill.<span id="fr_24"></span>[24](#fn_24.md) Legislation had

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

the apparent aim of freeing the clergy from all responsibility to the
civil or moral law, and placing the weight of every sin or crime upon
woman.

    A council at Tivoli in the Soissainanes, A. D. 909, presided over by
twelve bishops, promulgated a Canon requiring the oath of seven persons
to convict a priest with having lived with a woman; if their oath failed
of clearing him he was allowed to justify himself upon Ills sole oath.
Under Canon Law a woman could not bring an accusation unless prosecuted
for an injury done to herself. It is less than thirty years since this
law was extant in Scotland; and as late as 1878, that through the
influence of Signor Morelli the Italian Parliament repealed the old
restriction existant in that country regarding woman's testimony. Under
Canon Law a woman could not be witness in ecclesiastical or criminal
suits, nor attest a will.<span id="fr_25"></span>[25](#fn_25.md) To cast
doubts upon a person's word is indicative of the most supreme contempt,
importing discredit to the whole character. That a woman was not allowed
to attest a will, nor become a witness in ecclesiastical suits, implied
great degradation and is a very strong proof of the low esteem in which
woman was held both by State and Church. That a priest could clear
himself upon his own unsubstantiated oath is equally significative of
the respect in which this office was held, as well as showing the degree
in which all law was made to shield man and degrade woman. When we find
the oath of seven Women required to nullify that of one layman, we need
no stronger testimony as to woman's inequality before the law. Canonists
laid down the law for all matters of a temporal nature whether civil or
criminal. The buying and selling of lands; leasing, mortgaging,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

contracts; the descent of inheritance; the prosecution, and punishment
of murder; theft; detection of thieves; frauds; those and many other
objects of temporal jurisdiction were provided for by Canon Law. it was
intended that the clergy should come entirely under its action, governed
as a distinct people from the laity. The principal efforts of the Canon
Law towards which all its enactments tended, was the subordination of
woman<span id="fr_26"></span>[26](#fn_26.md) and the elevation of the
hierarchy. To secure these two ends the church did not hesitate at
forgery. For many hundred years a collection of Decretals, or what were
claimed as decrees of the early popes, carried great authority, although
later investigation has proven them forgeries.<span
id="fr_27"></span>[27](#fn_27.md) Civil as well as ecclesiastical laws were
forged in the interest of the priesthood; a noted instance, was the once
famous law of Constantine which endowed bishops with unlimited power,
giving them jurisdiction in all kinds of causes. This law declared that
whatever is determined by the judgment of bishops shall always be held
as sacred and venerable, and that in all kinds of causes whether they
are tried according to the pastoral or civil law that it is law to be
forever observed by all.

    The famous Seldon known as the "Light of England," declares it to
have been "a prodigious and monstrous jurisdiction" assumed by the
priestly order, by means

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

of falsehood and forgery.<span id="fr_28"></span>[28](#fn_28.md) The two
classes of temporal affairs that Spiritual Courts especially endeavored
to appropriate, were marriages, and wills, with everything bearing upon
them. In these the greatest oppression fell upon women.<span
id="fr_29"></span>[29](#fn_29.md) Canon Law gradually acquired enormous
power through the control it gained over wills, the guardianship of
orphans, marriage, and divorce.<span id="fr_30"></span>[30](#fn_30.md) As
soon as ecclesiastical courts were divided from the temporal in
England,<span id="fr_31"></span>[31](#fn_31.md) a new set of principles and
maxims began to prevail. This was one of the first effects of the
Conquest, but in 1272, Robert Kilmandy, Dean of Canterbury, gave
directions for the restoration and observation of the ancient and
neglected laws of Ecclesiastical Courts; of these the Court of Arches
was one of the most ancient. It is almost impossible to fix the date of
ecclesiastical rule, unless indeed we go back to the very foundation of
the church. As noted, the early Saxons were largely governed by their
priests. In

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

615, at the Paris synod, the clergy were given authority in matters
theretofore under civil power, while in England we find priestly power
to have been great during the fourth and fifth centuries. Bracton sets
the one hundred and fifty years between the middle of the twelfth and
end of the thirteenth centuries as the period when this power took its
greatest strides. At this time it touched upon wills, inheritance,
bequests, the legitimacy of children, the marriage relation, and all
family concerns, having broken over many securities of the common law.
This period covers the establishment of celibacy with the trains of
evils noted in the preceding chapter, when the marriage of priests was
declared invalid, their wives branded as immoral persons, and stain of
illegitimacy thrown upon their children. Despite the guarantees of the
Runnymede Charter, and the religious rebellion of the Eighth Henry,
despite the vigor of Elizabeth who bent both priest and prelate to her
fiery will, the influence of this period moved down in line with the
Reformation, and to the injury of woman, successfully incorporated its
worst features into the common law; the new church, social and family
life all partaking of this injustice. A great number of canons were
enacted after the reformation. These, together with the foreign canons
which had been adopted, were held as part of the law of England.<span
id="fr_32"></span>[32](#fn_32.md) The Episcopal church appropriated
numerous canons extant at time of the reformation, several of these
having been created for purpose of sustaining the church at a period
when the temporal power threatened encroachment.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

The archdeacon of Surrey prepared a voluminous work upon this subject
known as the Jurus,<span id="fr_33"></span>[33](#fn_33.md) proving that
these canons, decrees, etc., when falling into disuse had been
established by act of Parliament, as part of the law of England The
preface of his work declared that it had been prepared purely for the
service of the clergy, and in support of the rights and privileges of
the Church. Thus we have direct proof of the adoption of papal decrees
as part of the government of the Protestant Episcopal church,--the
Anglican--and also as part of English law.

An act of Parliament at this age was regarded as synonymous with a law
of God. The Bible and the English government were upon the same plane,
each to be implicitly obeyed.<span id="fr_34"></span>[34](#fn_34.md) Canon
Law thus firmly established by act of Parliament, the union of Church
and State complete, England lost much of that civil freedom whose origin
can be traced to the wise legislation and love of freedom inhering in
two British queens, Martia and Boadicea. Suffering from cruel wrong, the
latter rose in revolt against the Romans. Riding among the squadrons of
her army she thus addressed them:

    It will not be the first time, Britons, that you have

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

been victorious under the conduct of your queen. I come not here as one
of royal blood, to fight for empire or riches, but as one of the common
people to avenge the loss of their liberty, the wrongs of myself and my
children. If you Britons will but consider the motives of our war, you
will resolve to conquer or die. Is it not much better to fall in the
defense of liberty than to be exposed to the outrages of the Romans?
Such at least is my resolution, you may it you please live and be
slaves.

    But many historians date the entire subordination of the common law
to ecclesiasticism, to the reign of Stephen, who ascended to the throne
1135, the fourth of the Anglo-Norman kings. In order to keep the ranks
of the church full, the bearing of children was enforced upon women as a
religious duty. No condition of health or distaste for motherhood was
admitted as exemption. Alike from the altar, the confessional, and at
the marital ceremony,<span id="fr_35"></span>[35](#fn_35.md) was this duty
taught, nor has such instruction even under the light of physiology and
new regard for personal rights, yet ceased.<span
id="fr_36"></span>[36](#fn_36.md) No less is the unresisting subjection of
women in this relation indirectly or directly enforced by the Protestant
and the Greek churches as the law of the Bible and God. 'Increase and
multiply'<span id="fr_37"></span>[37](#fn_37.md) has been the first
commandment for woman, held as far more binding upon her than the "Ten
Words" of Mount Sinai. Proof exists in abundance of a character
impossible to present in this work.

    Under the general absence of learning and the equally general
reverence for whatever emanated from the church, minor ecclesiastics
found it in their power

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

to promulgate doctrines to suit every new set of circumstances; thus
many laws aside from regularly promulgated canons, came from time to
time into force. When once applied they assumed all the power of custom
and soon bore all the force of common law. The evils of ecclesiastical
law were soon increased through the unsparing use of forgery and
falsehood. Lea says:

    In the remodeling of European Institutions, so necessary to the
interests of Christianity and civilization, one of the most efficient
agencies was the collection of Canons known as the False Decretals.
Forgery was by no means a novel expedient to the church. From the
earliest times orthodox and heretics had rivalled each other in the
manufacture of whatever documents were necessary to substantiate their
respective positions whether in faith or discipline. An examination of
these Decretals tends to the conclusion that they were not the result of
one effort or the work of one man Their constant repetitions and their
frequent contradiction would seem to prove this, and to show that they
were manufactured from to time to time to meet the exigencies of the
moment or to gratify the feelings of the writers. Interpolated into
codes of law, adopted and amplified in the canons of councils and the
decretals of popes, they speedily became part of the civil and
ecclesiastical policy of Europe, leaving traces on the constitutions
which they afflicted for centuries \* \* The pretenses and privileges
which they conferred on the hierarchy became the most dearly prized and
frequently quoted portions of the Canon Law. In each struggle with the
temporal authority, it was the arsenal from which were drawn the most
effective weapons, and after each struggle the sacerdotal combatants had
higher vantage ground for the ensuing conflict \* \* \* theories of
ecclesiastical superiority which left so profound an impress on the
middle ages and which have in no slight degree molded our modern
civilization.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

    Even Magna Charta strengthened Canon Law, confirming many liberties
of the Church, and injuring women by prohibiting appeal to them unless
for the death of their husbands. While the general tenor of the church
was against marriage, an unmarried woman unless dedicating her life to
the church was, regarded with more contempt than the married. To be
under control of a husband was looked upon as the normal condition of
women not living celibate lives. Consequently women were driven into
marriage or monastic houses,<span id="fr_38"></span>[38](#fn_38.md) and no
reproach so great as the term "old maid." The influence of custom is
nowhere more discernible than in Blackstone himself. The great
commentator while fully admitting the blending of Canon with Common law,
also acknowledging its most prejudicial effects to have fallen upon
woman, yet attempts to prove that the liberties of the English people
were not infringed through ecclesiasticism. He is so entirely permeated
with the church doctrine of woman's created inferiority as not to be
willing to acknowledge the infringement of her natural liberty through
it, although at the same time he declares that "whosoever would fully
understand the Canon Law must study Common Law in respect to woman."
Such benumbing of the moral faculties through her doctrines is among the
greatest wrongs perpetrated by the church upon mankind. Nor is it alone
in regard to woman. During the Franco-Prussian war a writer declared the
great and absolute need of the French people to be education; that of
moral character there was absolutely none, either in the higher or lower
classes. Even the sons of aristocratic families educated in Jesuit
schools, being at most taught that

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

wrong can only be measured by a formal religious standard, and that
every wrong can be wiped out by confession to the priest. French
education, this writer declared to be that of two centuries ago, when
might was looked upon as identical with justice. Nor can morality be
taught while its basis in the church remains the same.

    The priestly profession held the most brilliant promises of
gratified ambition to every man that entered it. Not alone did he
possess the keys of heaven and hell, but also those of temporal power.
The laity were his Obedient servants upon which he could impose penance
and from whose coffers wealth could be made to flow into his own.
Through long continued false teaching the people believed their fate in
both worlds more fully depended upon the priesthood than upon their own
course in life, God having deputed a share of his power to every priest
and monk, no matter how debased; and that when be spoke it was not
himself, but God, through his lips, as asserted by the priesthood
themselves. This impious assertion so capable as shown of being used for
the most tyrannous purposes, came also into the Reformation, and is even
heard from the lips of Protestant clergymen to-day.<span
id="fr_39"></span>[39](#fn_39.md) Denied recognition of a right to decide
for themselves whether the priest spoke from God, or from his own
ambitious and iniquitous Purposes, deprived of education as well as of
free thought,--the latter a crime to be punished with death after the
Most diabolical torture,--it is not a subject of surprise

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

that the majority of the christian world was a prey to the vilest
superstition. The claim of infallibility, which may be unsuccessfully
combated when urged by a single individual, became all-potent when
advanced by a large powerfully organized and widely distributed class
under guise of religion, into which the element of fear largely entered.
No salvation outside of the church was a fundamental doctrine of that
body. Hell was declared not to be peopled alone by the heathen, but by
christian heretics, and the excommunicated who had died without
obtaining forgiveness from the Church. These were depicted as in eternal
torments of a more terrible character than even those whom birth had
left ignorant of the plan of salvation. The strength of the church Jay
in its control of the conscience and the will. Upon the State it
fastened double bonds; *first*, by its control of each individual
member; *second*, in its capacity of secular ruler. Long before the days
of Torquemada and Ximenes, the Inquisition had practically been brought
to every man's door. The imagination, that faculty that in its
perfection constitutes the happiness of mankind, was made the implement
of excessive mental torture. Common Law as it exists to-day is the
outgrowth of Ecclesiastical or Canon Law touching upon all the relations
of life but falling with heaviest weight upon woman, as Blackstone so
frankly admits.<span id="fr_40"></span>[40](#fn_40.md) From the X. to the
XVI. centuries is the period when the features of the Canon Law most
derogatory to woman became thoroughly incorporated into English common
law, since which period the complete inferiority and subordination of
woman has been as fully maintained by the State as by the Church.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

    Common Law in not alone English law, it is the basic law of the
United States. Chancellor Kent said of it, "Common Law is part of the
fundamental law of the United States." It has been recognized and
adopted as one entire system by the constitutions of Massachusetts, New
York, New Jersey and Maryland. It has been assumed by courts of justice,
or declared by statute, as the law of the land in every State, although
its influence upon the criminal codes of England and the United States
has but recently attracted the attention of legal minds. Wharton whose
"Criminal Law" has been for years a standard work, did not examine this
relation until its seventh edition. in the preface to this edition he
gave a copious array of authors in English, German, Latin, in proof that
the criminal codes of those two countries are permanently based upon
Ecclesiastical Law.

    An early council of Carthage thus ordained:

    "Let not a woman however learned or holy presume to teach a man in a
public assembly." To this Canon may be ascribed the obstacles thrown in
the way of women even during the present century, who have come before
the world as public teachers in the pulpit, at the bar, in medicine, or
the more customary branches of instruction. Advancing civilization of
the present century is still hampered by the laws of an imperfect
church, enacted many hundred years since. The trial of Mistress Anne
Hutchinson in New England, during the XVII. Century, was chiefly for the
sin of having taught men.

    All modern legislation can be referred to the church for its origin
although most especially **noticeable** in reference to women legislated
for as a class, distinct and separate from men. Under Church laws, the
humble,

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

the ignorant, the helpless have been the most oppressed, because of
their powerlessness, but upon no part of humanity has this oppression so
heavily fallen as upon her whom the church has declared to be the author
of all the misery of human life." The laws of bastardy and illegitimacy
still extant in Christian countries which decree that a child born
outside of marriage shall be known by its mother's name and she alone
responsible for its support, and which do not allow it to inherit its
putative father's property even when he acknowledges the child as his
own, are of ecclesiastical origin. Enacted by the Church in its most
powerful days, as protection to a celibate priesthood against all claim
by mother or child, they are still a reminder of the Matriarchate when
the sole right of the mother to the child was unquestioned. But under
Church ruling this law that the child should follow the condition of the
mother, herself but a slave, was the source of great injustice both to
women and to thousands of innocent children. Under feudalism and during
slavery the child of the feudal lord or powerful master by a serf woman,
became at birth subject to all the restrictions of the mother while the
father was freed from accountability of any nature. The Antonelli case
referred to in the second chapter, in which the Countess Lambertini
claimed heirship of Cardinal Antonelli's property as his daughter, was
decided against her not upon denial of her paternity which was most
fully proven, but because under church law

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

this daughter had no claim upon her priestly father. Under Canon Law she
was no more to be regarded as his child than as the child of any other
man. She was "fatherless." She was "A sacrilegious child" having
violated sacred things by coming into existence. Her "holy" father under
Canon Law was entirely irresponsible for her birth.<span
id="fr_42"></span>[42](#fn_42.md)

    The reformation proved itself in many ways as restrictive towards
woman as catholicism. The commencement of modern law dates to the reign
of Elizabeth,

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

who established the reformation upon a firm basis. The oppression of her
reign exceeded all that had been experienced under Catholicism. No
cottager in England was permitted to shelter his homeless mother or
sister under penalty<span id="fr_43"></span>[43](#fn_43.md) because, she
was "masterless." The greatest amount of legislation both religious and
secular under the Patriarchate has bad woman for its object, and this is
especially noticeable in all countries where Christianity has been the
dominant power, because she has not been regarded by the church as a
component part of humanity, but as an offshoot whose rights and
responsibility were entirely different from those of man. Although among
the Anglo-Saxons the priesthood possessed great influence yet after the
Norman Conquest ecclesiasticism gained much greater control in England,
and Canon Law began to influence legislation, as has been shown,
exercising its chief restrictive force upon woman. While under old
Common Law,<span id="fr_44"></span>[44](#fn_44.md) a husband was compelled
to leave his wife one-third of his property and could leave her as much
more as he pleased, by Canon Law be was prohibited from leaving her more
than one-third and could leave her as much less as he pleased. Thus
ecclesiasticism presumed to control a husband's affections and placing
its slimy fingers upon common law, allowed the husband to leave his wife
in absolute poverty, notwithstanding that her property upon marriage,
and her services under marriage, belonged

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

exclusively to him. As early as the twelfth century, Glanville laid it
down as a law of the British Kingdom that no one was compelled to leave
another person any portion of his property, and that the part usually
devised to wives was left them at the dictate of affection and not of
law. Thus early did the Church in England override Common Law to the
detriment of woman. While thus legislating in opposition to family
rights, the church continually favored its own increase of its own
property.<span id="fr_45"></span>[45](#fn_45.md) The world has produced no
system so thoroughly calculated to extend its own power and wealth, as
this vast celibate organization which, under the guise of religion,
appealed to man's superstition, and ruled his will under the assumption
of divine authority, the family being its chief objective point of
attack.

    While under feudalism his lord was to receive the best gift at the
villein's death, the church the second best, in time the demands of the
church overpowered those of the lord, as well as those of the family. So
rapacious did the church at last become in its demand for valuable gifts
and its claim of one third of a man's property upon his decease, that
the civil law ultimately interfered, not however in the interests of
wives, but of creditors. Canon Law nearly everywhere prevailed, having
its largest growth through the pious fiction of woman's created
inferiority. Wherever it became the basis of legislation, the laws of
succession and inheritance, and those in regard to children, constantly
sacrificed the interests of wives and daughters to those of husbands and
sons. Church legislation created

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

numerous and stringent enactments which rendered it impossible for woman
to succeed to any considerable amount of property, forcing her to entire
dependence upon man, either as a wife, or as a resident of a religious
house; thus she entirely lost the freedom possessed by her in pagan
Rome.<span id="fr_46"></span>[46](#fn_46.md)

    While under Canon Law the dower of the wife was forfeited by
attainder of the husband, yet the husband did not lose his right to the
wife's property in case she was attainted of treason. Under Canon Law if
for recognized just cause of the husband's cruelty the wife separated
from him, she was returned upon his demand provided he gave security for
treating her well.

    Canon Law gave to the husband the power of compelling the wife's
return if, for any cause, she left him. She was then at once in the
position of an outlaw, branded as a runaway who had left her master's
service, a wife who had left "bed and board" without consent,

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

and whom all persons were forbidden "to harbor" or shelter "under
penalty of the law." The absconding wife was in the position of an
excommunicate from the Catholic Church, or of a woman condemned as a
witch. Any person befriending her was held accessory to the wife's theft
of herself from her husband, and rendered liable to fine and other
punishment for having helped to rob the husband (master) of his wife
(slave). The present formula of advertising a wife, which so frequently
disgraces the press, is due to this belief in wife-ownership.

    Whereas my wife \* \* \* has left my bed and board without just
cause or provocation, I hereby forbid all persons from harboring or
trusting her on my account.

    By old English law, in case the wife was in danger of perishing in a
storm, it was allowable "to harbor" and shelter her. It is less than
fifty years since the dockets of a court in New York city, the great
metropolis of the United States, were sullied by the suit of a husband
against parties who had received, "harbored" and sheltered his wife
after she left him, the husband recovering $10,000 damages.

    In losing control, upon marriage, of her person and her property,
woman's condition became that of an infant. No act of hers was of legal
value. If she made a bargain her husband could repudiate it and the
person with whom she had contracted was held to have taken part in a
fraud. The denial under Common Law of her right to make a contract grew
out of the denial of her right of ownership. Not possessing control of
her inheritance or of her future actions, she was consequently held
unable to make a binding contract.<span id="fr_47"></span>[47](#fn_47.md)
Forbidden the right of acting for herself; deprived

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

of the ownership and control of her own property or earnings, woman had
little opportunity to prove her business capacity. Since the time of
Aristotle the control of property has been recognized as the basis of
social and responsible conditions. The great school of German
jurists<span id="fr_48"></span>[48](#fn_48.md) teach that ownership
increases both physical and moral capacity, and that as owner, actual,
or possible, man is a more capable and worthy being than he would
otherwise be.

    Inasmuch as through both the ecclesiastical and civil laws of
Christendom, woman was debarred from giving testimony in courts of law;
sisters prohibited from sharing a patrimony with brothers; wives
deprived of property rights both of inheritance and earnings, it is
entirely justifiable to say that even the boasted Common Law, that pride
of English speaking peoples, has greatly injured civilization through
its destruction of woman's property rights. Canon or Church laws were
enacted upon the principle of protection for men alone and upon these
civil laws gradually became wholly based. Herbert Spencer<span
id="fr_49"></span>[49](#fn_49.md) has not failed to recognize this fact in
England. No less in law than in religion is woman dealt with as a
secondary being, for whom equal religious rights or equal civil rights
are not designed. While under the Matriarchate justice and purity
prevailed, and the inherent rights of man were preserved, we find an
entirely contrary condition under the Patriarchate, that system enacting
laws solely with intent to man's interest regardless alike of mother,
sister, wife or daughter. The entire destruction under Canon and

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

civil law, of woman's property rights, has not alone lessened her
responsibility, but has also diminished her self-respect. As in common
with a child, or a slave, her business agreements were held as of no
binding force, she ultimately came to regard herself as incapable of
business transactions. In England until a very recent date, and in the
United States until when in 1839, Mississippi first placed the control
of her own property in a married woman's hands (to be followed in 1848,
by Pennsylvania, New York, and about the same period by Rhode Island),
it was in the husband's power in every part of christian Europe and
America, to repudiate any bargain, sale or gift made by the wife as of
no binding legal force, and this, even though she had brought the entire
property into the marital firm.<span id="fr_50"></span>[50](#fn_50.md)
Therefore under Christian laws the person with whom the wife made a
contract, or to whom she made a gift was held as a criminal, or
participant in a fraud. The wife under Canon Law belonged to the
husband, and as a sequence to not owning herself she could not own
property, and in her condition of servitude could possess no control
over either her present or her future actions. Such is Common Law warped
and changed by Canon Law.<span id="fr_51"></span>[51](#fn_51.md)

    Property is a delicate test of the condition of a nation. It is a
remarkable fact in history that the rights of property have everywhere
been recognized before

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

the rights of person. The American Revolution arose from an attack upon
property rights and although the Declaration of Independence assumed the
rights of person to be primal, this unique foundation for a system of
government has not yet fully been admitted in practice, and woman is
still denied its advantages and responsibilities. While the property
owner unwittingly becomes a hostage for the security of the state
itself, it needs governmental recognition of the rights of person, in
order to create firm self-reliance and a feeling of strength and
freedom. A proper self-respect cannot inhere in any person under
governmental control of others. Unless the person so governed constantly
maintains a system of rebellion in thought or deed, the soul gradually
becomes debased, and the finest principles of human nature suffer a
rapid process of disintegration; The integrity of elementary principles
disappears, bad citizenship results, the general rights of humanity are
ignored, selfish, personal, or family interests taking their place. Good
citizenship requires individual personal responsibility in affairs of
the state.

    That property rather than person still receives recognition in
governmental matters, owes its origin to the period when the rights of
the common people in both property and person were ignored. The effort
of the peasant was chiefly directed to securing property. To his clouded
vision, the wealth of the lord created his power, and to a great extent
such was the fact. Intuitively lie felt that property rights were the
basis of the rights of persons. The Church possessed enormous wealth, as
did all his oppressors, and the peasant could but see that control of
rights of property was a dangerous assault upon their rights of

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

person. The foremost element of all slavery is the denial to the slave
of right to the proceeds of his own labor. As soon as a colored slave in
the United States, was permitted to hire his time, the door of freedom
began to open for him. Thus when Canon Law so influenced Civil and
Common Law that it forbade woman's inheritance and ownership of
property, it placed its final touch upon her degradation; she virtually
became a slave to her husband. Sir Henry Maine is outspoken in declaring
that Christianity has thus deeply injured civilization, an injury from
which he asserts there can be no recovery as long as society remains
Christian. As a man of profound thought he does not fail to see that the
prevailing religious sentiment created by the teachings of the church as
to woman's created inferiority and subjection to man, was the cause of
that destruction of her property rights. The priests of pagan Rome held
juster view regarding woman than did the Christian Church. Before the
establishment of Christianity they had conferred the rights of woman to
property; daughters inherited equally with sons. To such extent was
woman's rights of property carried that at one period, as has been
heretofore stated, the greater part of the real-estate of the empire was
in woman's possession.<span id="fr_52"></span>[52](#fn_52.md) The slavish
condition of woman greatly increased through denial of her rights of
inheritance, was more fully established through denial to her of the
fruits of her own labor in the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

marriage relation. Under church law the wife was the husband's personal
slave, all her time was absolutely his. Civil and ecclesiastical law
held her as completely under his authority. Her property, her person,
her time and services were all at the husband's disposal. Nor did the
Reformation effect a change in this respect. Luther's ninety Theses
nailed against the church door in Wittemberg, did not assert woman's
natural or religious equality with man. It was a maxim of his that "no
gown or garment worse became a woman than that she will be wise." The
home under the reformation was governed by the laws in force before that
period.

    First. She was to be under obedience to the masculine head of the
household.

    Second. She was to be constantly employed for his benefit.

    Third. Her society was strictly chosen for her by her master and
responsible head.

    Fourth. This masculine family head was regarded as a general
father-confessor to whom she was held as responsible in word and deed.

    Fifth. Neither genius nor talent could free women from such control
without his consent.

    The Cromwellian period while exhibiting an increase of piety brought
no amelioration to woman. The old Church doctrine of her having caused
the expulsion of men from Paradise was still proclaimed from the pulpit,
and warnings against her extreme sinfulness lost none of their invective
strength from the lips of the new gospel. All kinds of learning and
accomplishments for her fell under new reprobation and the old teaching
as to her iniquities and the necessity for her to feel shame from the
fact of her

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

existence took new force after the rise of Melancthon, Huss, and
Luther.<span id="fr_53"></span>[53](#fn_53.md) About this period it was
said "she that knoweth how to compound a pudding is more desirable than
she who skilfully compoundeth a poem."<span
id="fr_54"></span>[54](#fn_54.md) Men thought it no shame to devote
themselves to the pleasure of the table. Epicures and gluttons abounded,
but to women was forbidden a seat at the world's intellectual board; she
who secured. learning did so at the peril of her social and religious
position. Under no other system of religion has there been such absolute
denial of woman's right to directly approach the divinity; under no
other religious system has her debasement been greater.<span
id="fr_55"></span>[55](#fn_55.md)

    It cannot be asserted that the religious system teaching restrictive
moral and civil laws regarding woman, is of the past. Its still great
living influence is shown by the thousands of pilgrims who visited Italy
during the Pope's jubilee and the presents of incalculable value that by
tens of thousands poured into the papal treasury in commemoration of the
fiftieth anniversary of the entrance of Pope Leo XIII. into the
priesthood. These were received from almost every

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

civilized nation, Christian, Mohammedan, Catholic, Protestant. Even the
President of the United States, head of a form of government which
recognizes religion as entirely disconnected with the State, so far
catered to superstition, so far conceded the assumptions of this system,
as to send an elegant copy of the Federal Constitution to the Pope,
through Cardinal Gibbons.<span id="fr_56"></span>[56](#fn_56.md) No
stronger proof is required of the still powerful influence of that
system based upon the degradation of woman, than the fact that the
President of the United States, temporary head of a nation professedly
based upon a recognition of equal civil, political and religious rights;
the Queen of England head of the Anglican Church; the Sultan of Turkey
representative of Mohammedanism; Sadogara, the celebrated Rabbi of
Vienna, known as the "Pope of the Hebrews," were all found among the
number of persons outside of Catholicism who by gifts recognized this
occasion. It was but ten years previously that Pope Pius IX. celebrated
his jubilee entrance into the Episcopal office with great pomp and
ceremony, but the jubilee of Leo XIII. exceeded in splendor and popular
interest anything of the kind ever before known as the history of the
church. With

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

a religious clientelle Of 200,000,000 behind him, and the ten thousand
magnificent testimonials as to the justice of his claim as vicar of
Jesus Christ, the world cannot fail to be impressed by the danger to
human liberty still connected with this powerful organization; an
organization that in its control of human thought and human will has
ever been of incalculable injury to mankind. Portions of the daily press
saw the continuing danger, declaring that:

    These facts are truly impressive indicating as they do the
tremendous hold which the Roman ecclesiastical system has gained over
the hearts and minds of men. Very striking, too, is the contrast between
all this magnificence and pomp and manifest aspiration for temporal
power on the part of one who claims to be the representative on earth of
the "meek and lowly Jesus," and the poverty, unostentation and
self-denial of the "Son of Man," who had not where to lay his head.

    This jubilee is an event of great moment to the XIX. century, at
once a warning and a proof of the life and strength of that scheme which
has for its real end, not alone the spiritual but also the temporal
subjugation of the entire human race. Since Italy under King Humbert
secured its release from the temporal power, thus severing the last
authoritative grasp of the pope upon temporal kingdoms, the attempt has
been sedulously made to create a fictitious sympathy for the pope under
claim of his imprisonment in the Vatican. Nor at the least supreme
moment of his pride and glorification did the pope forget to call
attention of the world to his temporal claims, by a refusal to receive
the offered gifts of the king and queen who occupy the worldly throne he
maintains to be especially his own.<span id="fr_57"></span>[57](#fn_57.md)

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

    The doctrine of original sin and woman as the original sinner,
transplanted from Judaism into Christianity by Paul in the statement
that "Adam, first created, was not first in sin," was developed to its
present evil proportions by the early Christian Fathers. To St.
Augustine, whose youth was spent in company with the most degraded of
womankind, is the world indebted for the full development of the
doctrine of original sin. Taught as one of the most sacred mysteries of
religion, which to doubt or to question was to hazard eternal damnation,
it at once exerted a most powerful and repressing influence upon woman,
fastening upon her a bondage which the civilization of the nineteenth
century has not been able to cast off.

    Reverence for the ancient in customs, habits of life, law, religion,
is the strongest and most pernicious obstacle to advancing civilization.
To this doctrine of woman's created inferiority<span
id="fr_58"></span>[58](#fn_58.md) and original sin we can trace those
irregularities which for many centuries filled the Church with shame,
for practices more obscene than the orgies of Babylon or Corinth, and
which dragged Christendom to a darkness blacker than the night of
heathendom in pagan countries--a darkness upon which the most searching
efforts of historians cast scarcely one ray of light--a darkness so
profound that from the seventh to the eleventh century no individual
thought can be traced.

    Rev. Charles Kingsley, a canon of the English Church declared that
from the third to the fifteenth centuries, Christianity had been swamped
by hysteria

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

in the practice of all those nameless orgies which made a by-word of
Corinth during the first century. Every evil was traced to woman. A
curious old black letter volume published in London, 1632, declares that
"the reason why women have no control in Parliament, why they make no
laws, consent to none, abrogate none, is their original sin."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Marquette.](wcs06.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_page_113">p. 113</span>  

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1.](#fr_1.md)  Maine says the bodies of customary
law which were built up over Europe were in all matters of first
principles under ecclesiastical influence, but the particular
application of a principle once accepted were extremely various.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2.](#fr_2.md)  The Council held at Winchester in
time of Archbishop Le Franc contained a constitution that a marriage
without the benediction of a priest should not be deemed a legitimate
marriage. Ecclesiastical law as allowed in this country (Great Britain),
from earliest times the presence of a priest was required to constitute
a legal marriage. Reeves.--*History of English Law*.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3.](#fr_3.md)  Reeves History of English Law is a
full and comprehensive history of the English law. Accurate and
judicious as well as full. Lord Mansfield is said to have advised its
author. In this work the student is presented with all that is necessary
that he should know of the earliest law books. Bracton, Glanville and
Fleta carefully collected and presented. Reeves History of English Law,
says Chancellor Kent, contains the best account that we have of the
progress of the law from the time of the Saxons to the reign of
Elizabeth. Sherwood.--*Professional Ethics*.

<span id="fn_page_114">p. 114</span>  

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4.](#fr_4.md)  Hefele's, *Acts of Councils*.

<span id="fn_page_115">p. 115</span>  

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5.](#fr_5.md)  Church and priestly property is
still untaxed in the United States. At an early day the clergy were not
required to sit on juries nor permitted to cast a vote.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[6.](#fr_6.md)  Giessier, *Ecclesiastical History*.

<span id="fn_page_116">p. 116</span>  

<span id="fn_7"></span>[7.](#fr_7.md)  Doctrines in the Canon Law most
favorable to the power of the clergy are founded in ignorance, or
supported by fraud and forgery, of which a full account is found in
Gerard. See *Mem. de l'Acad. des Inscript.*, Tom 18, p. 46. Also
Voltaire's essay upon general history.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[8.](#fr_8.md)  "Whenever Canon Law has been the
basis of legislation, we find the laws of succession sacrificing the
interests of daughters and wives." "Du Cange, in his Glossary, *voc
Casia Christianitatis*, has collected most of the causes with respect to
which the clergy arrogated an exclusive jurisdiction, and Giannone, in
the *Civil History of Naples*, lib. 19, sec. 3, has arranged these under
proper heads scrutinizing the pretensions of the church."

<span id="fn_page_117">p. 117</span>  

<span id="fn_9"></span>[9.](#fr_9.md)  "Canons were made from time to time
to supply the defects of the common law of the church; so were statutes
added to enforce both Common and Canon Law. The greater part of the
statutes made before the Reformation, which concerns the church and
clergy, are directly leveled against violence committed against the
possession of persons by the minister or the king, and against the
encroachments of the Temporal Courts upon the spiritual jurisdiction."

<span id="fn_10"></span>[10.](#fr_10.md)  "Phantastic romanticists and
calculating persons have endeavored to represent this period as the age
of morality and sincere reverence for woman. \* \* \* The 'Service of
Love' preached by French, German, and Italian knights, was supposed to
prove the high respect paid to the women of that day. On the contrary,
this period succeeded in destroying the little respect for the female
sex which existed at its commencement. The knights both in town and
country were mostly coarse, licentious men. \* \* \* The chronicles of
the times swarm with tales of rape and violence on the part of nobles in
the country, and still more in the towns where they were exclusive
rulers up to the XIII. and XIV. centuries, while those subjected to this
degraded treatment were powerless to obtain redress. In the towns the
nobles sat on the magistrates bench, and in the country criminal
jurisdiction was in the hands of the lord of the manor, squire or
bishop."

<span id="fn_11"></span>[11.](#fr_11.md)  The first article of the famous
Code of Love was "Marriage is not a legitimate excuse against love."

<span id="fn_12"></span>[12.](#fr_12.md)  This was Christine's first work.
Her success was so great that she supported a family of six persons by
her pen.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[13.](#fr_13.md)  Wright. *Womankind in Europe*.

<span id="fn_page_118">p. 118</span>  

<span id="fn_14"></span>[14.](#fr_14.md)  "The Fathers seem to have thought
dissolution of marriage was not lawful on account of the adultery of the
husband, but that it was not absolutely unlawful for a husband whose
wife had committed adultery to re-marry."

<span id="fn_page_119">p. 119</span>  

<span id="fn_15"></span>[15.](#fr_15.md)  The preference of males over
females in succession was totally unknown to the laws of Rome. Brothers
and sisters were entitled to equal parts of the inheritance.
Blackstone.--*Commentaries*.

<span id="fn_page_120">p. 120</span>  

<span id="fn_16"></span>[16.](#fr_16.md)  No marriage could take place
after 12 M., which is even now the rule of the English Established
Church. The decrees of the Plenary Council, Baltimore 1884, tend to the
establishment of similar regulations in our own country.

<span id="fn_page_121">p. 121</span>  

<span id="fn_17"></span>[17.](#fr_17.md)  The New Testaments of sixty years
since, contained a list of relatives commencing with grandfather and
grandmother, whom a man and woman might not marry.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[18.](#fr_18.md)  The policy of the church was to
persuade mankind that the cohabitation of a man and woman was in itself
unholy, and that nothing but a religious bond or sacrament could render
it inoffensive in the eyes of God. Pike.--*History of Crime in England*,
I, 90.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[19.](#fr_19.md)  This law held good in Protestant
England until within the last decade.

<span id="fn_page_122">p. 122</span>  

<span id="fn_20"></span>[20.](#fr_20.md)  The church visited its penalties
upon the innocent as well as guilty; whet, any man remained under
excommunication two months, his wife and children were interdicted and
deprived of all doctrines of the church but baptism and repentance.
Lea.--*Studies in Church History*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[21.](#fr_21.md)  In England, until the reign of
William and Mary, women were refused the benefit of clergy.

<span id="fn_page_123">p. 123</span>  

<span id="fn_22"></span>[22.](#fr_22.md)  In the hands of such able
politicians it (marriage), soon became an engine of great importance to
the papal scheme of an universal monarchy over Christendom. The
innumerable canonical impediments that were invented and occasionally
dispensed with by the Holy See, not only enriched the coffers of the
church, but give it a vast ascendant over persons of all denominations,
whose marriages were sanctioned or repudiated, their issue legitimated
or bastardized \* \* \* according to the humor or interest of the
reigning pontiff.--*Commentaries*, 3, 92.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[23.](#fr_23.md)  The word Liber, free, the solar
*Phre* of Egypt, and Liber, a book, being as has been shown, closely
connected, the bookish men of Bac, Boc, Bacchus, were comparatively free
from the rule of the warrior class, both in civil and military point of
view, and thence arises our *benefit of clergy*. If the benefit of
clergy depends upon a statute, it had probably been obtained by the
priests to put their privilege out of doubt. It has been a declaratory
statute, although, perhaps, every man who was initiated could not read
and write, yet I believe every man who could read and write was
initiated, these arts being taught to the initiated only in very early
times. It has been said that the privilege of clergy was granted to
encourage learning. I believe it was used as a test, as a proof that a
man was of, or immediately belonging to, the sacred tribe, and therefore
exempt from the jurisdiction of the court in which he had been tried. If
he were accused he said nothing; if found guilty he pleaded his orders
and his reading. I have little doubt that the knowledge of reading and
letters were a masonic secret for many generations, and that it formed
part of the mysterious knowledge of Eleusis and other
temples.--*Anacalypsis*, 2, 271-2.

<span id="fn_page_124">p. 124</span>  

<span id="fn_24"></span>[24.](#fr_24.md)  Woman was represented as the door
of hell, as the mother of all human ills. She should be ashamed of the
very thought that she is a woman, she should live in continual penance
on account of the curses she had brought upon the world. She should be
ashamed of her dress, for it is the memorial of her fall. She should
especially be ashamed of her beauty, for it is the most potent
instrument of the demon. \* \* \* Women were even forbidden by a
provincial council, in the sixth century, on account of their impurity,
to receive the eucharist in their naked hands. Their essentially
subordinate position was continually maintained. Lecky.--*Hist. European
Morals*.

<span id="fn_page_125">p. 125</span>  

<span id="fn_25"></span>[25.](#fr_25.md)  No woman can witness a will in
the state of Louisiana to-day.

<span id="fn_page_126">p. 126</span>  

<span id="fn_26"></span>[26.](#fr_26.md)  Blackstone says whosoever wishes
to form a correct idea of Canon Law can do so by examining it in regard
to married women.--*Commentaries*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[27.](#fr_27.md)  Blondell, a learned Protestant
who died in 1659, fully proved Isidore's Collection of the Decretal
Epistles of the popes of the first three centuries, to be all forged and
a shameless imposture, says *Collier*.

<span id="fn_page_127">p. 127</span>  

<span id="fn_28"></span>[28.](#fr_28.md)  The famous law of Constantine,
attached to the Theodosian Code, by virtue of which a prodigious and
monstrous jurisdiction was formerly attributed to bishops, or to the
hieratic order, though in reality that law was never a part of the
aforesaid code, at the end of which it is found. Seldon.--*Dissertation
on Fleta*, p. 101.

At time of Valentinian neither bishops nor the Consistories could,
without the consent of the contracting lay parties, take cognizance of
their causes. \* \* \* Because, says that emperor, it is evident that
bishops and priests have no court to determine the laws in, neither can
they according to the imperial constitutions of Arcadius and Honorius,
as is manifest from the Theodosian body, judge of any other matters than
those relating to religion. Thus the aforesaid Emperor Valentinian.
Neither do I think that the above sanction as extravagant, obtained a
place at the end of the Theodosian Code, or was under the title of
Episcopis, by any other manner posted into my manuscript, than by the
frauds and deceits, constantly, under various pretenses, made use of by
the hieratical orders, who endeavored to shape right or wrong, according
to the custom of those ages, not to mention others, sovereign princes
and republics of their authority and legal power, by this means under
the cloak of religion, its constant pretext, most strenuously serving
their own ends and ambition.--*Ibid*, 107.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[29.](#fr_29.md)  See Reeves.--*History of English
Law*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[30.](#fr_30.md)  Draper.--*Conflict of Science and
Religion*.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[31.](#fr_31.md)  Reeves.

<span id="fn_page_128">p. 128</span>  

<span id="fn_32"></span>[32.](#fr_32.md)  Declaration of judges in the
famous case of Evans and Ascuith. Vaughn said in a later case of the
same kind, "If Canon Law be made part of the law of this land, then it
is as much a law of the land and as well, and by the same authority as
any other part of the law of the land."

<span id="fn_page_129">p. 129</span>  

<span id="fn_33"></span>[33.](#fr_33.md)  Gibson was archdeacon of Surrey,
Rector of Lambeth, and Chaplain of his Grace the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury (Primate of all England and Metropolitan) to whom the Jurus
was dedicated. The work said: "The foreign is what we commonly call the
body of Canon Law, consisting of the Canons of Councils, Decrees of
Popes and the like, which obtained in England by virtue of their own
authority (in like manner as they did in other parts of the Western
Church), till the time of the Reformation, and from that time have
continued upon the foot of consent, usage and custom. For which
distinction we have no less warrant than an act of Parliament, made at
the very time when those foreign laws were declared to be no longer
binding by their own authority. \* \* \* We have a plain declaration
that foreign laws became part of the law of England by long use and
consent. Gibson.--*Codex Jurus Ecclesiasticum Anglican*.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[34.](#fr_34.md)  *English Common Law Reports*,
Hill vs. Gould, *Vaughn*, p. 327, says: "Whatever is declared by an Act
of Parliament to be against God's law must be so admitted by us, because
it is so declared by an Act of Parliament."

<span id="fn_page_130">p. 130</span>  

<span id="fn_35"></span>[35.](#fr_35.md)  Under Catholic form the bride
promises to consecrate her body to the marital rite.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[36.](#fr_36.md)  Chiniquy.--*The Priest, the Woman
and the Confessional*.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[37.](#fr_37.md)  "The clergy formerly, and to this
very day, declare those women evil who desire to limit self-indulgence
and procreation."

<span id="fn_page_132">p. 132</span>  

<span id="fn_38"></span>[38.](#fr_38.md)  See Lecky.--*Hist. European
Morals*.

<span id="fn_page_133">p. 133</span>  

<span id="fn_39"></span>[39.](#fr_39.md)  In a sermon laudatory of the
preachers office, delivered in the May Memorial Unitarian Church, in
Syracuse, N. Y., Sunday, Nov. 27,1887, Rev. Mr Calthrop, the pastor,
said: "Noble words are your chief weapons of offense and defense. But
remember it is not you that speak when you utter them, but the Holy
Ghost. From *Retort of Sermon*, published in the "Daily Standard",
November 28th.

<span id="fn_page_134">p. 134</span>  

<span id="fn_40"></span>[40.](#fr_40.md)  Whoever wishes to gain insight
into that great institution, Common Law, can do so most efficiently by
studying Canon Law in regard to married women, *Commentaries*.

<span id="fn_page_136">p. 136</span>  

<span id="fn_41"></span>[41.](#fr_41.md)  Distinction of class appears most
prominently in all the criminal laws for which the clergy are
responsible. It was for the man of low estate, the slave, and for women,
that the greatest atrocities were reserved. If the thief was a free
woman she was to be thrown down a precipice or drowned (a precedent
without doubt for dragging a witch through a pond), If the thief was a
female slave, and had stolen from any but her own lord, eighty female
slaves were to attend, each bearing a log of wood to pile the fire and
burn the offender to death. Pike.--*Hist. of Crime in England*, 49-51.

<span id="fn_page_137">p. 137</span>  

<span id="fn_42"></span>[42.](#fr_42.md)  A correspondent of "The London
Times" writes from Rome that he has not beard a single doubt expressed
as to the paternity of the Countess Lambertini, and the line adopted by
the Antonelli heirs tacitly confirms it. They strenuously oppose the
production of any of the evidence the plaintiff has offered. They object
to the depositions of the witnesses being heard and tested, and they
have declared their intention of impugning as forgeries the documentary
proofs tendered. These documents consist of some letters written by
Antonietta Marconi to the Archpriest Vendetta, and particularly one
dated April 1, 1857, wherein, asking him to prepare a draught of a
letter to the Cardinal she says that "Giacomo" does not send her money,
although he knows that he has a daughter to support, and that Loretina
is a cause, of great expense. "Write to him forcibly," she says, "or I
shall do something disagreeable" The extent of the scandal in Rome does
not consist so much in the fact of a Cardinal in Antonelli's position
having had one or more children, as in the law-suit which has brought
all the intimate details connected with the affair before the public.
Antonelli was to all intents and purposes a layman, filling one of those
civil departments of an ecclesiastical temporal Government to qualify
for which it was indispensably requisite to assume the ecclesiastical
habit. He accepted early in life those obligations without which no
career would have been open to him, and, like many others, he regarded
them as mere matters of form, for under the imperturbable mask of the
ecclesiastical diplomat beat a heart filled with the warmest domestic
affections and instincts, and how strong those feelings were in him was
fully demonstrated in his will, and is clearly shown in every incident
of the story now revealed.

Dame Gervasi has been subjected to a rigid cross-examination by the
counsel of the brothers Antonelli. The proceedings were conducted with
closed doors, but a Roman correspondent of "The Daily News" seems in
some manner to have wormed out the essential facts. When the mysterious
"foreign young lady" went to lodge at Dame Gervasi's, Cardinal
Antonelli--so the gossip runs--paid several visits to his protégé. "I
remember," says the Dame, "that when I went to open the door to them I
held in my hand a bowl of beef tea, which I was taking to the patient.
Dr. Lucchini was the first to enter, and I soon recognized the second
visitor to be Cardinal Antonelli, who wore a long redingote and a tall
hat. He took the bowl, which I held in my hand. 'This is for the
patient,' he said inquiringly, but before I had time to reply he had
swallowed part of its contents." Dame Gervasi then proceeded to relate
how Dr. Lucchini left the Cardinal alone with the foreign young lady.
The witness put her ear to the keyhole, and heard distinctly the sound
of kisses alternating, with sobs between the two. His Eminence, to
console the patient, told her he had taken every precaution against the
matter becoming known, "Don't be afraid" he said, "nobody will be a bit
the wiser. You will be able to marry. As for the baby, that's my affair.
I will take care of her, and I swear to you that she will never know the
name of her mother." Dame Gervasi gave the names of the persons who had
come to her on behalf of the brothers Antonelli and these emissaries,
she said, tried to make her disclose all she knew, and promised her
large sums of money to bind her to silence as to the clandestine part
played by Signora Marconi, and as to the Cardinal's relations with the
"foreign young lady."--N. Y. Tribune, July 5, 1878.

<span id="fn_page_138">p. 138</span>  

<span id="fn_43"></span>[43.](#fr_43.md)  See Reeves.--*Early English Law*.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[44.](#fr_44.md)  *Hollingshed's Chronicles*.

The foundation of old common law seems traceable to Martia, the widow of
Guilliame, left regent of her husband's kingdom, comprising a part of
Britain. two hundred years prior to the christian era. This queen
directed her attention to framing a system of laws which acquired for
her the surname of "Proba," or "The just." They were evidently one of
the three parts under which the common law is divided, although under
canon law the entire property of the wife became that of the husband
upon marriage.

<span id="fn_page_139">p. 139</span>  

<span id="fn_45"></span>[45.](#fr_45.md)  In England, in 1538, or even
earlier, it was calculated that besides the tithes, one-third of the
kingdom was ecclesiastical property, and that these vast Possessions
were devoted to the support of a body of men who found their whole
serious occupation in destroying the virtue of women. *Lea.--Sacerdotal
Celibacy*.

<span id="fn_page_140">p. 140</span>  

<span id="fn_46"></span>[46.](#fr_46.md)  The pagan laws during the Empire
had been continually repealing the old disabilities of women; and the
legislative movement in their favor continued with unabated force from
Constantine to Justinian, and appeared also in some of the early laws of
the barbarians. But, in the whole feudal legislation, women were placed
in a much lower legal position than in the pagan Empire. In addition to
the personal restrictions which grew necessarily out of the Catholic
Christian doctrines concerning divorce, and the subordination of the
weaker sex, we find numerous and stringent enactments, which rendered it
impossible for women to succeed to any considerable amount of property,
and which almost reduced them to the alternative of marriage or a
nunnery. The complete inferiority of the sex was continually maintained
by law; and that generous public opinion which in Rome had frequently
revolted against the injustice done to girls, in depriving them of the
greater part of the inheritance of their fathers, totally disappeared.
Wherever the canon law has been the basis of legislation, we find laws
of succession sacrificing the interests of daughters and of wives, and a
state of public opinion which has been formed and regulated by these
laws; nor was any serious attempt made to abolish them till the close of
the last century. The French Revolutionists, though rejecting the
proposal of Sieyès and Condorcet to accord political emancipation to
women, established at least an equal succession of sons and daughters,
and thus initiated a great reformation of both law and opinion, which
sooner or later must traverse the world. Lecky.--*Hist. Morals*, Vol.
II, pp. 357-359.

<span id="fn_page_141">p. 141</span>  

<span id="fn_47"></span>[47.](#fr_47.md)  Sheldon Amos.--*Science of Law*.

<span id="fn_page_142">p. 142</span>  

<span id="fn_48"></span>[48.](#fr_48.md)  *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[49.](#fr_49.md)  Our laws are based on the
all-sufficiency of man's rights. Society exists for man only; for women
merely as they are represented by some man; are in the *mundt* or
keeping of some man.--*Descriptive Sociology of England*.

<span id="fn_page_143">p. 143</span>  

<span id="fn_50"></span>[50.](#fr_50.md)  This slavish condition of the
wife yet prevails in over one-half the states of the union.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[51.](#fr_51.md)  The relations in respect to
property which exist between husband and wife in England, is solely
grounded on her not being assumed at common law to have sufficient
command of her purse or of her future actions wherewith to procure the
materials for making a contract. The legal presumption then is, that she
did not intend to make one, and therefore the allegation that she did
make a contract would simply on the face of it be a fraud.
Amos.--*Science of Law*.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[52.](#fr_52.md)  The jurisconsults had evidently
at this time assumed the equality of the sexes as a principle to the
code of equity. The situation of the Roman woman, whether married or
single, became one of great personal and proprietary independence; but
Christianity tended somewhat from the very first to narrow this
remarkable liberty. The prevailing state of religious sentiment may
explain why Modern jurisprudence has adopted those rules concerning the
position of woman, which belong peculiarly to an imperfect civilization.
No society which preserves any tincture of Christian institutions is
likely to restore to married women the personal liberty conferred on
them by middle Roman law. Canon law has deeply injured
civilization.--Sir Henry Maine.

<span id="fn_page_147">p. 147</span>  

<span id="fn_53"></span>[53.](#fr_53.md)  Under the Commonwealth, society
assumed a new and stern aspect. Women were in disgrace; it was
everywhere declared from the pulpit that woman caused man's expulsion
from Paradise, and ought to be shunned by Christians as one of the
greatest temptations of Satan. "Man," said they, "is conceived in sin
and brought forth in iniquity; it was his complacency to woman that
caused his first debasement; let man not therefore glory in his shame;
let him not worship the fountain of his corruption." Learning and
accomplishments were alike discouraged, and women confined to a
knowledge of cooking, family medicines and the unintelligible
theological discussions of the day. Lydia Maria Child.--*History of
Woman*.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[54.](#fr_54.md)  Many women made their entrance
into literature through the medium of a cook book, thus virtually
apologizing for the use of a pen.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[55.](#fr_55.md)  The slavish superstition under
which church teaching still keeps the minds of men was no less shown by
the thousands who visited the St. Anne relic in the United States. Nor
are Protestants but little less under the same superstition, accepting
the teaching of the church without investigation. An educated Protestant
girl, upon her return from Europe, recently, gravely declared that
during her absence she had seen the spear which pierced the Saviour's
side.

<span id="fn_page_148">p. 148</span>  

<span id="fn_56"></span>[56.](#fr_56.md)  The most interesting of all to
Americans is the copy of the American Constitution that President
Cleveland sent to the Vatican by Cardinal Gibbons. It is printed on
vellum in richly illuminated English characters, and bound in white and
red. It is enclosed in a case of purple plush with gold hinges, and
bears this autographic inscription by President Cleveland:

"Presented to his Holiness Pope Leo XIII., as an expression of
congratulation on the occasion of his sacerdotal jubilee, with the
profound regard of Grover Cleveland, President of the United States,
through the courtesy of his Eminence Cardinal Gibbons, Archbishop of
Baltimore."

WASHINGTON, D. C.

Upon the next page, beneath an American eagle printed in gold, is this
inscription:

"The Constitution of the United States. Adopted Sept. 17, 1787."

The page bearing this inscription and all the fly leaves were of
exquisite watered silk.

<span id="fn_page_149">p. 149</span>  

<span id="fn_57"></span>[57.](#fr_57.md)  "Owing to the pope's refusal to
accept the gifts of the king and queen of Italy on the occasion of his
jubilee, all the members of the House of Savoy, including the Duke
d'Aosta and the Princess Clotilde, have omitted to send offerings. <span
id="fn_page_150">p. 150</span> This is the fly in the jubilee ointment
of Pope Leo XIII., and settles the question of concessions of temporal
power. Nevertheless, the day is passed when the claim of 'imprisonment
in the Vatican' will further avail the pope."

<span id="fn_page_150">p. 150</span>  

<span id="fn_58"></span>[58.](#fr_58.md)  When Linneaus published his
sexual system of plants, in the eighteenth century, he was ridiculed and
shunned as one who had degraded nature.
