[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wcs06)  [Next](wcs08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

# CHAPTER V.

### WITCHCRAFT.

    Although toward the beginning of the IV. century, people began to
speak of the nocturnal meeting of witches and sorcerers, under the name
of "Assembly of Diana," or "Herodia," it was not until canon or church
law, had become quite engrafted upon the civil law, that the full
persecution for witchcraft arose. A witch was held to be a woman who had
deliberately sold herself to the evil one; who delighted in injuring
others, and who, for the purpose of enhancing the enormity of her evil
acts, choose the Sabbath day for the performance of her most impious
rites, and to whom 'all black animals had special relationship; the
black cat in many countries being held as her principal familiar. "To go
to the Sabbath" signified taking part in witch orgies. The possession of
a pet of any kind at this period was dangerous to woman. One who had
tamed a frog, was condemned to be burned in consequence, the harmless
amphibian being looked upon as a familiar of Satan. The devil ever being
depicted in sermon or story as black, all black animals by an easy
transition of ideas, became associated with evil and witches.<span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) Although I have referred to witchcraft as
having taken on a new phase soon after the confirmation of celibacy as a
dogma of the church by

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

the Lateran Council of 1215, it yet requires a chapter by itself, in
order to show to what proportions this form of heresy arose, and the
method of the church in its treatment. This period was the age of
supreme despair for woman,<span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md) death by
fire being the common form of witch punishment. Black cats were
frequently burned with a witch at the stake;<span
id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3.md) during the reign of Louis XV. of France,
sacks of condemned cats were burned upon the public square devoted to
witch torture. Cats and witches are found depicted together in a curious
cut on the title page of a book printed in 1621. The proverbial 'nine
lives' of a cat were associated in the minds of people with the
universally believed possible metamorphosis of a witch into a cat.<span
id="fr_4"></span>[4](#fn_4.md) So firmly did the diabolical nature of the
black cat impress itself upon the people, that its effects are felt in
business to this day, the skin of black cats being less prized and of
less value in the fur market than those of other colors. A curious
exemplification of this inherited belief is found in Great Britain. An
English taxidermist who exports thousands of mounted kittens each year
to the United States and other countries, finds the prejudice against
black cats still so great that he will not purchase kittens of this
obnoxious color.<span id="fr_5"></span>[5](#fn_5.md) In the minds of many

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

people, black seems ineradicably connected with sorcery.

    In the "Folk Lore of Cats," it is stated that as recently, as 1867 a
woman was publicly accused of witchcraft in the state of Pennsylvania on
account of her administering three drops of a black cat's blood to a
child as a remedy for the croup. She admitted the fact but denied that
witchcraft had anything to do with it, and twenty witnesses were called
to prove its success as a remedy. From an early period the belief in
metamorphosis by means of magical power was common throughout
Christendom. St. Augustine relates<span id="fr_6"></span>[6](#fn_6.md) that
"hostess or innkeepers sometimes put confections into a kind of cheese
made by them, and travelers eating thereof, were presently metamorphosed
into laboring beasts, as horses, asses or oxen." It was also believed
that the power of changing into various animals was possessed by witches
themselves.<span id="fr_7"></span>[7](#fn_7.md) At the present day under
certain forms of insanity persons imagine themselves to be animals,
birds, and even inanimate things, as glass; but usually those
hallucinations occur in isolated instances. But among the strange
epidemics which have at various times affected christendom, none is more
singular than that Lycanthropia, or wolf madness, which attacked such
multitudes

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

of inhabitants of the Jura in 1600, as to become a source of great
public danger. The affected persons walked upon their feet and hands
until their palms became hard and horny. They howled like wolves, and as
wolves do they hunted in packs, murdering and devouring many children,
nor could the most severe punishment put an end to this general madness.
Six hundred persons were executed upon their own confessions, which
included admissions of compact with the devil, attendance upon the
Sabbath and cannibal feasting upon a mountain, the devil having used his
power for their transmutation into wolves.<span
id="fr_8"></span>[8](#fn_8.md) Witches were believed to ride through the
air upon animals or bits of wood. The fact of their possession of such
powers is asserted by many writers, the usual method of transportation
being a goat, night crow or enchanted staff.<span
id="fr_9"></span>[9](#fn_9.md) The rhyming Mother Goose question:

    "Old woman, old woman, oh whither, oh whither so high?"

    And its rhyming answer:

    "To sweep the cobwebs from the sky,  
And I'll be back by and by,"

doubtless owes its origin to the witchcraft period.

    A song said to be in use during witch dances ran:

    "Har, Har, Diabole, Diabole; Sali huc,  
Sali illuc; Lude hic, Lude illic;  
Sabaoth, Sabaoth."

    Although the confirmation by the church in the

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

XIII\. century of the supreme holiness of celibacy, inaugurated a new
era of persecution for witchcraft, a belief in its existence had from
the earliest times been a doctrine of the church, Augustine, as shown,
giving the weight of his authority in favor. But to the Christian
Emperor Charlemagne, in the eight century, the first use of torture in
accusation of witchcraft is due. This great emperor while defying the
power of the pope, over whom he even claimed jurisdiction, was himself a
religious autocrat whose severity exceeded even that of the papal
throne. Torture was rapidly adopted over Europe, and soon became general
in the church; the council of Salsburg, 799, publicly ordering its use
in witch trials.

A new era of persecution and increased priestly power dates to the reign
of Charlemagne, who although holding himself superior to the pope, as
regarded independent action, greatly enlarged the dominion of the church
and power of the priesthood. He forced Christianity upon the Saxons at
immense sacrifice of life, added to the wealth and power of the clergy
by tithe lands, recognized their judicial and canonical authority, made
marriage illegal without priestly sanction and still further degraded
womanhood through his own polygamy. Although himself of such wanton
life, he yet caused a woman of the town to be dragged naked through the
city streets, subject to all the cruel tortures of an accompanying mob.

    In the ninth century the power of the pope was again greatly
increased. Up to this period he had been elected by the clergy and
people of Rome, and the approbation of the emperor was necessary to
confirm it. But Charles the Bald, 875, relinquished all right of
jurisdiction over Rome, and thereafter the Roman Pontiff became an
acknowledged if not sometimes

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

a supreme power in the appointment of temporal princes. The power of
bishops, clergy, and cardinals diminished as that of the pope increased.

    Notwithstanding her claims of power through St. Peter, it has been
by gradual steps that Rome has decided upon her policy and established
her dogmas. it is but little over four decades, at the Ecumenical of
1849, that the dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary,
was first authoritatively promulgated, although her worship had long
existed, being traceable to the Egyptian doctrine of the trinity, with
the substitution of Mary in place of Isis. It was not until 1085 that
Hildebrand, Pope Gregory VII, declared matrimony a sacrament of the
church; and not until 1415, at the Council of Trent, that extreme
unction was instituted and defined as a sacrament. Each of these dogmas
threw more power into the hands of the church, and greater wealth into
her coffers. Thus we see the degeneration of Christianity has had its
epochs. One occurred when the Council of Nice allowed chance to dictate
which should be considered the canonical books of the New Testament,
accepting some theretofore regarded as of doubtful authenticity and
rejecting others that had been universally conceded genuine.<span
id="fr_10"></span>[10](#fn_10.md) Another epoch of degeneration occurs when
the State in person of the great emperor Charlemagne added to the power
of the Church by the establishment of torture, whose extremest use fell
upon that portion of humanity looked upon as the direct embodiment of
evil. The peculiar character attributed to woman by the church, led to

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

the adoption of torture as a necessary method of forcing her to speak
the truth. The testimony of two, and in some countries, three women
being held as only equal to that of one man. At first, young children
and women expecting motherhood, were exempted, but afterwards neither
age or condition freed from accusation and torture, and women even in
the pangs of maternity were burned at the stake,<span
id="fr_11"></span>[11](#fn_11.md) Christianity in this respect showing much
more barbarity than pagan nations. In pagan Rome the expectant mother
was held sacred; to vex or disturb her mind was punishable, to strike
her was death. She even possessed a right pertaining to the Vestal
Virgins; if meeting a condemned criminal on his way to execution, her
word sufficed for his pardon. It scarcely seems possible, yet in some
christian countries the most prominent class subjected to the torture,
were women expecting motherhood. Christianity became the religion of
Iceland A. D., 1000, and by the earliest extant. law, the "Gragas,"
dating to 1119, we find that while torture was prescribed in but few
instances yet the class principally subjected to it, were women about to
become mothers. But generally throughout Europe, until about the XIV.
century, when priestly celibacy had become firmly established and the
Inquisition connected with the state, a class consisting of nobles,
doctors of the law, pregnant women, and children under fourteen, were
exempt from torture except in case of high treason and a few other
offenses. But at a later period when these institutions had greatly
increased the irresponsible power of the church,

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

we find neither sex, condition nor age, free from its infliction, both
state and church uniting in. its use.

    In Venitian Folk Lore, it is stated that Satan once became furious
with the Lord because paradise contained more souls than hell, and he
determined by fine promises to seduce human beings to his worship and
thus fill his kingdom. He decided to always tempt women instead of men,
because through ambition or a desire for revenge, they yield more
easily. This legend recalls the biblical story of Satan taunting the
Lord with the selfish nature of job's goodness, and receiving from God
the permission to try him. Witchcraft was regarded as a sin almost
confined to women. The Witch Hammer declared the very word *femina*
meant one wanting in faith. A wizard was rare; one writer declaring that
to every hundred witches but one wizard was found. In time of Louis XV.
this difference was greatly increased; "To one wizard 10,000 witches;"
another writer asserted there were 100,000 witches in France alone. The
great inquisitor Sprenger, author of the "Witch Hammer" and through
whose instrumentality many countries were filled with victims, largely
promoted this belief. "Heresy of witches, not of wizards<span
id="fr_12"></span>[12](#fn_12.md) must we call it, for these latter are of
very small account." No class or condition of women escaped him; we read
of young children, old people, infants, witches of fifteen years, and
two "infernally beautiful" of seventeen years. Although the ordeal of
the red hot iron fell into disuse in the secular courts early in the
fourteenth century, (1329),<span id="fr_13"></span>[13](#fn_13.md)
ecclesiasticism preserved it in case of

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

women accused of witchcraft for one hundred and fifty years longer.<span
id="fr_14"></span>[14](#fn_14.md) One of the peculiarities of witchcraft
accusations, was that protestations of innocence, and a submission to
ordeals such as had always vindicated those taking part in them if
passing through unharmed, did not clear a woman charged with witchcraft,
who was then accused with having received direct help from Satan. The
maxim of secular law that the torture which did not produce confession
entitled the accused to full acquittal was not in force under
ecclesiastical indictments, and the person accused of witchcraft was
always liable to be tried again for the same crime. Every safeguard of
law was violated in case of woman, even Magna Charta forbidding appeal
to her except in case of her husband.

    Before the introduction of Christianity, no capital punishment
existed, in the modern acceptation of the term, except for witchcraft.
But pagans unlike christians, did not look upon women as more given to
this practice than men; witches and wizards were alike stoned to death.
But as soon as a system of religion was adopted which taught the greater
sinfulness of women, over whom authority had been given to man by God
himself, the saying arose "one wizard to 10,000

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

witches." and the persecution for witchcraft became chiefly directed
against women. The church degraded woman by destroying her self-respect,
and teaching her to feel consciousness of guilt in the very fact of her
existence.<span id="fr_15"></span>[15](#fn_15.md) The extreme wickedness of
woman, taught as a cardinal doctrine of the church, created the belief
that she was desirous of destroying all religion, witchcraft being
regarded as her strongest weapon,<span id="fr_16"></span>[16](#fn_16.md)
therefore no punishment for it was thought too severe. The teaching of
the church, as to the creation of women and the origin of evil, embodied
the ordinary belief of the christian peoples, and that woman rather than
man practiced this sin, was attributed by the church to her original
sinful nature, which led her to disobey God's first command in
Eden.<span id="fr_17"></span>[17](#fn_17.md)

    Although witchcraft was treated as a crime against the state, it was
regarded as a greater sin against heaven, the bible having set its seal
of disapproval in the injunction "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to
live." The church therefore claimed its control. When coming under
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, witchcraft was much more strenuously dealt
with than when it fell under lay tribunals. It soon proved a great
source of emolument to the church, which grew enormously rich

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

by its confiscation to its own use of all property of the condemned.
Sprenger, whose work (The Witch Hammer), was devoted to methods of
dealing with this sin, was printed in size convenient for carrying in
the pocket.<span id="fr_18"></span>[18](#fn_18.md) It based its authority
upon the bible, twenty-three pages being devoted to proving that women
were especially addicted to sorcery. This work was sanctioned by the
pope, but after the reformation became equally authoritative in
protestant as in catholic countries, not losing its power for evil until
the XVIII. century. A body of men known as "Traveling Witch
Inquisitors," of whom Sprenger was chief, journeyed from country to
country throughout christendom, in search of victims for torture and
death. Their entrance into a country or city was regarded with more fear
than famine or pestilence, especially by women, against whom their
malignity was chiefly directed, Sprenger, the great authority, declaring
that her name signified evil; "the very word *femina*, (woman), meaning
one wanting in faith, for *fe* means faith, and *minus* less.<span
id="fr_19"></span>[19](#fn_19.md)" The reformation caused no diminution in
its use, the protestant clergy equally with the Catholic constantly
appealing to its pages. Still another class known as "Witch Finders," or
"Witch Persecutors" confined their work to their own neighborhoods. Of
these, Cardan, a famous Italian physician, said:

    "In order to obtain forfeit property, the same persons act as
accusers and judges, and invent a thousand stories as proof."<span
id="fr_20"></span>[20](#fn_20.md) The love of power, and the love

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

of money formed a most hideous combination for evil in the church; not a
christian country but was full of the horrors of witch persecutions and
violent deaths. During the reign of Francis I. more than 100,000 witches
were put to death, mostly by burning, in France alone. Christ was
invoked as authority, the square devoted to Auto da Fé, being known as,
"The Burning Place of the Cross."

    The Parliament of Toulouse burned 400 witches at one time. Four
hundred women at one hour on the public square, dying the horrid death
of fire for a crime which never existed save in the imagination of those
persecutors and which grew in their imagination from a false belief in
woman's extraordinary wickedness, based upon a false theory as to
original sin. Remy, judge of Nancy, acknowledged to having burnt eight
hundred in sixteen years; at the rate of half a hundred a year. Many
women were driven to suicide in fear of the torture in store for them.
In 1595 sixteen of those accused by Remy, destroyed themselves rather
than fall into his terrible hands. Six hundred were burnt in one small
bishopric in one year; nine hundred during the same period in another.
Seven thousand lost their lives in Treves; a thousand in the province of
Como, in Italy, in a single year; five hundred were executed at Geneva,
in a single month.

    While written history does not fail to give abundant record in
regard to the number of such victims of the church, largely women whose
lives were forfeited by accusation of witchcraft, hundreds at one time
dying agonizingly by fire, a new and weird evidence as

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

to the innumerable multitude of these martyrs was of late most
unexpectedly brought to light in Spain. During a course of leveling and
excavations for city improvements in Madrid, recently, the workmen came
upon the *Quemadero de la Cruz*.<span id="fr_21"></span>[21](#fn_21.md) The
cutting of a new road through that part of the city laid bare like
geological strata, long black layers super-imposed one above the other
at distances of one or two feet, in the sandstone and clay. Some of
these layers extended 150 feet in a horizontal direction, and were at
first supposed to be the actual discovery of new geological strata,
which they closely resembled. They proved to be the remains of
inquisitorial burnings, where thousands of human beings of all ages had
perished by the torture of fire.<span id="fr_22"></span>[22](#fn_22.md) The
layers consisted of coal coagulated with human fat, bones, the remains
of singed hair, and the shreds of burnt garments This discovery created
great excitement, people visiting the spot by thousands to satisfy
themselves of the fact, and to carry away some memento of that dark age
of christian cruelty, a cruelty largely exercised against the most
helpless and innocent, a cruelty having no parallel in the annals of
paganism. Imagination fails to conceive the condensed torture this spot
of earth knew under the watchword of "Christ and His Cross"; and that
was but one of the hundreds, nay, thousands of similar "Burning Places
of the Cross," with which every christian country, city, and town was
provided for many hundreds of years. A most diabolical custom of the
church made these burnings a holiday spectacle. People thus grew to look
unmoved upon

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

the most atrocious tortures, and excited crowds hung about witch
burnings, eagerly listening as the priests exhorted to confession, or
tormented the dying victims with pictures of an unending fire soon to be
their fate.

    An accusation of witchcraft struck all relatives of the accused with
terror, destroying the ordinary virtues of humanity in the hearts of
nearest friends. As it was maintained that devils possessed more than
one in a family, each member sought safety by aiding the church in
accumulating proof against the accused, in hopes thereby to escape
similar charge. It is impossible for us at the present day to conceive
the awful horror falling upon a family into which an accusation of
witchcraft had come. Not alone the shame and disgrace of such a charge;
the terrors of a violent death under the most painful form; the sudden
hurling of the family from ease and affluence to the most abject
poverty; but above all the belief that unending torment by fire pursued
the lost soul throughout eternity, made a combination of terrors
appalling to the stoutest heart. A Scotch woman convicted as a witch and
sentenced to be burned alive could not be persuaded by either priest or
sheriff to admit her guilt. Suffering the intensest agonies of thirst
during her torture she espied her only son in the surrounding crowd.
Imploring him in the name of her love for him she begged as her last
request, that he should bring her a drink. He shook his head, not
speaking; her fortitude her love, his own most certain conviction of her
innocence not touching him; when she cried again, "Oh, my dear son, help
me any drink, be it never so little, for I am most extremely drie, oh
drie, drie." His answer to her agonizing entreaties could not be
credited were it not a subject of history, and the date so recent.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

    "By no means dear mother will I do you the wrong, for the drier you
are no doubt you will burn the better."<span
id="fr_23"></span>[23](#fn_23.md) Under Accadian law 3,000 years before
christianity, the son who denied his father was sentenced to a simple
fine, but he who denied his mother was to be banished from the land and
sea;<span id="fr_24"></span>[24](#fn_24.md) but in the sixteenth century of
the christian era, we find a son under christian laws denying his mother
a drink of water in her death agony by fire.

    Erskine says:

    It was instituted in Scotland 1653, "that all who used witchcraft,
sorcery, necromancy, or pretended skill therein, shall be punished
capitally; upon which statute numberless innocent persons were tried and
burnt to death, upon evidence which, in place of affording reasonable
conviction to the judge, was fraught with absurdity and
superstition.<span id="fr_25"></span>[25](#fn_25.md)

    Thirty thousand persons accused of witchcraft were burned to death
in Germany and Italy alone, and although neither age nor sex was spared,
yet women and girls were the chief victims. Uncommon beauty was as
dangerous to a woman as the possession of great wealth, which brought
frequent accusations in

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

order that the church might seize upon the witches property for its own
use.

    Children of the most tender years did not escape accusation and
death. During the height of witch. craft persecution, hundreds of little
ones were condemned as witches. Little girls of ten, eight, and seven
years are mentioned; blind girls, infants<span
id="fr_26"></span>[26](#fn_26.md) and even young boys were among the
numbers who thus perished. Everywhere the most helpless classes were the
victims.

    It was declared that witches looked no person steadily in the face,
but allowed their eyes to wander from side to side, or kept them fixed
upon the earth. To this assertion that a witch could not look any one in
the face, the present belief of a connection between guilt and a
downcast look, is due; although the church taught that a woman should
preserve a downward look in shame for the sin she had brought into the
world, and to this day, an open, confident look upon a woman's face is
deprecated as evil. Attendance upon Sabbats<span
id="fr_27"></span>[27](#fn_27.md) and control of the weather were among the
accusations brought against the witch. In Scotland a woman accused of
raising a storm by taking off her stockings, was put to death. Sprenger
tells of a Swiss farmer whose little daughter startled him by saying she
could bring rain, immediately raising a storm.<span
id="fr_28"></span>[28](#fn_28.md)

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

    Whatever the pretext made for witchcraft persecution we have
abundant proof that the so-called "witch" was among the most profoundly
scientific persons of the age. The church having forbidden its offices
and all external methods of knowledge to woman, was profoundly stirred
with indignation at her having through her own wisdom, penetrated into
some of the most deeply subtle secrets of nature: and it was a subject
of debate during the middle ages if learning for woman was not an
additional capacity for evil, as owing to her, knowledge had first been
introduced in the world. In penetrating into these arcana, woman
trenched upon that mysterious hidden knowledge of the church which it
regarded as among its most potential methods of controlling mankind.
Scholars have invariably attributed magical knowledge and practices to
the church, popes and prelates of every degree having been thus accused.
The word "magic" or "wisdom" simply meaning superior science, was
attributed in the highest degree to King Solomon, who ruled even the
Elementals by means of his magic ring made in accord with certain
natural laws. He was said to have drawn his power directly from God.
Magi were known as late as the X. century of this era. Among their
powers were casting out demons, the fearless use of poisons, control of
spirits and an acquaintance with many natural laws unknown to the world
at large. During the present century, the Abbe Constant (Eliphas Levi),
declared the **Pentagram** to be the key of the two worlds, and if
rightly, understood, endowing man with infinite power. The empire

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

of THE WILL over the astral light is symbolized in magic by the
**Pentagram**, the growth of a personal will being the most important
end to be attained in the history of man's evolution. The opposition of
the church to this growth of the human will in mankind, has ever been
the most marked feature in its history. Under WILL, man decides for
himself. escaping from all control that hinders his personal
development.

    It is only an innate and natural tendency of the soul to go beyond
its body to find material with which to clothe the life that it desires
to give expression to. The soul can and must be trained to do this
consciously. You can easily see that this power possessed *consciously*
will give its possessor power to work magic.

    Ignorance and the anathemas of the church against knowledge to be
gained through an investigation of the more abstruse laws of nature,
have invested the word "magic" with terror. But magic simply means
knowledge of the effect of certain natural, but generally unknown laws;
the secret operation of natural causes, according to Bacon and other
philosophers; consequences resulting from control of the invisible
powers of nature, such as are shown in the electrical appliances of the
day, which a few centuries since would have been termed witchcraft.
Seeking to compel the aid of spirits, was understood as magic at an
early day. Lenormant says the object of magic in Chaldea, was to conjure
the spirits giving minute description of the ancient formula. Scientific
knowledge in. the hands of the church alone, was a great element of
spiritual and temporal power, aiding it in more fully subduing the human
will. The testimony of the ages entirely destroys the assertion
sometimes made that witchcraft was merely a species of hysteria. Every
discovery of

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

science is a nearer step towards knowledge of the laws governing "the
Accursed Sciences," as everything connected with psychic power in
possession of the laity was termed by the church. "Her seven evidences
for possession" included nearly all forms of mesmerism. All modern
investigations tend to prove what was called witchcraft, to have been in
most instances the action of psychic laws not yet fully understood. An
extremely suggestive article appeared in the January and February
numbers of "The Path" 1887, by C. H. A. Bjerregaard entitled, "The
Elementals and the Elementary Spirits." In it Mr. Bjerregaard referred
to the Pacinian Corpuscles, the discovery of an Italian physician in
1830 and 1840. He said:

    Pacini found in all the sensible nerves of the fingers many
elliptical whitish corpuscles. He compared them to the electrical organs
of the torpedo and described them as animal magneto-motors, or organs of
animal magnetism, and so did Henle and Holliker, two German anatomists
who have studied and described these corpuscles very minutely.

    In the human body they are found in great numbers in connection with
the nerves of the hand, also in those of the foot \* \* \* The ecstatic
dances of the enthusiasts and the not-sinking of somnambulists in water,
or their ability to use the soles of their feet as organs of perception,
and the ancient art of healing by the soles of the feet-all these facts
explain the mystery.

    They are found sparingly on the spinal nerves, and on the plexuses
of the sympathetic, but never on the nerves of motion \* \* \*
Anatomists are interested in these Pacinian corpuscles because of the
novel aspect in which they present the constituent parts of the
nerve-tube, placed in the heart of a system of concentric membranous
capsules with intervening fluid, and divested of that layer which they
(the anatomists)

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

regard as an isolator and protector of the more potential central axis
within.

    This apparatus--almost formed like a voltaic pile, is the instrument
for that peculiar vital energy, known more or less to all students as
Animal Magnetism.

    Since the cat is **somewhat** famous in all witchcraft, let me
state, that in the mesentery of the cat, they can be seen in large
numbers with the naked eye, as small oval-shaded grains a little smaller
than hemp-seeds A few have been found in the ox (symbol of the priestly
office,) but they are wanting in all birds, amphibia and fishes.

    "Magic" whether brought about by the aid of spirits or simply
through an understanding of secret natural laws, is of two kinds,
"white" and "black," according as its intent and consequences are evil
or good, and in this respect does not differ from the use made of the
well known laws of nature, which are ever of good or evil character, in
the hands of good or evil persons. To the church in its powerful control
of the human will, must be attributed the use of "black magic," in its
most injurious form. Proof that knowledge of the mysterious laws
governing ordinary natural phenomena still exists even among civilized
people, is indubitable. Our American Indians in various portions of the
continent, according to authorities, also possess power to produce
storms of thunder, lightning and rain<span
id="fr_29"></span>[29](#fn_29.md)

    A vast amount of evidence exists, to show that the word "witch"
formerly signified a woman of superior knowledge. Many of the persons
called witches doubtless possessed a super-abundance of the Pacinian
corpuscles in hands and feet, enabling them to swim

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

when cast into water bound, to rise in the air against the ordinary
action of gravity, to heal by a touch, and in some instances to sink
into a condition of catalepsy, perfectly unconscious of torture when
applied. Many were doubtless psychic sensitives of high powers similar
perhaps to the "Seeress of Prevorst," whose peculiar characteristics
were the subject of investigation by Dr. Kerner, about the end of the
witch period, his report forming one of the most mysteriously
interesting portions of psychic literature. The "Seeress" was able to
perceive the hidden principles of all vegetable or mineral substances,
whether beneficial or injurious. Dr. Kerner stated that her magnetic
condition might be divided into four degrees.

    First; that in which she ordinarily was when she appeared to be
awakened but on the contrary was the first stage of her inner life, many
persons of whom it was not expected and who was not aware of it
themselves, being in this state.

    Second; the magnetic dream, which she believed to be the condition
of many persons who were regarded as insane.

    Third; the half wakening state when she spoke and wrote the inner
language, her spirit then being in intimate conjunction **with** her
soul.

    Fourth; her clairvoyant state.

    With the investigation of Dr Kerner, the discoveries of Galvani,
Pacini, and those more recently connected with electricity, notably of
Edison and Nikolas Tesla, the world seems upon the eve of important
knowledge which may throw full light upon the peculiar nerve action of
the witch period, when a **holocaust** of women were sacrificed, victims
of the ignorance and barbarity of the church, which thus retarded
civilization and delayed spiritual progress for many hundred years.
Besides the natural psychics who formed

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

a large proportion of the victims of this period, other women with a
natural spirit of investigation made scientific discoveries with equally
baleful effect upon themselves; the one fact of a woman's possessing
knowledge serving to bring her under the suspicion and accusation of the
church. Henry More, a learned Cambridge graduate of the seventeenth
century wrote a treatise on witchcraft explanatory of the term "witch"
which he affirmed simply signified a wise, or learned woman. It meant
"uncommon" but not unlawful knowledge or skill. It will assist in
forming an opinion to know that the word "witch" is from wekken, to
prophesy a direct bearing upon the psychic powers of many such persons.
The modern Slavonian or Russian name for witch, "vjédma," is from the
verb "to know" signifying much the same as Veda.<span
id="fr_30"></span>[30](#fn_30.md) Muller says "Veda" means the same as the
wise, "wisdom." The Sanskrit word "Vidma" answers to the German "wir
wissen," which literally means "we know." A Russian name for the witch
"Zaharku," is derived from the verb "Znat," to know.<span
id="fr_31"></span>[31](#fn_31.md) A curious account of modern Russian
belief in witchcraft is to be found in Madame Blavatsky's "Isis
Unveiled." The German word "Heke," that is, witch, primarily signified
priestess, a wise or superior woman who in a sylvan temple worshiped
those gods and goddesses that together governed earth and heaven. Not
alone but with thousands of the people for whom she officiated she was
found there especially upon Walpurgis Night, the chief Hexen (witch)
Sabbat of the north. A German scholar furnished this **explanation**.

    The German word Heke, (witch) is a compound word from "hag" and
"idisan" or "disan." Hag means

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

a beautiful landscape, woodland, meadow, field, altogether. Idisen means
female deities, wise-women. Hexen-Sabbat, or Walpurgis Night is May
twelfth. Perfume and avocation--originally the old gods--perverted by
the priests. It is a remnant of the great gathering to worship the old
deities, when Christianity had overshadowed them. A monument of the
wedding of Woden or Odin with Freia--Sun and Earth at spring time.

    The Saxon festival "Eostre," the christian Easter, was celebrated in
April, each of these festivals at a time when winter having released its
sway, smiling earth giving her life to healing herbs and leaves, once
more welcomed her worshipers. In the south of Europe, the month of
October peculiarly belonged to the witches.<span
id="fr_32"></span>[32](#fn_32.md) The first of May, May-day, was especially
devoted by those elementals known as fairies, whose special rites were
dances upon the green sward, leaving curious mementoes of their visits
in the circles known as "Fairies Rings." In reality the original meaning
of "witch" was a wise woman. So also the word "Sab" means sage or wise,
and "Saba" a host or congregation;<span id="fr_33"></span>[33](#fn_33.md)
while "Bac," "Boc" and "Bacchus"<span id="fr_34"></span>[34](#fn_34.md) all
originally signified book.<span id="fr_35"></span>[35](#fn_35.md) "Sabs"
was the name of the day when the Celtic Druids gave instruction and is
the origin of our words Sabbath and Sunday.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

But the degradation of learning, its almost total loss among christian
nations, an entire change in the signification of words, owing to
ignorance and superstition led to the strangest and most infamous
results. The earliest doctors among the common people of christian
Europe were women<span id="fr_36"></span>[36](#fn_36.md) who had learned
the virtues and use of herbs. The famous works of Paracelsus were but
compilations of the knowledge of these "wise women" as he himself
stated. During the feudal ages women were excellent surgeons, wounded
warriors frequently falling under their care and to the skill of these
women were indebted for recovery from dangerous wounds. Among the women
of savage races to much greater extent than among the men, a knowledge
of the healing powers of plants and herbs is to this day found. But
while for many hundred years the knowledge of medicine, and its practice
among the poorer classes was almost entirely in the hands of women and
many discoveries in science are due to them, yet an acquaintance of
herbs soothing to pain, or healing in their qualities, was then looked
upon as having been acquired through diabolical agency. Even those
persons cured through the instrumentality of some woman, were ready when
the hour came to assert their belief in her indebtedness to the devil
for her knowledge. Not only were the common people themselves ignorant
of all science, but their brains were filled with superstitious fears,
and the belief that knowledge had been first introduced to the world
through woman's obedience to the devil. In the fourteenth century the
church decreed that any woman who healed

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

others without having duly studied, was a witch and should suffer death;
yet in that same century, 1527, at Basle, Paracelsus threw all his
medical works, including those of Hippocrates and Galen into the fire,
saying that he knew nothing except what he had learned from
witches.<span id="fr_37"></span>[37](#fn_37.md) As late as 1736, the
persecution of her male compeers cast Elizabeth Blackwell, an English
woman physician, into prison for debt. Devoting herself even behind the
bars to her loved science, she prepared the first medical botany given
to the world. The modern discovery of anæsthetics by means of whose use
human suffering can be so greatly ameliorated, is justly claimed as the
greatest boon that science has conferred upon mankind, yet it must not
be forgotten that this medical art of mitigating pain, is but an olden
one re-discovered. Methods of causing insensibility to pain were known
to the ancient world. During the middle ages these secrets were only
understood by the persecuted women doctors of that period, subjected
under church rule to torture, burning at the stake or drowning as
witches. The use of pain-destroying medicaments by women, can be traced
back from five hundred to a thousand years. At the time that witchcraft
became the great ogre against which the church expended all its terrific
powers, women doctors employed anæsthetics to mitigate the pains and
perils of motherhood, "throwing the sufferer into a deep sleep when the
child entered the world. They made use of the Solanæ, especially
Belladonna.

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

But that woman should find relief at this hour of intense suffering and
peril when a new being entered the world, provoked open hostility from
the church. The use of mitigating herbs assailed that theory of the
church which having placed the creation of sin upon woman, still further
inculcated the doctrine that she must undergo continual penance, the
greatest suffering being a punishment in nowise equal to her deserts.
Its teachings that she had therefore been especially cursed by her Maker
with suffering and sorrow at this period, rendered the use of mitigating
remedies during childbirth, dangerous alike to the "wise woman" and the
mother for whose relief they were employed.<span
id="fr_39"></span>[39](#fn_39.md) Although the present century has shown
similar opposition by the church to the use of anæsthetics for women at
this time, it is almost impossible to depict the sentiment against such
relief which made the witchcraft period one of especial terror to
womankind--an age that looked upon the slightest attempt at such
alleviation as proof of collusion with the devil. So strong was the
power of the church, so universal the belief in the guilt of all women,
that even those sufferers who had availed themselves of the knowledge of
the "wise woman" did so in fear as calling in the aid of evil, and were
ready to testify against her to whom they had been indebted for
alleviation of pain, whenever required by the dread mandate of the
church. A strong natural bias toward the study of medicine, together
with deepest sympathy for suffering humanity, were required in order to
sustain the wise woman' amid the perils constantly surrounding her; many
such women losing their lives as witches simply because of their
superior medical and surgical knowledge. Death by

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

torture was the method of the church for the repression of woman's
intellect, knowledge being held as evil and dangerous in her hands.
Ignorance was regarded as an especial virtue in woman, and fear held her
in this condition. Few women dared be wise, after thousands of their sex
had gone to death by drowning or burning because of their knowledge. The
superior learning of witches was recognized in the widely extended
belief of their ability to work miracles. The witch was in reality the
profoundest thinker, the most advanced scientist of those ages. The
persecution which for ages waged against witches was in reality an
attack upon science at the hands of the church. As knowledge has ever
been power, the church feared its use in woman's hands, and leveled its
deadliest blows at her. Although the church in its myth of the fall
attributes knowledge to woman's having eaten of its tree, yet while not
scrupling to make use of the results of her disobedience for its own
benefit, it has been most earnest in its endeavors to prevent her from
like use. No less to-day than during the darkest period of its history,
is the church the great opponent of woman's education, every advance
step for her having found the church antagonistic.

    Every kind of self-interest was brought into play in these
accusations of witchcraft against women physicians: greed, malice, envy,
hatred, fear, the desire of clearing one's self from suspicion, all
became motives. Male physicians not skillful enough to cure disease
would **deliberately** swear that there could be but one reason for
their failure--the use of witchcraft against them. As the charge of
witchcraft not only brought disrepute but death upon the "wise woman" at
the hands of the church, she was soon compelled to abandon both the
practice of medicine and surgery, and for many hundred

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

years but few women doctors were to be found in christian countries. It
is, however, a noticeable fact that Madam La Chapelle, an eminent woman
accoucher of France, during the present century, and M. Chaussure
revived the use of Belladonna<span id="fr_40"></span>[40](#fn_40.md) during
parturition, thus acknowledging the scientific acquirements of serf
women and "witches." Since the re-entrance of woman into the medical
profession within the past few years, the world has been indebted for a
knowledge of the cause and cure of certain forms of disease peculiar to
woman, to the skill of those physicians of her own sex whom the church
so long banished from practice.

    Through its opposition to the use of anæsthetics by the women
physicians of the witch period, the church again interposed the weight
of her mighty arm to crush science, leaving the load of preventable
suffering of all kinds upon the world for many hundred years longer, or
until the light of a scientific civilization threw discredit upon her
authority. History proves that women were the earliest chemists. The
witch period also shows us the germs of a medical system, the
Homeopathic, supposed to be of modern origin, in *similia similibus
curantur*. Among the strange epidemics of these ages, a dancing mania
appeared; Belladonna among whose effects is the desire of dancing, was
employed as a cure of the "Dancing Mania," and thus the theory of
Hahnemann was forestalled. During the witch period these sages or
wise-women were believed to be endowed with a supernatural or magical
power of curing diseases. They were also regarded as prophets to whom
the secrets of the future were known. The women of ancient Germany, of
Gaul and among the Celts were especially famous for their

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

healing powers, <span id="fr_41"></span>[41](#fn_41.md) possessing
knowledge by which wounds and diseases that baffled the most expert male
physicians were cured. The women of a still more ancient period, the
fame of whose magical powers has descended to the present time, Circe,
Medea and Thracia, were evidently physicians of the highest skill. The
secret of compounding herbs and drugs left by Circe to her descendants,
gave them power over the most poisonous serpents. Chief among the many
herbs, plants and roots whose virtues were discovered by Medea, that of
Aconite stands pre-eminent. The Thracian nation took its name from the
famous Thracia whose medical skill and knowledge of herbs was so great
that the country deemed it an honor to thus perpetuate her name.

    Aside from women of superior intelligence who were almost invariably
accused of witchcraft, the old, the insane, the bed-ridden, the
idiotic,<span id="fr_42"></span>[42](#fn_42.md) also fell under
condemnation. The first investigation by Rev. Cotten Mather in America
resulted in the hanging of a half-witted Quaker woman. Later still, an
Indian woman, an insane man, and another woman who was bed-ridden were
also accused. Under the present theories regarding human rights, it
seems scarcely possible that less than two hundred years ago such
practices were not only common in England, but had also been brought
into America by the Puritan Fathers. The humiliation and tortures of
women increased in proportion to

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

the spread of christianity,<span id="fr_43"></span>[43](#fn_43.md) and the
broader area over which man's sole authority in church and state was
disseminated. As the supreme extent of spiritual wrong grew out of the
bondage of the church over free thought, so the extreme of **physical**
wrong rose from the growth of the inquisitional or paternal spirit,
which assumed that one human being possessed divine authority over
another human being. Paternalism, a species of condensed patriarchism,
runs through ecclesiastical, civil, and common law. Down to the time of
the American revolution, individuality was an uncomprehended word; many
hundred crimes were punishable by death. That of pressing to death,
*peine-fort-et-dure*, the strong and hard pain, was practiced upon both
men and women in England for five hundred years and brought by the
pilgrims to New

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

England. The culprit was placed in the dark lower room of some prison,
naked, upon the bare ground without clothing on rushes underneath or to
cover him. The legs and arms were extended toward the four corners of
the room and as great a weight placed upon the body as could be
supported.

"The first day he (or she) is to have three morsels of barley bread;
upon the second day three draughts of water standing next to the door of
the prison, without bread, and this to be his (or her) diet till he (or
she) die."

    It is computed from historical records that nine millions of persons
were put to death for witchcraft after 1484, or during a period of three
hundred years, and this estimate does not include the vast number who
were sacrificed in the preceding centuries upon the same accusation. The
greater number of this incredible multitude were women. Under
catholicism, those condemned as sorcerers and witches, as "heretics,"
were in reality the most advanced thinkers of the christian ages. Under
that protestant pope, the Eighth Henry, an Act of Parliament condemning
witchcraft as felony was confirmed. Enacted under Henry V, it had fallen
into disuse, but numerous petitions setting forth that witches and
sorcerers were "wonderful many," and his majesty's subjects persecuted
to death by their devices, led to its re-enactment. The methods used to
extort confession without which it was impossible in many cases to
convict for witchcraft, led to the grossest outrages upon woman.
Searching the body of the suspected witch for the marks of Satan, and
the practice of shaving the whole body before applying torture were
occasions of atrocious indignities. It was asserted that all who
consorted

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

with devils had some secret mark about them, in some hidden place of
their bodies; as the inside of the lip, the hair of the eyebrows, inside
of the thigh, the hollow of the arm or still more private parts, from
whence Satan drew nourishment. This originated a class of men known as
"Witch Prickers" who divesting the supposed witch, whether maid, matron,
or child, of all clothing minutely examined all parts of her body for
the devil's sign. Woe to the woman possessing a mole or other blemish
upon her person; it was immediately pointed to as Satan's seal and as
undeniable proof of having sold herself to the devil. Belief in this
sign existed among the most educated persons. Albertus Pictus, an
advocate in the Parliament of Paris, declared he himself had seen a
woman with the devil's mark on her shoulders, carried off the next day
by the devil. Many authors affirmed the trustworthiness of witch-marks.
It was supposed that upon touching the place the witch would be unable
to speak. If under the torture of having every portion of her body
punctured by a sharp instrument, the victim became no longer able to cry
out, her silence was an accepted proof of finding the witch-mark and her
condemnation was equally certain. So great was the number of accused,
that these men found profitable employment. The depth of iniquity to
which greed of money leads was never more forcibly shown than during
witchcraft. One Kincaid, a New England Witch Pricker, after stripping
his victims of all clothing, bound them hand and foot, then thrust pins
into every part of their bodies until exhausted and rendered speechless
by the torture, they were unable to scream, when he would triumphantly
proclaim that be had found the witch mark. Another confessed on the
gallows, to

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

which a just fate finally condemned him, that he had illegally caused
the death of one hundred and twenty women whom he had thus tortured. No
means were considered too severe in order to secure conviction. The
Jesuit, Del Rio, said torture could scarcely be properly administered
without more or less dislocation of the joints, and persons escaping
conviction were frequently crippled for life.<span
id="fr_44"></span>[44](#fn_44.md) The church declared the female sex had
always been most concerned in the crime of christian witchcraft and as
it was its aim to separate woman from all connection with its
ordinances, it also asserted that the priestesses of antiquity held
their high places by means of witchcraft.

    Trials for witchcraft filled the coffers of the church, as whenever
conviction took place, the property of the witch and her family was
confiscated to that body. The clergy fattened upon the torture and
burning of women. Books giving directions for the punishment to be
inflicted upon them bore the significant titles of "Scourge", "Hammer"'
"Ant Hills," "Floggings," etc. During the middle ages the devil was a
personal being to the church with power about equal to that of God, his
kingdom maintaining its equilibrium with the Father, Son and Holy Ghost
of Heaven, by means of three persons in Hell; Lucifer, Beelzebub and
Leviathan. In this era of christian devil-worship the three in hell
equipoised the three in the Godhead. Marriage with devils was one of the
most ordinary accusation in witch trials. Such connections were
sometimes regarded with pride; the celebrated marshall de Bassompierre
boasting that the founder of his family was engendered from communion
with a spirit. It was reported of the mother of Luther that she was

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

familiar with an Incubus. During this period many nuns and married women
confessed to having been visited by Incubi of whose visits no spiritual
efforts could rid them. Church history also proves that young girls and
boys, many under ten years of age were tried for intercourse with such
spirits. Those infesting men were known as Succubi. Lady Frances Howard,
daughter of the earl of Suffolk, obtained a divorce from her husband
because of his connection with a Succubus.

    One of the most notable things connected with such accusation was
the frequent confession of its truthfulness. In 1459, a great number of
witches and wizards were burned,<span id="fr_45"></span>[45](#fn_45.md) who
publicly confessed to their use of ungents, to their dances, feasts, and
their consort with devils. A Vicar General<span
id="fr_46"></span>[46](#fn_46.md) among the Laodunenses, at his death left
confession of his witch-rides, his copulation with devils, etc. Nor is
the present age free from similar confessions. Tales of marriage with
spirits; of dead lovers paying nightly visits to the living
betrothed--of Incubi consorting with willing or unwilling victims;--all
those mediæval statements regarding the intercourse of spirits of the
dead with the living, all the customs of witchcraft and sorcery are
paralleled in our midst to-day; and such statements do not come from the
ignorant and superstitious, but are made by persons of intelligence as
within their own personal experience. During the witchcraft period
familiarity of this nature with Incubi or Succubi was punished with
death. Occasionally a person was found of sufficient saintliness to
exorcise them as

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

Elementals are said to have been exorcised during the last half of the
present century.<span id="fr_47"></span>[47](#fn_47.md) Devils were said to
be very fond of women with beautiful hair and the direction of St. Paul
in regard to woman's keeping her head covered, was not always regarded
as a sign of inferiority, but sometimes believed to be a precautionary
admonition intended for the safety of christian women.<span
id="fr_48"></span>[48](#fn_48.md) To this day the people of some eastern
countries, men and women alike, will not expose the head uncovered,
because of the danger of thus giving entrance to certain invisible
beings of an injurious character; the Persians in particular, wearing a
turban or cloth of peculiar appearance called Mathoomba. Confessions of
magical and witchcraft practices were by no means rare even among the
highest church dignitaries who implicated themselves by such avowals. It
was customary to attribute the practice of magic to the most holy
fathers of the church. The popes from Sylvester II. to Gregory VII. were
all believed to have been magicians Benedict IX. was also thus accused.
The difference between the practices of men and of women existed only in
name. What was termed magic, among men, was called witchcraft in woman.
The one was rarely, the other invariably, punished.

The practice of magic by the holy fathers was in furtherance of private
or ecclesiastical advancement and therefore legitimate in the eye of the
church. Yet, death-bed repentance was by no means infrequent. Of Pope
Sylvester, it is said, that convinced of his sinfulness in having
practiced magic, upon his deathbed

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

he ordered his tongue to be torn out and his hands cut off because he
had sacrificed to the devil; having learned the art when Bishop of
Rheims. The significant question as to whether magnetism or hypnotism
was not a custom of the church during the middle ages, as part of the
"magic" practiced by illustrious ecclesiastical dignitaries, is one of
importance in view of recent hypnotic experiments. The fact that by
means of "suggestion" the responsibility for crime and the perpetration
of overt criminal acts, can be made to fall upon persons entirely
innocent of criminal intention, who, at the time are in a condition of
irresponsibility, while the actual felon, the person who incited the act
remains unknown and unsuspected, exceeds in malign power all that
christendom has taught regarding the evil one. Science trembles on the
verge of important discoveries which may open the door for a full
understanding of mediæval witchcraft. The Scotch woman who asked if a
person could not be a witch without knowing it, had intuitive perception
that by the action of one person upon another, consequences could be
induced of which the perpetrator was entirely guiltless.<span
id="fr_49"></span>[49](#fn_49.md) Doubtless the

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

strange power which certain persons are capable of wielding over others,
at present calling the attention of scientific investigators, was very
common during the witchcraft period. Of this power the church as
self-constituted guardian of the esoteric sciences was fully aware,
frequently making it the method through which envy, greed and revenge,
satisfied themselves while throwing the external appearance of guilt
upon others. The most complete protection against such powers,--a strong
will,--it has ever been the aim of the church to destroy. Freedom of the
will has ever held place in clerical denunciation by side of "original
sin," and punished as sorcery.<span id="fr_50"></span>[50](#fn_50.md)

    A reminiscence of olden magic--far older than the witchcraft period
is found in the Masonic lamentation over the "lost word." This "lost
word," the "supreme word," by whose use all things can be subdued, is
still the quest of a certain portion of the world; and sorcerers are
still mentioned, who cannot die until a certain mysterious word is
passed from "mouth to ear." One of the latest occult societies extant,
its membership widely extended, claims its origin from a mysterious word
similarly passed. The Lord's Prayer demands the making whole (hallowed),
of the Father's name, evidently in the esoteric sense referring to that
loss which dwells in the minds of men through tradition, a species of
unwritten history. With the restoration of the feminine in all its
attributes to its rightful place everywhere, in realms seen and unseen,
the lost power will have been restored, the "lost name" have been found.
Numbers are closely connected with names, their early knowledge not

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

only having preceded letters, but having been of much greater value,
although after a time, letters and numbers became interchangeable.
Certain persons devoted to the consideration of occult subjects
therefore claim the lost power to abide in a number rather than in a
word; sounds possessing great and peculiar influence in all magical
formulas, their power largely depending upon inflection and tone or
vibration; color and light are also called in aid during magical
formulas.<span id="fr_51"></span>[51](#fn_51.md)

    The three most distinguishing features of the history of witchcraft
were its use for the enrichment of the church; for the advancement of
political schemes; and for the gratification of private malice. Among
these the most influential reason was the emolument it brought to the
church. Although inquisitors and the clergy were the principal
prosecutors, this period gave opportunity for the gratification of
private malice, and persons imbued with secret enmity towards others, or
who coveted their property, found ready occasion for the indulgence of
that malice of covetousness; while the church always claimed one-half,
it divided the remainder of the accused's possessions between the judge
and the prosecutor. Under these circumstances accusation and conviction
became convertible terms. The pretense under which the church
confiscated to itself all property of the accused was in line with its
other sophistical teaching. It declared that the taint of witchcraft
hung to all that had belonged to the condemned, whose friends were not
safe with

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

such property in their possession. To make this claim more effective, it
was also asserted that the very fact of one member of a family having
fallen into the practice of this sin was virtual proof that all were
likewise attainted. Under this allegation of the church, a protest
against such robbery was held as proof of the witchcraft in the person
so protesting. For the purpose of getting the property of the accused
admission of the crime was strenously pressed. In some countries the
property was not forfeited unless such confession took place.
Persecution for witchcraft was if possible more violent in the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries than at any previous date. By this period it
had been introduced into America through the instrumentality of the
Puritan Fathers. It was no less wide-spread in Calvinistic Scotland,
while it re-appeared with renewed vigor in Catholic countries. In the
State of Venice it caused open rebellion against church authority, the
Council forbidding the sentence of the Inquisition to be carried
out.<span id="fr_52"></span>[52](#fn_52.md)

    While only Venice in the whole of Europe defied the church upon this
point, emphatically protesting against such robbery of her citizens, she
ultimately succeeded in establishing a treaty with the pope whereby the
inheritance of the condemned was retained in the family. The rebellion
of Venice against the church upon the question of property belonging to
its subjects, a question upon which the state held itself

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

pre-eminent, soon effected a radical change and had remarkable effect in
lessening the number of accusations in that state.<span
id="fr_51"></span>[51](#fn_51.md) Theft by the church in that direction, no
longer possible, accusations of witchcraft soon ceased; being no longer
recognized as sin, after ceasing to bring money into the coffers of the
church.

    It is a fact noted by very many authorities that when witchcraft
fell under control of the state, its penalties were greatly lessened
while accusations grew fewer. Yet for a period, even the civil power
aided in spreading this belief, offering rewards for conviction; and as
the church had grown immensely rich by means of witch persecution, so
the state increased its own power and wealth through similar means. The
theory of Bishop Butler that whole communities at times become mad,
seems proven by the experience of this period. Upon no other ground but
that of universal insanity can excusable explanation be offered. But for
the church no such exculpation is possible, her teachings and her acts
having created this wholesale madness of communities. Experience of her
course during preceding centuries shows us that the persecution of the
witchcraft period was but a continuation of her policy from the moment
of her existence--that of universal dominion over the lives, the
property, and the thoughts of mankind. Neither rank, nor learning, age,
nor goodness freed a woman from accusation.<span
id="fr_54"></span>[54](#fn_54.md) The mother of the great astronomer,
Kepler, a woman

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

of noble family, died in chains having been accused of witchcraft. The
council of Bourges tortured a reputed witch who was only known for her
good works. A determined effort for the destruction of every virtue
among women seemed made at this period. In the middle of the XIII.
century, the Emperor Theodore Lascarius caused a noble lady of his court
to be entirely stripped of her clothing, and placed thus nude in a sack
with cats, but even this torture failed to extort a confession from her
innocent lips. Even in America, women of the purest lives, all of whose
years had been given to good works, met with death from like accusation.

    Soon after the confirmation of celibacy as a dogma of the church, at
the time when the persecution for witchcraft so rapidly increased, which
was also the period of the greatest oppression under feudalism-a
peculiar and silent rebellion against both church and state took place
among the peasantry of Europe, who assembled in the seclusion of night
and the forest, their only place of safety in which to speak of their
wrongs. Freedom for the peasant was found only at night. Known as "Birds
of the Night," "Foxes," "Birds of Prey," it was only at night
assemblages that they enjoyed the least happiness or freedom. Here with
wives and daughters, they met to talk over the gross outrages
perpetrated upon them. Out of their foul wrongs grew the sacrifice of
the "Black Mass" with women as officiating priestess, in which the rites
of the church were travestied in solemn mockery, and defiance cast at
that heaven which permitted the priest and the lord alike to trample
upon all the sacred rights of womanhood, in the name of religion and
law. During this mocking service a true sacrifice of wheat

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

was offered to the "Spirit of the Earth" who made wheat to grow, and
loosened birds bore aloft to the "God of Freedom" the sighs and prayers
of the serfs asking that their descendants might be free. We can but
regard this sacrifice as the most acceptable offering made in that day
of moral degradation; a sacrifice and a prayer more holy than all the
ceremonials of the church. This service where woman by virtue of her
greater despair acted both as altar and priest, opened with the
following address and prayer. "I will come before Thine altar, but save
me, O, Lord, from the faithless and violent man!" (from the priest and
the baron.)<span id="fr_56"></span>[56](#fn_56.md) From these assemblages
known as "Sabbat" or "the Sabbath" from the old Pagan midsummer-day
sacrifice to "Bacchus Sabiesa" rose the belief in the "Witches Sabbath,"
which for several hundred years formed a source of accusation against
women, sending tens of thousands to most horrible deaths. The thirteenth
century was about the central period of this rebellion of the serfs
against God and the church when they drank each other's blood as a
sacrament, while secretly speaking of their oppression.<span
id="fr_57"></span>[57](#fn_57.md) The officiating priestess was usually
about thirty years old, having experienced all the wrongs that woman
suffered under church and state. She was entitled "The Elder" yet in
defiance of that God to whom the serfs under church teaching ascribed
all their wrongs, she was also called "The Devil's bride." This period
was especially that of woman's rebellion

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

against the existing order of religion and government in both church and
state. While man was connected with her in these ceremonies as father,
husband, brother, yet all accounts show that to woman as the most deeply
wronged, was accorded all authority. Without her, no man was admitted to
this celebration, which took place in the seclusion of the forest and
under the utmost secrecy. Offerings were made to the latest dead and the
most newly born of the district, and defiance hurled against that God to
whose injustice the church had taught woman that all her wrongs were
due.

    Woman's knowledge of herbs was made use of in a preparation of
Solanæ which mixed with mead, beer, cider, or farcy,--the strong drink
of the west--disposed the oppressed serfs to joyous dancing and partial
forgetfulness of their wrongs during these popular night gatherings of
the Sabbath.<span id="fr_58"></span>[58](#fn_58.md) It became "the
comforter" throwing the friendly mantle of partial oblivion over the
mental suffering of "him who had been so wronged" as it had done for the
mother's physical pain. "The Sabbath" was evidently the secret protest
of men and women whom church and state in combination had utterly
oppressed and degraded. For centuries there seemed no hope for this
class of humanity--for this degraded portion of christendom--yet, even
then women held position of superiority in these night assemblages.
Among the "Papers of the Bastile," a more extended account of woman
officiating as her own altar, is to be found.<span
id="fr_59"></span>[59](#fn_59.md)

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

    The injustice of man towards woman under the laws of both Church and
State engrafted upon society, have resulted in many evils unsuspected
by, the world, which if known would strike it with amazement and terror.
Even Louis Lingg, one of the condemned Chicago anarchists, young,
handsome, of vigorous intellect, who uncomplainingly accepted for
himself that death he had decreed to the representatives to law; even
he, who neither asked mercy nor accepted the death decreed him, was the
outgrowth of woman's wrongs. His mother with whom his fate was thrown, a
woman of the people in Hungary, belonging to a powerless class crushed
for centuries, the plaything of those above them;--his father, a
representative of the aristocracy descended from a long line of military
ancestors, leaving him, as the church had taught him, to the sole care
of the mother he had betrayed, it was impossible for this boy not to
find in his breast a turmoil of conflicting emotions, but above all,
ruling all, a hatred of entrenched oppression; nor did his father's
military blood fail to play its part, leading to the final result which
affrighted a city and closed his young life.

    In looking at the history of witchcraft we see three striking points
for consideration:

    First; That women were chiefly accused.

    Second; That men believing in woman's inherent wickedness, and
understanding neither the mental nor the physical peculiarities of her
being, ascribed all her idiosyncrasies to witchcraft.

    Third; That the clergy inculcated the idea that woman was in league
with the devil, and that strong intellect, remarkable beauty, or unusual
sickness were in themselves proof of this league.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

    Catholics and protestants yet agree in holding Women as the chief
accessory of the devil.<span id="fr_60"></span>[60](#fn_60.md)

    The belief in witches indeed seemed intensified after the
reformation. Luther said: "I would have no compassion for a witch, I
would burn them all." He looked upon those who were afflicted with
blindness, lameness, or idiocy from birth,<span
id="fr_61"></span>[61](#fn_61.md) as possessed of demons and there is
record of his attempt to drown an afflicted child in whom he declared no
soul existed, its body being animated by the devil alone. But a
magistrate more enlightened or more humane than the great reformer,
interfered to save the child's life. Were Luther on earth again to-day
with the sentiments of his lifetime, he would regard the whole community
as mad. Asylums for the blind, the dumb and idiots, curative treatment
for cripples and all persons naturally deformed, would be to him a
direct intervention with the ways of providence. The belief of this
great reformer proves the folly of considering a man wise, because he is
pious. Religion and humanity were as far apart with him after the
reformation as while he was yet a monk. The fruits of monasticism
continued their effects, and his latter life showed slight intellectual
or spiritual advancement. As late as 1768 John Wesley declared the
giving up of witchcraft to be in effect giving up the Bible. Such was

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

his low estimate of woman that he regarded his own wife as too sinful to
conduct family prayers, although to Susannah, equally with John, is
Methodism indebted for its existence. In Great Britain, the rapid
increase of belief in witchcraft after the reformation was especially
noticeable. The act of Parliament which declared witchcraft to be
felony; confirmed under Henry VIII. was again confirmed under Elizabeth.
In England the reformation brought with it great increase of tyranny
both civil and ecclesiastical. Under Henry VIII. many new treasons were
created. This king who sent the largest proportion of his six wives to
the headsman's block, who neither hesitated at incest or at casting the
taint of illegitimacy upon the daughter who succeeded him upon the
throne, could not be expected to show justice or mercy to subject women.
The penal laws of even celibate Elizabeth were largely the result of the
change in religion of the realm.<span id="fr_62"></span>[62](#fn_62.md) The
queen, absolute in Church as in State, who "bent priest and prelate to
her fiery will," caused the laws to bear with equal severity upon
protestant and catholic. Under her "A Statute of Uniformity for
abolishing Diversity of Opinions," was enacted, and the clergy were
continued in the enjoyment of secular power. Women received no favor.
The restrictions of the catholic church in regard to the residence of a
priest's mother or sister in his house were now extended to the laity.
No man was permitted to give his widowed mother or orphan sister a home
in his house without permission from the authorities, and then but for a
limited time. Single women were allowed no control over their own
actions. Twelve years was the legal marriageable age for a girl, after
which period if still unmarried

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

she could be bound out at the option of the court.<span
id="fr_63"></span>[63](#fn_63.md) Nor did the Cromwellian period lessen
woman's persecution. The number of witches executed under the
Presbyterian domination of the Long Parliament according to a list<span
id="fr_64"></span>[64](#fn_64.md) that has been preserved, amounted to
between three and four thousand persons. The legal profession no less
than the clerical asserted its belief in witchcraft, referring to the
Bible in confirmation. Blackstone said:

    "To deny the possibility, nay the actual existence of witchcraft and
sorcery is at once flatly to contradict the revealed word of God, in
various passages of the Old and New Testament; and the thing itself is a
truth to which every nation in the world hath in its turn borne
testimony, either by examples seemingly well attested, or by prohibiting
laws."

    The protestant clergy equally with the catholic priesthood, were
charged with fostering a belief in witchcraft for the purpose of gain.
At no period of the world has a more diabolical system of robbery
existed. For the sake of a few pounds or pence, the most helpless of
human beings, made helpless through church teaching as to their
unworthiness, were by the church daily brought under accusation,
exposing them to a cruel death at the hand of irresponsible tyranny. The
system of thugery in India, shines white by side of this christian
system of robbery, inaugurated by the church and sustained by the state.
In the name of religion, the worst crimes against humanity have ever
been perpetrated. On the accession of James I. he ordered the learned
work of Reginald Scott against witchcraft, to be burned.<span
id="fr_65"></span>[65](#fn_65.md)

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

This was in accordance with the act of Parliament 1605-9 which ratified
a belief in witchcraft in the three kingdoms. At this date the tragedy
of Macbeth appeared, deeply tinged with the belief of the times. A few
persons maintaining possession of their senses, recognized the fact that
fear, apprehension and melancholy gave birth to the wildest
self-delusions; medical experience recording many instances of this
character. In an age when ignorance and superstition prevailed among the
people at large, while vice, ignorance, and cupidity were in equal force
among those in power, the strangest beliefs became prevalent.

Sir George Mackenzie, the eminent king's advocate of Scotland,
conducting many trials for witchcraft, became convinced it was largely a
subject of fear and delusion. He said:

    Those poor persons who are ordinarily accused of this crime are poor
ignorant creatures, and ofttimes women who understood not the nature of
what they are accused of, and many mistake their own fears and
apprehensions for witchcraft, of which I shall give you two instances;
one of a poor man, who after he had confessed witchcraft being asked how
he saw the devil, he answered "like flies dancing about a candle."
Another of a woman who asked sincerely; when accused, "if a woman might
be a witch and not know it?" And it is dangerous then. Those who of all
others are the most simple should be tried for a crime which of all
others is the most mysterious. Those poor creatures when defamed became
so confused with fear and the close prison in which they were kept, and
so starved for want of meals and sleep (either of which wants is enough
to destroy the strongest reason), when men are confounded with fear and
apprehension they will imagine things very ridiculous and

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

absurd. Melancholy often makes men imagine they are horses. Most of
these poor creatures are tortured by their keepers who are persuaded
they do God good service. Most of all that were taken were tortured In
this manner and this usage was the ground of their complaints.

    To such an extent was this persecution carried even in protestant
Scotland that accused women sometimes admitted their guilt that they
might die and thus escape from a world where even if cleared, they would
ever after be looked upon with suspicion. Sir George Mackenzie visiting
some women who had confessed, one of them told him "under secrecie"
that:

    She had not confessed because she was guilty but being a poor
creature who wrought for her meat and being defined for a witch, she
knew she would starve, for no person thereafter would give her either
meat or lodging, and that all men would beat her and hound dogs at her
and therefore she desired to be out of the world, whereupon she wept
bitterly and upon her knees called upon God to witness what she said.

    Even under all the evidence of the persecution and cruel tortures
that innocent women endured during the witchcraft period, no effort of
the imagination can portray the sufferings of an accused woman. The
death this poor woman chose, in voluntarily admitting a crime of which
she was innocent, rather than to accept a chance of life with the name
of "witch" clinging to her, was one of the most painful of which we can
conceive, although in the diversity of torture inflicted upon the witch
it is scarcely possible to say which one was the least agonizing. In no
country has the devil ever been more fully regarded as a real personage,
ever on the watch for souls, than in Christian Scotland. Sir George
says:

    Another told me she was afraid the devil would

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

challenge a right to her soul as the minister said when he desired her
to confess; and therefore she desired to die.<span
id="fr_66"></span>[66](#fn_66.md)

    The following is an account of the material used and the expenses
attending the execution of two witches in Scotland.

|                                                                          |         |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|
|     For 10 loads of coal to burn the witches                             | £3 06.8 |
|     " A tar barrel                                                       |  0 14.0 |
|     " towes                                                              |  0 06.0 |
|     " hurdles to be jumps for them                                       |  3 10.0 |
|     " making of them                                                     |  0 08.0 |
|     " one to go to Tinmouth for the lord to sit upon the assize as judge |  0 06.0 |
|     " the executioner for his pains                                      |  8 14.0 |
|     " his expenses there                                                 |  0 16.4 |

 

    What was the special office of the executioner does not appear;
whether to drag the victims upon hurdles, to the places of burning, to
light the fire, to keep it well blazing, is not mentioned although his
office was important and a well paid one; eight pounds and fourteen
shillings above his expenses, sixteen shillings and four pence more; in
all nine pounds, ten shillings and four pence, a sum equal to one
hundred and fifty or two hundred dollars of the present day. At these
rates it was easy to find men for the purpose desired. It is worthy of
note that under the frequency of torture the payment lessened. Strange
experiences sometimes befell those who were tortured: a cataleptic or
hypnotic state coming on amid their most cruel sufferings causing an
entire insensibility to pain. To the church this condition was sure
evidence of help from Satan and caused a renewal of torture as soon as
sensibility returned. In the year 1639 a poor widow called Lucken, who

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

was accused of being a witch and sentenced to the rack at Helmstadt
having been cruelly tortured by the screw, was seized with convulsions,
spoke high German and a strange language and then fell asleep on the
rack and appeared to be dead. The circumstance related to the
juricounsul at Helmstadt she was ordered to be again submitted to the
torture. Then protesting she was a good Christian while the executioner
stretched her on the rack, whipt her with rods and sprinkled her with
burning brimstone, she fell again fast asleep and could not by any means
be awakened.<span id="fr_67"></span>[67](#fn_67.md)

    Boiling heretics and malefactors alive, commonly in oil but
occasionally in water, was practiced throughout Europe until a
comparatively late period. In fact as a civil punishment in England it
dates only to 1531 under Henry VII. The "Chronicle of the Gray Friars"
mentioned a man let down by a chain into a kettle of hot water until
dead. We have expense items of this form of torture, in the boiling of
Friar Stone of Canterbury.

|                                                                        |     |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----|
|     Paid two men that sat by the kettle and boiled him                 | 1s  |
|     To three men that carried his quarters to the gate and set them up | 1s  |
|     For a woman that scoured the kettle                                | 2d  |

 

    Boiling was a form of torture frequently used for women. The
official records of Paris show the price paid for torture in France was
larger than in England; boiling in oil in the former country costing
forty eight francs as against one shilling in the latter. It must be
remembered these official prices for torture, are not taken from the
records of China or Persia, two thousand years ago, nor from among the
savages of Patagonia, Australia or Guinea, but two European countries

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

of highest Christian civilization within the last three hundred years.

    The following list of prices for dealing with criminals is taken
from the official records in Paris:

|                                                           |     |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----|
|     For boiling a criminal in oil, francs                 | 48  |
|     For tearing a living man in four quarters with horses | 30  |
|     Execution with the sword                              | 20  |
|     Breaking on the wheel                                 | 10  |
|     Mounting the head on a pole                           | 10  |
|     Quartering a man.                                     | 36  |
|     Hanging a man.                                        | 29  |
|     Burying a man                                         | 2   |
|     Impaling a man alive                                  | 14  |
|     Burning a witch alive                                 | 28  |
|     Flaying a man alive                                   | 28  |
|     Drowning an infanticide in a sack                     | 24  |
|     Throwing a suicide's body among the offal             | 20  |
|     Putting to the torture                                | 4   |
|     For applying the thumb-screw                          | 2   |
|     For applying the boot                                 | 4   |
|     Torture by fire                                       | 10  |
|     Putting a man in the pillory                          | 2   |
|     Whipping a man                                        | 4   |
|     Branding with a red-hot iron                          | 10  |
|     Cutting off the tongue, the ears and the nose         | 10  |

 

    Burning a witch, probably because of its greater frequency, cost,
but little over one-half as much as boiling in oil. The battle of
gladiators with wild beasts in the Coliseum at Rome in reign of Nero,
had in it an element of hope. Not the priesthood but the populace were
the arbiters of the gladiator's destiny, giving always a chance for life
in cases of great personal bravery. But in France and England the
ecclesiastical code was so closely united with the civil as to be one
with it; compassion equally with justice was forgotten, despair taking
their place. Implements of torture were of frequent invention, the
thought of the

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

age turning in the direction of human suffering, new methods were
continually devised. Many of these instruments are now on exhibition in
foreign museums. One called "The Spider" a diabolical iron machine with
curved claws, for tearing out a woman's breasts was shown in the United
States but a few years since. In Protestant Calvinistic Scotland, where
hatred of "popery" was most pronounced, the persecution of witches raged
with the greatest violence, and multitudes of women died shrieking to
heaven for that mercy denied them by Christian men upon earth. It was in
Scotland after the reformation that the most atrocious tortures for the
witch were invented, one of most diabolical being known as "the Witches'
Bridle." By means of a loop passed about the head, this instrument of
four iron prongs was fastened in the mouth. One of the prongs pressed
down the tongue, one touched the palate, the other two doing their
barbarous work upon the inner side of the cheeks. As this instrument
prevented speech thus allowing no complaint upon the part of the victim,
it was preferred to many other methods of torture.<span
id="fr_68"></span>[68](#fn_68.md) The woman upon

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

whom it was used was suspended against a wall by a loop at the back,
barely touching the floor with her toes. The iron band around her neck
rendered her powerless to move, she was unable to speak or scarcely to
breathe. Every muscle was strained in order to sustain herself and
prevent entire suffocation, the least movement causing cruel wounds by
means of the prongs in her mouth.

    The victims were mostly aged women who having reared a family,
spending their youth and beauty in this self-denying work, had lived
until time threading their hair with silver had also robbed cheek and
lip of their rosy hue, dimmed the brilliancy of the eye and left
wrinkles in place of youthful dimples. Such victims were left for hours,
until the malignity of their persecutors was satisfied, or until death
after long torture released them from a world where under the laws of
both Church and State they found their sex to be a crime. Old women for
no other reason than that they were old, were held to be the most
susceptible to the assaults of the devil, and the persons most
especially endowed with supernatural powers for evil. Blackstone refers
to this persecution of aged women in his reference to a statute of the
Eight Henry.<span id="fr_69"></span>[69](#fn_69.md) We discover a reason
for this intense hatred of old women in the fact that woman has chiefly
been looked upon from

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

a sensual view by christian men, the church teaching that she was
created solely for man's sensual use. Thus when by reason of declining
years she no longer attracted the sensual admiration of man, he regarded
her as having forfeited all right to life. England's most learned judge,
Sir Mathew Hale, declared his belief in the agency of the devil in
producing diseases through the aid of old women. The prosecution against
this class raged with unusual violence in Scotland under the
covenanters.

    To deny the existence of especially evil supernatural powers, in old
women, was held as an evidence of skeptism exposing the doubting person
to like suspicion. Great numbers of women were put to death at a time;
so common indeed was the sight as to cause but little comment. A Scotch
traveler casually mentioned having seen nine women burning together at
Bath in 1664. Knox himself suffered a woman to be burned at St. Andrews,
whom one word from him would have saved. Father Tanner speaks of "the
multitude" of witches who were daily brought under the torture that was
constantly practiced by the church.

    The reformers were more cruel than those from whose superstitious
teachings they professed to have escaped. All the tortures of the old
church were repeated and an unusual number of new and diabolical ones
invented to induce confession. Nor were these tortures applied to the
suspected witch alone; her young and tender children against whom no
accusation has been brought, were sometimes tortured in her presence in
order to wring confession from the mother. Towards the end of the
sixteenth century, a woman accused of witchcraft endured the most
intense torture,

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

constantly asserting her innocence. Failing to secure confession, her
husband, her son, and finally her young daughter of seven short years
were tortured in her presence, the latter being subjected to a species
of thumb-screw called "the pinniwinkies" which brought blood from under
the finger nails with a pain terribly severe. When these were applied to
the baby hands, to spare her innocent child, the mother confessed
herself a witch; but after enduring all the agonies of torture upon
herself and all she was made to suffer in the persons of her innocent
family, confession having been obtained through this diabolical means,
she was still condemned to the flames, undergoing death at the stake a
blazing torch of fire, and died calling upon God for that mercy she
could not find at the hands of Christian men.<span
id="fr_70"></span>[70](#fn_70.md) In

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

protestant Scotland as in catholic countries, witchcraft was under
control of the clergy. When a woman fell under suspicion of being a
witch, the minister denounced her from the pulpit, forbade any one to
harbour or shelter her and exhorted his parishoners to give evidence
against her.<span id="fr_71"></span>[71](#fn_71.md) She was under ban
similar to the excommunicate of the catholic church, a being outside of
human help or sympathy. In protestant as in catholic countries the woman
accused was virtually dead. She was excommunicated from humanity;
designated and denounced as one whom all must shun, to whom no one must
give food or lodging or speech or shelter; life was not worth the
living. To afford such a one aid was to hazard accusation as a
confederate. The first complaint was made to the clergy and Kirk
Sessions.<span id="fr_72"></span>[72](#fn_72.md)

    Notwithstanding two hundred years of such experience, when by ail
act of parliament in 1784, the burning and hanging of witches was
abolished, the General Assembly of the Calvinistic church of Scotland
"confessed" this act "as a great national sin." Not only were the courts
and the church alert for the detection of alleged witches, but the
populace persecuted many to death.<span id="fr_73"></span>[73](#fn_73.md)
Deserted by her friends, the suspected

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

witch was beaten, worried by dogs, denied food and prevented from
sleeping.<span id="fr_74"></span>[74](#fn_74.md) Contrary to equity and the
principles of modern law, the church sought in every way to entrap
victims into giving evidence against themselves. Once a person was
accused, no effort was spared to induce confession. Holding control over
the soul as well as the body, enquiry into these crimes was pushed by
every method that human ingenuity could devise. The kirk became the
stronghold of superstition; both rewards and punishments were used as
inducements towards ferreting out witches. All ties of natural affection
were ignored, the kirk preaching it to be a matter of greater duty to
inform against one's nearest relatives than against strangers. Unlike
the theory of Roman civil law which held the accused innocent until
proven guilty, ecclesiastical law everywhere produced a condition under
which the accused was held guilty from the moment of accusation. During
the witchcraft period the minds of people were trained in a single
direction. The chief lesson of the church that betrayal of friends was
necessary to one's own salvation, created an intense selfishness. All
humanitarian feeling was lost in the effort to secure heaven at the
expense of others, even those most closely bound by ties of nature and
affection. Mercy, tenderness, compassion were all obliterated.
Truthfulness escaped from the Christian world; fear, sorrow and cruelty
reigned pre-eminent. All regard that existed for others grew up outside
of church teaching and was shown at the hazard of life.

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

Contempt and hatred of woman was inculcated with greater intensity; love
of power and treachery were parts of the selfish lessons of the church.
All reverence for length of years was lost. The sorrows and sufferings
of a long life appealed to no sympathetic cord in the heart. Instead of
the tenderness and care due to aged women, they were so frequently
accused of witchcraft that for years it was an unusual thing for an old
woman in the north of Europe to die in her bed. Besides the thousands of
accused who committed suicide in order to escape the horrors incident
upon trial, many others tired of life amid so much humiliation and
suffering, falsely accused themselves, preferring a death by the torture
of fire to a life of endless isolation and persecution. An English woman
on her way to the stake, with a greatness of soul born of despair, freed
her judges from responsibility, by saying to the people, "Do not blame
my judges. I wished to put an end to my own self. My parents keep aloof
from me; my own husband has denied me. I could not live on without
disgrace. I longed for death and so I told a lie." The most eminent
legal minds became incompetent to form correct judgment. Having received
the church as of divine origin, and its priesthood as the
representatives of the divinity, they were no longer capable of justice.
Old and ignorant women upon the most frivolous testimony of young
children were condemned to death. One of the most notable examples of
the power of superstitious belief to darken the understanding, is that
of Sir Mathew Hale, living in the seventeenth century. He was spoken of
by his contemporaries as one of the most eminent jurists of the world,
whose integrity, learning and knowledge of law were scarcely to be
paralleled

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

in any age, and yet he became so entirely convinced of the diabolism of
two women as to condemn them to death while sitting at Bury St. Edmunds,
without even summing up the evidence. The learned and famous Sir Thomas
Browne, who was present, coincided in the justice of this decision,
although but a short time previously he had published a work against
superstition. The testimony upon which these women were condemned was of
the most petty and worthless character, yet among all the persons
present at the trial, but one or two seemed inclined to doubt the
sufficiency of the evidence.

    The records of this remarkable trial were preserved to the world by
a gentleman who privately took a report for his own use, which was
Published in pamphlet form a number of years afterwards. This extremely
rare book is not to be found even in the Congressional Library at
Washington, but the Supreme Court Library owns a copy from which this
report is taken:

    Trial March 10, 1664 by Sir Matthew Hale, Knight, Lord Chief Baron
of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer held before a judge who for his
integrity, learning and wisdom hardly any age before or since could
parallel; he not only took a great deal of pains and spent much time in
this trial himself, but had the assistance and opinion of several other
very eminent and learned persons; so that this was the most perfect
narrative of anything of this nature hitherto extant.

    The persons tried were Ann Durant, or Drury, Susan Chander,
Elizabeth Pacy. The celebrated Dr. Brown of Norwich who had written a
work against witchcraft, was present and after hearing the evidence
expressed himself as clearly of the opinion the persons were bewitched,
and said in Denmark lately there had been

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

a great discovery of witches who used the same way of afflicting persons
by the agency of pins. This trial took place in the sixteenth year of
Charles II. The witnesses were two children of eleven and nine years who
fell into fits, vomiting pins and nails. Sargeant Keeling asserted
deception on part of the witnesses. The Court appointed Lord Cornwallis,
Sir Edmund Bacon and Sargeant Keeling as committee to examine the girl
alone, when they became fully satisfied of her imposture but without
convincing the learned judge who contrary to all justice and law did not
sum up the evidence, but gave the great weight of his opinion in favor
of their guilt saying: "That there are such creatures as witches, I have
no doubt at all. For First, Scripture has offered so much. Second, the
wisdom of all nations has propounded laws against such persons, which is
an argument of their confidence of such a crime. And such has been the
judgment of this kingdom as appears by that Act of Parliament which hath
provided punishments proportionate to the guilt of this offense, and
desired them strictly to observe the evidence; and desired the great God
of Heaven to direct their hearts in the weighty things they had so
heard. For to condemn the innocent and to let the guilty go free, were
both an abomination to the Lord. Within half an hour the jury returned a
verdict of guilty on thirteen counts. The judge and all the court were
fully satisfied with the verdict and therefore gave judgment against the
witches that they should be hanged.

    The evidence was of the most paltry character; as when out of door a
little thing like a bee flew upon the witness face, putting a ten penny
nail with a broad head into her mouth. Lath nails and pins said to have
been vomited by the children were produced in court. When arraigned the
accused pleaded not guilty nor did they ever change this plea. Great
pressure was upon them to induce confession, but they could not be
prevailed upon to thus criminate themselves and were executed the
seventeenth of March, just one week after trial, confessing nothing.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

    This trial is the more remarkable that confessions usually deemed
the best of evidence, were not obtained, these poor illiterate,
persecuted women braving all the learning of the great judge and power
of the kingdom in maintaining to the last the assertion of their
innocence. The minutes of this trial were taken by a gentleman in
attendance upon the court and were not published until 1716 when the
record fell into the hands of a person who saw its value "so that," he
says, "being the most complete minutes of anything of this nature
hitherto extant, made me unwilling to deprive the world of it; which is
the sole motive that induced me to publish it."

    Not alone the clergy and the legal fraternity wrought in unison, but
the medical as well, gave the weight of their authority in favor of
witchcraft; and many persons needing the wisest medical appliance for
their relief from disease were executed as witches. Half-witted and
insane persons met with the same persecution as old women. It was an era
of the strong against the weak, the powerful against the helpless. Even
Sir Thomas Browne, himself a physician, regarded the fainting fits to
which one of the accused women had long been subject as fuller evidence
of her guilt. In his character of medical examiner he asserted that the
devil had taken opportunity of her natural fits, to operate with her
malice.

    An almost equally notable trial as that of Bury St. Edmunds before
Sir Matthew Hale, was known as the Sommers Trial, or that of the
"Lancashire Witches," in 1612. Among the accused were two extremely aged
women decrepit and nearly blind, tottering into second childhood,
incapable of understanding whereof they were accused, or the evidence
against them which, as in the case argued before Sir Matthew Hale, was
of the most worthless character. One needs but refer to

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

the records in order to learn the extreme age, ignorance and many
infirmities of these women. But as was the case in Scotland, these
weaknesses were used as evidences of guilt. The feeble mental and
physical condition of "the Lancashire witches," their great age and
failing power were used as evidence for their condemnation. From
published accounts of this trial, we learn that:

    This Annie Whittle, alias Chattox, was a very old withered and
decrepit creature, her sight almost gone, a dangerous witch of very long
continuance, her lips ever chattering and walking (talking)? but no one
knew what. She was next in order to that wicked, fierce bird of
mischief, old Demdike.

    This poor old creature "confessed" that Robert Mutter had offered
insult to her married daughter; and the court decreed this was a fair
proof of her having bewitched him to his death. No condemnation of the
man who had thus insulted her daughter, but death for the aged mother
who had resented this insult. Designated as "Old Demdike, a fierce bird
of mischief" this woman of four score years of age, had not only brought
up a large family of her own, but her grand children had fallen to her
care. She had lived a blameless life of over eighty years, much of it
devoted to the care of children and children's children. But when
decrepit and almost blind she fell under suspicion of a crime held by
Church and State as of the most baleful character, her blameless and
industrious life proved of no avail against this accusation. She seems
to have originally been a woman of great force of character and
executive ability, but frightened at an accusation she could not
understand and overpowered by all the dread majesty of the law into
whose merciless power she had fallen, she "confessed" to communion

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

with a demon spirit which appeared to her in the form of a brown dog."
From a work entitled The Sommers Trials, the form of indictment is
learned.<span id="fr_76"></span>[76](#fn_76.md)

    INDICTMENT.

    This Annie Whittle, alias Chattox, of the Forest of Pendle, in the
countie of Lancaster, widow, being indicted for that she feloniously had
practiced, used and exercised divers wicked and divelish artes, called
witchcraftes, inchantments, charms and sorceries, in and upon one Robert
Mutter of Greenhead, in the Forest of Pendle, in the countie of Lane;
and by force of the same witchcraft, feloniously the sayed Robert Mutter
had killed, contra pacem, etc. Being at the barre was arraigned. To this
indictment, upon her arraignment, she pleaded, not guiltie; and for the
tryall of her life put herself upon God and her country.

    One of the chief witnesses at this trial was a child of nine
years.<span id="fr_77"></span>[77](#fn_77.md) Upon seeing her own daughter
arraigned against her, the mother broke into shrieks and lamentations
pleading with the girl not to falsify the truth and thus condemn her own
mother to death. The judges instead of seeing in this agony a proof of
the mother's innocence looked upon it as an attempt to thwart the ends
of justice by demoniac influence, and the child having declared that she
could not confess in her mother's presence, the latter was removed from
the room, and as under the Inquisition, the testimony was given in the
absence of the accused. The child then said that her mother had been a
witch for three or four years, the devil appearing in the form

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

of a brown dog, Bill. These trials taking place in protestant England,
two hundred years after the reformation, prove the worthless nature of
witchcraft testimony, as well as the superstition, ignorance and entire
unfitness for the bench of those men called the highest judicial minds
in England. The church having almost entirely destroyed freedom of will
and the expression of individual thought, men came to look upon
authority and right as synonymous. Works bearing the stamp of the legal
fraternity soon appeared. in 1618 a volume entitled, "The County
Justice," by Michal Dalton, Gentleman of Lincoln Inn, was published in
London, its chief object to give directions, based upon this trial, for
the discovery of witches.

    Now against these witches the justice of the peace may not always
expect direct evidence, seeing all their works are works of darkness and
no witness permitted with them to accuse them, and therefore for their
better discovery I thought good here to set down certain observations
out of the methods of discovery of the witches that were arraigned at
Lancaster, A. D. 1612 before Sir James Altham and Sir Edward Bromley,
judges of Assize there.

1\. They have ordinarily a familiar or spirit which appeareth to them.

2\. The said familiar hath some bigg or place upon their body where he
sucketh them.

3\. They have often pictures of clay or wax (like a man, etc.) found in
their house.

4\. If the dead body bleed upon the witches touching it.

5\. The testimony of the person hurt upon his death.

6\. The examination and confession of the children or servants of the
witch.

7\. Their own voluntary confession which exceeds all other evidence.

    At this period many persons either in hope of a

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

reward<span id="fr_78"></span>[78](#fn_78.md) or because they believed they
were thus aiding the cause of justice, kept private note books of
instruction in the examination of witches, and new varieties were
constantly discovered. When witchcraft by Act of Parliament was decreed
felony this statute gave the legal fraternity double authority for a
belief in its existence. Even Sir George Mackenzie although convinced by
his own experience that many persons were wrongfully accused of
witchcraft, still declared that its existence could not be doubted,
"seeing that our law ordains it to be punished with death." The most
fatal record the world possesses of the plague is that of the fourteenth
century, known as the "Black Death," when whole villages were
depopulated and more than half the inhabitants of Europe were destroyed.
It will aid in forming our judgment as to the extent of woman's
persecution for witchcraft, to remember it has been estimated that the
number of deaths from this cause equalled those of the plague.

    The American Colonies adopted all the unjust previsions of European
christianity as parts of their own religion and government. Fleeing from
persecution, the Puritans yet brought with them the spirit of
persecution in the belief of woman's inferiority and wickedness, as
taught by the church from whence they had fled. The "Ducking Stool" for
women who too vigorously protested against their wrongs, and the
"Scarlet Letter" of shame for the woman who had transgressed the moral
law, her companion in sin going free, or as in England, sitting as juror
in the box, or judge upon the bench. With them also came a belief in
witchcraft, which soon caused Massachusetts Colony

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

to enact a law ordering suspected women to be stripped naked their
bodies to be carefully examined by a male "witch pricker" to see if
there was not the devil's mark upon them. The public whipping of half
naked women at the cart's tail for the crime of religious free thought
soon followed, a union of both religious and judicial punishment;
together with banishment of women from the Colony for daring to preach
Christ as they understood his doctrines. These customs more barbarous
than those of the savages whose home they had invaded, were the pleasing
welcome given to the pioneer woman settlers of America by the husbands
and fathers, judges and ministers of that period, with which the words
"Plymouth Rock," "May Flower" and "Pilgrim Fathers" are so intimately
associated. The same persecution of aged women took place in New England
as in old England, while children of even more tender years were used as
witnesses against their mothers if accused of witchcraft, or were
themselves imprisoned upon like suspicion. The village of Salem,
Massachusetts, is indissolubly connected with witchcraft, for there the
persecution raged most fiercely, involving its best women in ruin. One
of the oldest buildings still extant in the United States is "The Witch
House" of that place, erected in 1631, although it was sixty one years
later before this persecution reached its height.

    A terrible summer for Salem village and its vicinity was that of
1692--a year of worse than pestilence or famine. Bridget Bishop was
hanged in June; Sarah Good, Sarah Wilder, Elizabeth Howe, Susanna Martin
and Rebecca Nurse in July; George Burroughs, John Proctor, George
Jacobs, John Willard and Martha Carrier in August; Martha Corey, Mary
Easty, Alice Parker, Ann Pudeator, Margaret Scott, Wilmit Reed,

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

    Samuel Wordwell, and Mary Baker in September; in which last month
Giles Corey eighty-one years of age, was pressed to death under a board
loaded with heavy stones, not heavy enough however to crush out life
until a day or two of lingering torture had intervened. Sarah Good's
daughter Dorcas between three and four years old, orphaned by her
mother's execution, was one of a number of children who with several
hundred other persons were imprisoned on suspicion of witchcraft; many
of these sufferers remained in a wretched condition, often heavily
ironed for months, some upwards of a year; and several dying during this
time. A child of seven, Sarah Carrier, was called upon to testify as
witness against her mother.

    Some of the condemned, especially Rebecca Nurse, Martha Corey, and
Mary Easty, were aged women who had led unblemished lives and were
conspicuous for their prudence, their charities and all domestic
virtues.<span id="fr_79"></span>[79](#fn_79.md)

    So extended became the persecution for witchcraft that the king was
at last aroused to the necessity of putting a stop to such wholesale
massacre of his subjects, issued a mandate forbidding the putting of any
more persons to death on account of witchcraft.<span
id="fr_80"></span>[80](#fn_80.md) A remarkable family gathering took place
at Salem, July 18, 1883, of two hundred persons who met to celebrate
their descent from Mrs. Rebecca Nurse, who was executed as a witch at
that place in 1692. The character and life of Mrs. Nurse were
unimpeachable. She was a woman seventy years of age, the mother of eight
children, a church member of unsullied reputation and devout habit; but
all these considerations did not prevent her accusation, trial,
conviction and death, although she solemnly asserted her innocence to
the last. A reprieve granted by the governor was

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

withdrawn through the influence of the church, and she was hung by the
neck till she was dead. In order to give her body burial, her sons were
obliged to steal it away by night, depositing it in a secret place known
but to the family. Forty persons at the hazard of their own lives
testified to the goodness and piety of Mrs. Nurse. Their names were
inscribed upon the monument erected by her descendants, in 1892, to her
memory.<span id="fr_81"></span>[81](#fn_81.md) The Rev. Cotton Mather and
the Rev. Samuel Parrish are indissolubly connected with this period, as
both were extremely active in fomenting a belief in witchcraft. Richard
Baxter, known as the "greatest of the Puritans" condemned those who
expressed a disbelief in witchcraft as "wicked Sadducees." Increase
Mather, president of Harvard College, was one of the most bitter
persecutors of witches in New England. The dangerous spirit of a
religious autocracy like the priesthood, was forcibly shown by a paper
read by Rev. Dr. George E. Ellis, a few years since, before the
Massachusetts Historical Society, in which he excused the act of
stripping women naked in order to search for a witch mark, upon the
ground of its being a judicial one by commissioned officers and
universally practiced in Christendom.

    Boston as "The Bloody Town" rivalled Salem in its persecution of
women who dared express thoughts upon religious matters in contradiction
to the Puritanic belief; women were whipped because of independent
religious belief, New England showing itself as strenuous for
"conformity" of religious opinion as

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

Old England under Queen Elizabeth. The cruelties of this method of
punishing free thought, culminated in the Vagabond Law of Massachusetts
Colony, passed May 1661.

The first ecclesiastical convocation in America was a synod especially
convened to sit in judgment upon the religious views of Mistress Anne
Hutchinson, who demanded that the same rights of individual judgment
upon religious questions should be accorded to woman which the
reformation had already secured to man. Of the eighty-two errors
canvassed by the synod, twenty nine were charged to Mistress Hutchinson,
and retraction of them was ordered by the church. The State united with
the Church in opposition to Mistress Hutchinson, and the first real
struggle for woman's religious liberty, (not yet at an end), began upon
this side of the Atlantic. The principal charge brought against Mistress
Hutchinson was that she had presumed to instruct men. Possessed of a
fine intellect and strong religious fervor, she had inaugurated private
meetings for the instruction of her own sex; from sixty to a hundred
women regularly gathering at her house to hear her criticism upon the
Sunday sermon and Thursday lectures. These meetings proved so
interesting that men were soon found also in attendance and for these
reasons she was arbitrarily tried in November 1637, before the
Massachusetts General Court upon a joint charge of sedition and heresy.
In May of the same year a change had taken place in the civil government
of the colony. Sir Henry Vane, who like herself, believed in the supreme
authority of the in-dwelling spirit, having been superseded by John
Winthrop as governor, the latter sustaining the power of the clergy and
himself taking

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

part against her. Two days were spent by him and prominent clergymen in
her examination, resulting in a sentence of imprisonment and banishment
from the colony for having "traduced the ministers" and taught men
against the direct authority of the Apostle Paul, who declared "I suffer
not a woman to teach."

    Thus the old world restrictions upon woman, and their persecutions,
were soon duplicated in the new world. Liberty of opinion became as
serious a crime in America as in England, and here as in Europe, the
most saintly virtue and the purest life among women were not proof
against priestly attack. While Mistress Hutchinson was the first woman
thus to suffer, many others were also persecuted. When Mary Fisher and
Anne Austin, two Quaker women who had become famous for their
promulgation of this heretical doctrine in many parts of the world,
arrived in Boston harbor, July 1656, they were not at first permitted to
land, but were ultimately transferred to the Boston jail, where they
were closely confined, and notwithstanding the heat of the weather their
one window was boarded up. Their persons were also stripped and examined
for signs of witchcraft, but fortunately not a mole or a spot could be
found. Boston--"The Bloody Town"--was the center of this persecuting
spirit and every species of wanton cruelty upon woman was enacted.
Stripped nude to the waist they were tied to a whipping-post on the
south side of King Street and flogged on account of their religious
opinions; but it was upon the famous "Common" that for the crime of free
speech, a half nude woman with a new born babe at her breast was thus
publicly whipped; and it was upon the "Common" that Mary Dyer, another
Quaker woman, was hung in 1659.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

Both she and Anne Hutchinson prophesied calamity to the colony for its
unjust course, which was fulfilled, when in 1684 it lost its charter in
punishment for its intolerance. No Christian country offered a refuge
for woman, as did Canada the colored slave. But the evils of woman's
persecution by the church, did not end with the wrongs inflicted upon
her; they were widely extended, affecting the most common interests of
the world. While famines were unknown among the ancient Romans in the
first period of their history, yet Christendom was early and frequently
afflicted with them. While the operations of nature were sometimes the
cause, the majority of famines were the result of persecutions, or of
christian wars, especially the crusades which took such immense numbers
of men from the duties of agriculture at home, making them a prey upon
the scanty resources of the countries through which these hordes passed.
As was seen in the Irish famine of 1847-8 and at the present moment as
result of a scanty food supply in Russia, pestilence of various kinds
followed famine years. But the crusades in which the church attempted to
wrest the holy sepulchre from Turkish hands, were scarcely more
productive of famines than its persecuting periods when mankind lost
hope in themselves and the future. Our own country has shown the effect
of fear and persecution upon both business and religion, as during the
witchcraft period of New England, scarcely two hundred years since, all
business of whatever nature in country and in town was neglected, and
even the meeting house was allowed to fall out of repair. Nor was this
ruin of a temporary nature, as many people left the Colony and its
effects descended to those yet unborn. Both Bancroft's History

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

of the United States, and Lapham's History of the Salem Witchcraft,
paint vivid pictures of the effects following the different church
persecutions of woman. Of the Hutchinson trial, Bancroft says:

    This dispute infused its spirit into everything. It interferred with
the levy of troops for the Pequot war; it influenced the respect shown
to magistrates; the distribution of town lots; the assessment of rates
and at last the continued existence of the two parties was considered
inconsistent with public peace.

    Of the witchcraft period, Upham says:

    It cast its shadows over a broad surface and they darkened the
condition of generations \* \* \* The fields were neglected; fences,
roads, barns, even the meeting house went into disrepair \* \* \* A
scarcity of provisions nearly amounting to a famine continued for some
time. Farms were brought under mortgage, or sacrificed, and large
numbers of people were dispersed. The worst results were not confined to
the village but spread more or less over the country.

    Massachusetts was not the only colony that treated witchcraft as a
crime. Maryland, New Jersey and Virginia possessed similar enactments.
Witchcraft was considered and treated as a capital offense by the laws
of both Pennsylvania and New York, trials taking place in both colonies
not long before the Salem tragedy. The peaceful Quaker, William Penn,
presided upon the bench in Pennsylvania at the trial of two Swedish
women accused of witchcraft The Grand jury acting under instruction
given in his charge, found true bills against these women, and Penn's
skirts were only saved from the guilt of their blood by some technical
irregularity in the indictment.

    Virginia, Delaware, Maryland, South Carolina, Pennsylvania, New
Jersey, Massachusetts and New York, eight of the thirteen colonies
recognized witchcraft

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

as a capital crime. Margaret M------ was indicted for witchcraft in
Pennsylvania in 1683, the law against it continuing in force until
September 23, 1794. By law of the Province of East New Jersey, 1668, any
person found to be a witch, either male or female, was to suffer death.
In that state the right of complaining against a child who should smite
or curse either parent, pertained to both father and mother; the penalty
was death. As late as 1756, Connecticut recognized the right of parents
to dispose of children in marriage. In Maryland 1666 the commission
given to magistrates for Somerset county directed them under oath to
make enquiries in regard to witchcraft, sorcery, and magic arts. In 1706
Grace Sherwood of Princess Anne County, Virginia, was tried for
witchcraft. The records of the trial show that the court after a
consideration of the charges, ordered the sheriff to take the said Grace
into his custody and to commit her body to the common jail, there to
secure her with irons or otherwise, until brought to trial.<span
id="fr_82"></span>[82](#fn_82.md)

    In 1692, the Grand jury brought a bill against Mary Osgood of the
Province of Massachusetts Bay, as follows:

    The powers for our sovereign lord and lady, the king and queen,
present that Mary Osgood, wife of Captain John Osgood in the county of
Essex, about eleven years ago in the town of Andover aforesaid,
wickedly, maliciously and feloniously a covenant with the devil did make
and signed the devil's book, and took the devil to be her God, and
consented to serve and worship him and was baptized by the devil and
renounced her former Christian baptism and promised to the devil both
body and soul, forever, and to serve him; by which diabolical covenant
by her made with the devil; she, the said Mary Osgood is become a
detestable witch against the peace of our sovereign

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

lord and lady, the king and queen, their crown and dignity and the laws
in that case made and provided. A true bill.<span
id="fr_83"></span>[83](#fn_83.md)

    When for "witches" we read "women," we gain fuller comprehension of
the cruelties inflicted by the church upon this portion of humanity.
Friends were encouraged to cast accusation upon their nearest and
dearest, rewards being offered for conviction. Husbands who had ceased
to care for their wives or who by reason of their sickness or for any
cause found them a burden, or for reasons of any nature desired to break
the indissoluble bonds of the church, now found an easy method They had
but to accuse the wife of witchcraft and the marriage was dissolved by
her death at the stake. Church history is not silent upon such
instances, and mention is made of a husband who by a rope about the neck
dragged his wife before that Arch-Inquisitor, Sprenger, making
accusation of witchcraft against her. No less from protestant than from
catholic pulpits were people exhorted to bring the witch, even if of
one's own family, to justice.

    In 1736, the statute against witchcraft was repealed by the English
Parliament, yet a belief in witchcraft is still largely prevalent even
among educated people. Dr. F. G. Lee the vicar of an English church,
that of All Saints in Lambeth, a few years since publicly deprecated the
abolition of its penalties in a work entitled "Glimpses of the
Twilight," complaining that the laws against witchcraft had been
"foolishly and short-sightedly repealed." A remarkable case occurred in
Prussia 1883 when the father of a bed-ridden girl, having become
persuaded that his daughter was bewitched by a woman who had
occasionally given her apples and pears, was advised the child would be

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

cured if she drank some of the blood of the supposed witch. The woman
was therefore entrapped into a place where some of the chief men of the
commune had assembled to receive her. She was seized, one of her fingers
pricked with a needle and her blood given to the sick child. In 1885 a
case of slander based upon alleged witchcraft came before Justice
Randolphs, District Court of Jersey City. The justice listened to the
evidence for several hours before recalling the fact that there was no
law upon which he could base his decision, the latest legislation being
the law of 1668 repealed 1795 (twenty years after our Declaration of
Independence), the crime was no longer officially recognized.<span
id="fr_84"></span>[84](#fn_84.md) It is curious to note the close parallel
between accusations during the witchcraft period and those against the
New Jersey suspect of 1885. It was said of her that during the night she
accomplished such feats by supernatural power as jumping from a third
story window, alighting upon a gate post as gently as a falling feather.
It was also asserted that people whom she was known to dislike became
gradually ill, wasting away until they died. The accused woman declared
it was her superior knowledge that was feared, and thus again the middle
ages are paralleled, as the witches of that period were usually women of
superior knowledge. In 1882, a Wisconsin farmer was put under bonds to
keep the peace, on account of his attempts to assault an old lady who he
averred was a witch, who injured his cattle, and entered his house
through the chimney or key hole, to his great terror and distress. The
state of Indiana about sixty years ago possessed

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

a neighborhood where the people believed in witchcraft. If the butter
failed to come, or the eggs to hatch, or a calf got choked, or even if
the rail fences fell down when covered with sleet and snow, the whole
trouble was attributed to the witches, who were also believed to have
the remarkable power of saddling and bridling a man and with sharp spurs
riding him over the worst roads imaginable, to his great harm and
fatigue. Even the great Empire State, as late as January 1892, had
within its borders a case of murder where an inoffensive old man lost
his life because he was believed to be a wizard; and this occurred in
the center of a prosperous farming country where money is liberally
expended for educational purposes, this being one of the rare instances
where a man fell under suspicion.

    It is but a few years since the great and enlightened city of Paris
caused the arrest, under police authority, of fourteen women upon charge
of sorcery; and it is but little more than twenty years since a woman in
the state of Puebla, Mexico, was hung and burned as a witch, because
unable to reveal the whereabouts of a lost animal. She was seized, hung
to a tree shot at and then plunged into fire until she expired.<span
id="fr_85"></span>[85](#fn_85.md) The body at first buried in the cemetery,
was exhumed the following day by order of the priest, who refused to
allow the remains of a witch to be buried in consecrated ground. The
state, in person of the mayor of the city, authorized the proceedings by
taking part in them as principal persecutor. In the same province
another woman was severely flogged as a witch, by four men, one of them
her own son. Thus

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

now, as in its earlier ages, wherever the light of civilization has not
overcome the darkness of the church, we find woman still a sufferer from
that ignorance and superstition which under Christianity, teaches that
she brought sin into the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Wives.](wcs08.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_page_217">p. 217</span>  

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1.](#fr_1.md)  Black was hated as the colors of the
devil. In the same manner red was hated in Egypt as the color of Typhon.

<span id="fn_page_218">p. 218</span>  

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2.](#fr_2.md)  At what date then did the witch
appear? In the age of despair, of that deep despair which the guilt of
the church engendered. Unfalteringly I say, the witch is a crime of
their own making.--*Michelet*.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3.](#fr_3.md)  "It is not a little remarkable,
though perfectly natural, that the introduction of the cat gave a new
impulse to tales and fears of ghosts and enchantments. The sly,
creeping, nocturnal grimalkin took rank at once with owls and bats, and
soon surpassed them both as an exponent of all that is weird and
supernatural. Entirely new conceptions of witchcraft were gained for the
world when the black cat appeared upon the scene with her swollen tail,
glistening eyes and unearthly yell."--Ex.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4.](#fr_4.md)  Steevens says it was permitted to a
witch to take on a cattes body nine times.-Brand 3, 89-90.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5.](#fr_5.md)  Mr. E, F. Spicer, a taxidermist of
Birmingham, whose great specialty is <span id="fn_page_219">p.
219</span> the artistic preparation of kittens for sale, will not
purchase black ones, as he finds the superstition against black cats
interferes with their sale.--"Pall Mall Gazette," Nov. 13, 1886. But the
United States, less superstitious, has recently witnessed the formation
of a "Consolidated Cat Company" upon Puget Sound for the special
propagation of black cats to be raised for their fur.

<span id="fn_page_219">p. 219</span>  

<span id="fn_6"></span>[6.](#fr_6.md)  *City of God*, Lib. XVIII. Charles
F. Lummis, in a recent work, *Some Strange Corners of Our Country, the
Wonderland of the Southwest*, refers to the power of the **shamans** to
turn themselves at will into any animal shape, as a wolf, bear or dog.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[7.](#fr_7.md)  Italian women usually became cats.
The Witch Hammer mentioned a belief in Lycanthropy and Metamorphosis. It
gave the story of a countryman who was assaulted by three cats. He
wounded them, after which three infamous witches were found wounded and
bleeding.

<span id="fn_page_220">p. 220</span>  

<span id="fn_8"></span>[8.](#fr_8.md)  For a full account of this madness,
and other forms that sometimes attacked whole communities during the
middle Christian ages, see "Hecker.--*Epidemics of the Middle Ages*."

<span id="fn_9"></span>[9.](#fr_9.md)  The conventicle of witches was said
to be held on Mt. Atlas, "to which they rode upon a goat, a night crow,
or an enchanted staff, or bestriding a broom staff. Sundry speeches
belonged to these witches, the words whereof were neither Hebrew, Greek,
Latin, French, Spanish, Italian, nor indeed deriving their Etymology
from any known language."

<span id="fn_page_222">p. 222</span>  

<span id="fn_10"></span>[10.](#fr_10.md)  *St. Gregory, of Nyassa*, a
canonized saint, the only theologian to whom the church (except St.
John) has ever allowed the title of "The Divine," was a member of that
council, aiding in the preparation of the Nicene Creed. it is a
significant fact that a great number of public women, "an immense
number," congregated at Nice during the sessions of this council.

<span id="fn_page_223">p. 223</span>  

<span id="fn_11"></span>[11.](#fr_11.md)  In Guernsey a mother and her two
daughters were brought to the stake; One of the latter, a married woman
with child, was delivered in the midst of her torments, and the infant,
just rescued, was tossed back into the flames by a priest with the cry,
"One heretic the less."

<span id="fn_page_224">p. 224</span>  

<span id="fn_12"></span>[12.](#fr_12.md)  "Old writers declared that women
have been more addicted to those devilish arts than men, was manifest by
'many grave authors,' among whom Diodorus, Sindas, Pliny and St.
Augustine were mentioned. Quintillian declared theft more prevalent
among men, but witchcraft especially a sin of omen."

<span id="fn_13"></span>[13.](#fr_13.md)  Lea.--*Superstition and Force*.

<span id="fn_page_225">p. 225</span>  

<span id="fn_14"></span>[14.](#fr_14.md)  Certain forms of ordeal, such as
the ordinary ones of fire and water, seem to have owed their origin to
the trials passed by the candidate for admission into the ancient
mysteries as Lea, has also conjectured. During the mysteries of Isis,
the candidate was compelled to descend into dark dungeons of unknown
depth, to cross bars of red-hot iron, to plunge into a rapid stream at
seeming hazard of life, to hang suspended in mid-air; while the entrance
into other mysteries confronted the candidate with howling wild beasts
and frightful serpents. All who passed the ancient ordeals in safety,
were regarded as holy and acceptable to the Deity, but not so under
Christian ordeal, its intention being conviction of the accused. Those
who proved their innocence by carrying red-hot iron uninjured for three
paces and the court was thus forced to acquit, or who passed through
other forms of torture without confession were still regarded with
suspicion as having been aided by Satan, and the sparing of their lives
was to the scandal of the faithful.

<span id="fn_page_226">p. 226</span>  

<span id="fn_15"></span>[15.](#fr_15.md)  Woman was represented as the door
of hell, as the mother of all human ill. She should be ashamed at the
very thought she is a woman. She should live in continual penance on
account of the curses she has brought upon the world. She should be
ashamed of her dress, for it is the memorial of her fall. She should be
especially ashamed of her beauty, for it is the most potent instrument
of the demon.--*Hist. European Morals*, Vol. 2, p. 358.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[16.](#fr_16.md)  Witchcraft was supposed to have
power of subverting religion.--*Montesquieu*.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[17.](#fr_17.md)  The question why the immense
majority of those who were accused should be women, early attracted
attention; it was answered by the inherent wickedness of the sex, which
had its influence in pre-disposing men to believe in witches, and also
in producing the extreme callousness with which the sufferings of the
victims were contemplated.--*Rationalism in Europe* I, 88.

<span id="fn_page_227">p. 227</span>  

<span id="fn_18"></span>[18.](#fr_18.md)  18 mo. An unusually small size
for that period.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[19.](#fr_19)  (*Witch Hammer*..md)

<span id="fn_20"></span>[20.](#fr_20.md)  The Court of Rome was fully
apprized that power cannot be maintained without property, and thereupon
its attention began very early to be riveted upon every method that
promised pecuniary advantage. All the wealth of Christendom was
gradually drawn by a thousand channels into the coffers of the Holy See.
Blackstone.--*Commentaries* 4, 106. "The church forfeited the wizard's
<span id="fn_page_228">p. 228</span> property to the judge and the
prosecutor, Wherever the church law was enforced, the trials for
witchcraft waxed numerous and brought much wealth to the clergy.
Wherever the lay tribunal claimed the management of those trials, they
grew scarce and disappeared."

<span id="fn_page_229">p. 229</span>  

<span id="fn_21"></span>[21.](#fr_21.md)  Burning Place of the Cross.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[22.](#fr_22.md)  A MS. upholding the burning of
witches as heretics, written in 1450 by the Dominican Brother
*Hieronymes Visconti*, of Milan, is among the treasures of the *White
Library*, recently presented to Cornell University.

<span id="fn_page_231">p. 231</span>  

<span id="fn_23"></span>[23.](#fr_23.md)  It shall not be amiss to insert
among these what I have heard concerning a witch of Scotland: One of
that countrie (as by report there are too many) being for no goodness of
the judges of Assize, arrayed, convicted and condemned to be burnt, and
the next day, according to her judgment, brought and tied to the stake,
the reeds and fagots placed round about her, and the executioner ready
to give fire (for by no persuasion of her ghostly fathers, nor
importunities of the sheriff, she could be wrought to confess anything)
she now at the last cast to take her farewell of the world, casting her
eye at one side upon her only sonne, and calls to him, desiring him
verie earnestly as his last dutie to her to bring her any water, or the
least quantity of licuor (be it never so small), to comfort her, for she
was so extremely athirst; at which he, shaking his head, said nothing;
she still importuned him in these words: "Oh, my deere sonne helpe me to
any drinke, be it never so little, for I am most extremely drie, oh
drie, drie;" to which the young fellow answered, "by no means, deere
mother will I do you that wrong; *for the drier you are (no doubt) you
will burne the better*." Heywoode--*History of Women*, Lib. 8, p. 06.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[24.](#fr_24.md)  Lenormant.--*Chaldean Magic and
Sorcery*, 385.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[25.](#fr_25.md)  *Institutes of Scotland*.

<span id="fn_page_232">p. 232</span>  

<span id="fn_26"></span>[26.](#fr_26.md)  At *Bamburg, Germany* an original
record of twenty-nine burnings in nineteen months, 162 persons in all,
mentions the infant daughter of Dr. Schutz as a victim of the
twenty-eighth burning. Hauber.--*Bibliotheca Magica*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[27.](#fr_27.md)  In those terrible trials presided
over by Pierre de Lancre, it was asserted that hundreds of girls and
boys flocked to the indescribable Sabbats of Labourd. The Venitians
record the story of a little girl of nine years who raised a great
tempest, and who like her mother was a witch. Signor Bernoni,--*Folk
Lore*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[28.](#fr_28.md)  Some very strange stories of such
power at the present time have become known to the author, one from the
lips of a literary gentleman in New York City, this man of undoubted
veracity declaring that he had seen his own father extend <span
id="fn_page_233">p. 233</span> his hand under a cloudless sky and
produce rain. A physician of prominence in a western city asserts that a
most destructive cyclone, known to the Signal Service Bureau as "The
Great Cyclone," was brought about by means of magical formula, made use
of by a school girl in a spirit of ignorant bravado.

<span id="fn_page_236">p. 236</span>  

<span id="fn_29"></span>[29.](#fr_29.md)  These and similar powers known as
magical, are given as pertaining to the Pueblo Indians, by Charles F.
Lummis, in *Some Strange Corners of Our Country*, pub. 1892. A friend of
the author witnessed rain thus produced by a very aged Iowa Indian a few
years since.

<span id="fn_page_238">p. 238</span>  

<span id="fn_30"></span>[30.](#fr_30.md)  A *Hindoo Scripture* whose name
signifies knowledge.--Max Muller.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[31.](#fr_31.md)  *Isis Unveiled*, I, 354.

<span id="fn_page_239">p. 239</span>  

<span id="fn_32"></span>[32.](#fr_32.md)  of which the tricks of Halloween
may be a memento.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[33.](#fr_33.md)  *Anacalypsis*, Vol. I, p. 35.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[34.](#fr_34.md)  Bacchus was not originally the
god of wine, but signified books. Instruction of old, when learning was
a secret science, was given by means of leaves. "Bacchus Sabiesa" really
signified "book wise" or learned, and the midsummer-day festival was
celebrated in honor of learning. In the Anacalypsis Higgins says: "From
Celland I learn that in Celtic, Sab means wise, whence Saba and
Sabasius, no doubt wise in the stars. From this comes the Sab-bath day,
or day dedicated to wisdom, and the Sabbat, a species of French masonry,
an account of which may be seen in *Dulare's History of Paris*. Sunday
was the day of instruction of the Druids, whence it was called
Sabs.--*Ibid* I, 716.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[35.](#fr_35.md)  From the preachment of the Sabs,
or Sages, or wise Segent Sarcedos.--*Ibid* I, 716.

<span id="fn_page_240">p. 240</span>  

<span id="fn_36"></span>[36.](#fr_36.md)  The only physician of the people
for a thousand years was the witch. The emperors, kings, popes and
richer barons had indeed the doctors of Salermo, then Moors and Jews,
but the bulk of the people in every state; the world, it might as well
be called, consulted none but the Sages or wise women. Michelet,--*La
Sorciere*.

<span id="fn_page_241">p. 241</span>  

<span id="fn_37"></span>[37.](#fr_37.md)  I make no doubt that his
(Paracelsus) admirable and masterly work on the Diseases of Women, the
first written on this theme, so large, so deep, so tender, came forth
from his special experience of those women to whom others went for aid,
the witches, who acted as midwives, for never in those days was a male
physician admitted to the women.--*Ibid*.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[38.](#fr_38.md)  Within the past fifty years the
death rate in childbirth was forty in a thousand, an enormous mortality,
and although the advances in medical knowledge have somewhat lessened
the rate, more women still lose their lives during childbirth than
soldiers in battle.

<span id="fn_page_242">p. 242</span>  

<span id="fn_39"></span>[39.](#fr_39.md)  In childbirth a motherly hand
instilled the gentle poison, casting the mother herself into a sleep,
and soothing the infant's passage, after the manner of modern
chloroform, into the world.--*Michelet*.

<span id="fn_page_244">p. 244</span>  

<span id="fn_40"></span>[40.](#fr_40.md)  *Pouruchet Solenasaes*.

<span id="fn_page_245">p. 245</span>  

<span id="fn_41"></span>[41.](#fr_41.md)  Alexander.--*History of Women*.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[42.](#fr_42.md)  You will hardly believe it, but I
saw a real witch's skull, the other evening, at a supper party I had the
pleasure of attending it was at the house of Dr. Dow, a medical
gentleman of culture and great skill in his profession here. You will
admit that a skull is not a pleasant thing to exhibit in a parlor, and
some of the ladies did not care about seeing it; but the majority did,
and you know one cannot see a witch's skull every day. So, after a
little hesitation and persuasion on the part of the doctor, he produced
the uncanny thing and gave us its history, or rather that of the witch.
She lived at Terryburn, a little place near here. <span
id="fn_page_246">p. 246</span> One day it came to the ears of the kirk
session of the parish that she had had several interviews with his
Satanic Majesty. Strange enough, when the woman was brought before that
body--which seems to have been all-powerful in the several parishes in
those days--and accused of it, she at once admitted the charge to be
true. The poor soul, who could have been nothing else than an idiot, as
the doctor pointed out from the very low forehead and small brain
cavity, was sentenced to be prevented from going to sleep; or in other
words, tortured to death, and the desired end was attained in about five
days, her body being buried below high-water mark.

Her name was Lillas Adie, and there is no doubt that she was only a
harmless imbecile. The skull. and also a piece of the coffin, were
presented to the doctor by a friend who had read in the kirk session
records an account of the trial, and went to the spot stated as being
the place of burial. The remains were found by him exactly as indicated,
although there was nothing to mark their resting place, One would have
thought that after the lapse of so many years it would be exceedingly
difficult to find them, but you know things do not undergo such radical
changes in this country as they do in America.--From a traveler's letter
in the "Syracuse Journal," August 22, 1881.

Almost indistinguished from the belief in witchcraft was the belief that
persons subject to epilepsy, mania or any form of mental weakness, were
possessed of a devil who could be expelled by certain religious
ceremonies. Pike.--*History of Crime in England*, Vol. pp. 7-8.

<span id="fn_page_246">p. 246</span>  

<span id="fn_43"></span>[43.](#fr_43.md)  The mysteries of the human
conscience and of human motives are well nigh inscrutable, and it may be
shocking to assert that these customs of unmitigated wrong are
indirectly traceable to that religion of which the two great
commandments were that man should love his neighbor as himself.
Lea.--*Superstition and Force*, 53.

<span id="fn_page_249">p. 249</span>  

<span id="fn_44"></span>[44.](#fr_44.md)  Fox's *Book of Martyrs*, gives
account of persons brought into court upon <span id="fn_page_250">p.
250</span> litters six months after having been subjected to the rack.

<span id="fn_page_250">p. 250</span>  

<span id="fn_45"></span>[45.](#fr_45.md)  In this case both men and women
says Johannus Megerus, author of a History of Flanders.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[46.](#fr_46.md)  Adrianus Ferrens.

<span id="fn_page_251">p. 251</span>  

<span id="fn_47"></span>[47.](#fr_47.md)  St. Bernard exorcised a demon
Incubus, who for six years maintained commerce with a woman, who could
not get rid of him. Lea.--*Studies in Church History*.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[48.](#fr_48)  It was observed they (devils.md) had
a peculiar attachment to women with beautiful hair, and it was an old
Catholic belief that St. Paul alluded to this in that somewhat obscure
passage in which he exhorts women to cover their heads because of the
angels.--*Sprangler*.

<span id="fn_page_252">p. 252</span>  

<span id="fn_49"></span>[49.](#fr_49.md)  The attention of scientific men
and governments has recently been directed to what are now called "*The
Accursed Sciences*," under whose action certain crimes have been
committed from "suggestion," the hand which executed being only that of
an irresponsible automaton, whose memory preserves no traces of it. The
French Academy has just been debating the question--how far a hypnotized
subject from a mere victim can become a regular tool of
crime.--*Lucifer*, October 1887.

"Merck's Bulletin," New York medical journal, in an editorial entitled
*Modern Witchcraft*, December, 1892, relates some astonishing
experiments recently made at the *Hopital de la Charitè*, Paris, in
which the power to "exteriorize sensibility" has been discovered,
reproducible at will; suggestion through means of simulated pinching
producing suffering; photographs sensitive to their originals even
having produced. Thus modern science stamps with truthfulness the power
asserted as pertaining to black magicians, of causing suffering or death
through means of a waxen image of a person. "*The Accursed Sciences*,"
although brought to the bar of modern investigating knowledge, seem not
yet to have yielded the secrets of the law under which they are rendered
possible.

<span id="fn_page_253">p. 253</span>  

<span id="fn_50"></span>[50.](#fr_50.md)  In 1609 six hundred sorcerers
were convicted in the Province of Bordeaux, France, most of whom were
burned.--*Dr. Priestly*. Within the last year fourteen women have been
tried in France for sorcery.

<span id="fn_page_254">p. 254</span>  

<span id="fn_51"></span>[51.](#fr_51.md)  The supreme end of magic is to
conjure the spirits. The highest and most inscrutable of all the powers
dwells in the divine and mysterious name, "The Supreme Name," with which
Hea alone is acquainted. Before this name everything bows in heaven and
earth, and in hades, and it alone can conquer the Maskim and stop their
ravages. The great name remained the secret of Hea; if any man succeeded
in divining it, that alone would invest him with a power superior to the
gods.--*Chaldean Magic and Sorcery*.

<span id="fn_page_255">p. 255</span>  

<span id="fn_52"></span>[52.](#fr_52.md)  Venitians concluded not
unreasonably that the latter ran no more risk from the taint of
witchcraft attached to their inheritance than did the clergy or the
church. Where profits were all spiritual their ardor soon cooled. Thus
it happened as the inevitable result of the peoples attitude in
religious matters, that while in Venice there were representatives of
the vast sisterhood, which extended from the Blockula of Sweden to the
walnut tree of Beneveuto, sorcery there never became the terrible
scourge that it was in other lands where its victims at times threatened
to outnumber those of the Black Death.--*The Witches of Venice*.

<span id="fn_page_256">p. 256</span>  

<span id="fn_53"></span>[53.](#fr_53.md)  One of the most powerful features
of the belief in witchcraft was the power that greed had in producing
belief and causing persecution. The church had grown rich from such
trials, and the state was now to take its turn. By the public offering
of a reward for the finding of witches, their numbers greatly increased.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[54.](#fr_54.md)  The most exceptional conduct, the
purest morals in constant practice of every day life, are not sufficient
security against the suspicion of errors like these.--*Montesquieu*.

<span id="fn_page_257">p. 257</span>  

<span id="fn_55"></span>[55.](#fr_55.md)  For a number of years her
celebrated son struggled amid his scientific studies for the
**preservation** of her life.

<span id="fn_page_258">p. 258</span>  

<span id="fn_56"></span>[56.](#fr_56.md)  Michelet.--*Le Sorcerie* 151. See
*Papers on the Bastile*.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[57.](#fr_57.md)  In its earliest phase the Black
Mass seemed to betoken the redemption of Eve, so long accused by
Christianity. The woman filled every place in the Sabbath. Following its
celebration was the denial of Jesus, by whose authority the priests and
barons robbed the serf of human hope--the paying of homage to the new
master--the feudal kiss. To the closing ceremonies, "The Feast of
Peace," no man was admitted unaccompanied by a woman.--*La
Sorcerie.--Ibid.*

<span id="fn_page_259">p. 259</span>  

<span id="fn_58"></span>[58.](#fr_58.md)  "This word at different times
clearly meant quite different things. In the 14th century, under the
Avignon popes, during the great schism when the church with two heads
seems no longer a church, the Sabbath took the horrible form of the
Black Mass."

<span id="fn_59"></span>[59.](#fr_59.md)  This important part of the woman
being her own altar, is known to us by the trial of La Voisin, which M.
Revanna *Sen*. published with other *Papers of the Bastile.--Ibid*.

<span id="fn_page_261">p. 261</span>  

<span id="fn_60"></span>[60.](#fr_60.md)  That women have been more
addicted to this devilish art than man, is manifest by the approbation
of many grave authority. Diodorus, in his fifth book, speaks of Hecate.
Heywood.--*History of Women*, London, 1624. St. Augustine, in his City
of God, declared that women are more prone to these unlawful acts, for
so we read of Medea, Cyrce and others. Suidas, speaking of witches,
cites an old proverb, declaring witchcraft peculiar to woman and not to
man. Quintillian, referring to this statement, says: Theft is more
common with man, but witchcraft with woman.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[61.](#fr_61.md)  Idiots, the lame, the blind and
the dumb, are men in whom devils have established themselves, and all
the physicians who heal these infirmities as though they preceded from
natural causes are ignorant blockheads, who know nothing about the power
of the demons.--*Tishreden*, p. 202.

<span id="fn_page_262">p. 262</span>  

<span id="fn_62"></span>[62.](#fr_62.md)  See *Reeves*, and *Hume*.

<span id="fn_page_263">p. 263</span>  

<span id="fn_63"></span>[63.](#fr_63.md)  *The Statute of Labourers* (5
Eliz. C. 4) enacted that unmarried women between twelve and forty years
old may be appointed by two justices to serve by the year, week, or day,
for such wages and in such reasonable sort and manner as they shall
think meet.--*Reeves* 3, 591-8.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[64.](#fr_64.md)  Seen by *Dr. Gray*.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[65.](#fr_65.md)  James believing in their
(witches) influence, and Bacon partly sharing in <span
id="fn_page_264">p. 264</span> the belief. Macbeth appeared in this year
mixed up with Bacon's inquiries into witchcraft. Ignatius
Donnelly.--*The Cryptogram*. From the accession of James I., witchcraft
became the master superstition of the age. The woman accused of
witchcraft was practically beyond the pale of the law; the mere fact of
accusation was equal to condemnation.

<span id="fn_page_266">p. 266</span>  

<span id="fn_66"></span>[66.](#fr_66.md)  *Laws and Customs of Scotland*,
2; 56

<span id="fn_page_267">p. 267</span>  

<span id="fn_67"></span>[67.](#fr_67.md)  *The Seeress of Prevorst*.

<span id="fn_page_269">p. 269</span>  

<span id="fn_68"></span>[68.](#fr_68.md)  Iron collars, or Witches'
Bridles, are still preserved in various parts of Scotland, which had
been used for such iniquitous purposes. These instruments were so
constructed that by means of a loop which passed over the head, a piece
of iron having four points or prongs, was forcibly thrust into the
mouth, two of these being directed to the tongue and palate, the others
pointing outward to each cheek. This infernal machine was secured by a
padlock. At the back of the collar was fixed a ring, by which to attach
the witch to a staple in the wall of her cell. Thus equipped, and day
and night waked and watched by some skillful person appointed by her
inquisitors, the unhappy creature, after a few days of such discipline,
maddened by the misery of her forlorn and helpless state, would be
rendered fit for confessing anything in order to be rid of the dregs of
her life. At intervals fresh examinations took place, and they were
repeated from time to time until her "contumacy," as it was termed, was
subdued. The clergy and Kirk Sessions appear to have been the unwearied
instruments of "purging the land of witchcraft," and to them, *in the
first instance, all the complaints and informations were
made*.--*Pitcairn*, Vol. I., Part 2, p. 50.

"Who has not heard of the Langholm witches, and 'the branks' to subdue
them? This was a simple instrument formed so as to fit firmly on the
head, and <span id="fn_page_270">p. 270</span> to project into the mouth
a sharp spike for subjugating the tongue. It was much preferred to the
ducking-stool, 'which not only endangered the health of the patient, but
also gave the tongue liberty betwixt every dip!' Scores of these
'patients' were burned alongside Langholm castle; and the spot is fully
as interesting as our own reminder of the gentle days, Gallows Hill, at
Salem."

<span id="fn_page_270">p. 270</span>  

<span id="fn_69"></span>[69.](#fr_69.md)  By statute 33 of Henry VIII., C.
8, all witchcraft and sorcery was to be felony without benefit of
clergy. This act continued in force till lately to the terror of all
ancient females in the kingdom.--*Commentaries*. As bad as the Georges
are depicted, thanks are due to two of them from women. By statute of
George II., C. 5, no future prosecution was to be carried on against any
person for conjuration, witchcraft, sorcery or enchantment.

<span id="fn_page_272">p. 272</span>  

<span id="fn_70"></span>[70.](#fr_70.md)  Towards the end Of 1593 there was
trouble in the family of the Earl of Orkney. His brother laid a plot to
murder him, and was said to have sought the help of a notorious witch
called "Allison Balfour." No evidence could be found connecting her with
this particular offense or with witchcraft in general, but it was enough
in these matters to be a woman and to be accused. She swore she was
innocent, but she was looked upon as a pagan who thus aggravated her
guilt. She was tortured again and again, but being innocent she
constantly declared her innocence. Her legs were put into the
Casctulars--an iron which was gradually heated until it burned into the
flesh, but no confession could be wrung from her. The Casctulars having
utterly failed to make her tell a lie, "the powers that be," whom Paul
tells us "are of God," tortured her husband, her son and her daughter, a
little child of only seven years. The "powers" knew the tenderness and
love of a wife and mother, so they first brought her husband into court
and placed by her side. He was placed in the "long irons," some accursed
instrument. She did not yield. Then her son was tortured; the poor boy's
legs were set in "the boot," the iron boot, and wedges were driven in,
which forced home crushed the very bone and marrow. Fifty-seven mallet
strokes were delivered upon the wedges, yet this failed. This innocent
tortured heroic woman would not confess to a lie. So last of all her
baby daughter was brought in, the fair child of seven short years. There
was a machine called the pinniwinkies, a kind of thumb screw which
brought blood from under the finger nails with a pain terribly severe.
These tortures were applied to the baby hands, and the mother's
fortitude broke down and she would admit anything they wished. She
confessed the witchcraft. So tried she would have confessed the seven
deadly sins, but this suffering did not save her to her family. She was
burned alive, with her last suffering breath protesting her innocence.
This account is perfectly well authenticated and taken from the official
report of the proceedings. Froude.--*Short Stories on Great Subjects*.

<span id="fn_page_273">p. 273</span>  

<span id="fn_71"></span>[71.](#fr_71.md)  The same dark superstition shared
the civil councils of Scotland as late as the beginning of the 18th
century, and the convictions which then took place are chiefly to be
ascribed to the ignorance and fanaticism of the clergy.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[72.](#fr_72.md)  Excommunication was both of
temporal and spiritual effect, the person under ban not only being
deprived of absolution, extreme unction, consecrated burial, etc, but
all persons were forbidden to deal with the recalcitrant. Under the
strictest protestantism in Scotland, the clergy held almost entire
control. When a woman fell under suspicion of being a witch, the
minister denounced her from the pulpit, forbade any one harboring or
sheltering her, and exhorted his parishoners to give evidence against
her. To the clergy and Kirk Sessions were the first complaints made. It
is scarcely more than 150 years since the last witch was burned in
Scotland, having been accused of raising a thunder storm by pulling off
her stockings.--*Witchcraft Under Protestantism*.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[73.](#fr_73.md)  Many witches lost their lives in
every part of England, without being brought to trial at all, from
injuries received at the hands of the populace. Mackay.--*Memoirs of
Extraordinary Popular Delusions*.

<span id="fn_page_274">p. 274</span>  

<span id="fn_74"></span>[74.](#fr_74.md)  One of the most powerful
incentives to confession was to systematically deprive the suspected
witch of her natural sleep. It was said who but witches can be present
and so witness of the doings of witches, since all their meetings and
conspiracies are the habits of darkness. "The voluntarie confession of a
witch doth exceede all other evidence. How long she has been a witch the
devil and she knows best."

<span id="fn_page_280">p. 280</span>  

<span id="fn_75"></span>[75.](#fr_75.md)  Among the Lancashire witches was
Old Demedike, four score years old, who had been a witch fifty years,
and confessed to possessing a demon which appeared to her in the form of
a brown dog.--Sommer's Trials.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[76.](#fr_76.md)  *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[77.](#fr_77.md)  Which examination, although she
was but very young, yet it was wonderful to the Court in so great a
presence and audience.--*Ibid*. Ties of the tenderest nature did not
restrain the inquisitors. Young girls were regarded as the best
witnesses against their mothers, and the oaths of children of
irresponsible age were received as evidence against a
parent.--Superstition and Force, p. 93.

<span id="fn_page_282">p. 282</span>  

<span id="fn_78"></span>[78.](#fr_78.md)  When a reward was publicly
offered there seemed to be no end of finding witches, and many kept with
great care their note book of "Examination of Witches," and were
discovering "hellish kinds of them."

<span id="fn_page_284">p. 284</span>  

<span id="fn_79"></span>[79.](#fr_79.md)  *Salem Witchcraft* I, 393-4; 2,
373.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[80.](#fr_80.md)  I seemed to have stepped back to
Puritan time, when an old gentleman said to me. "I am descended from
that line of witches; my grandmother and 120 others were under
condemnation of death at New Bedford, when an order came from the king
prohibiting farther executions."

<span id="fn_page_285">p. 285</span>  

<span id="fn_81"></span>[81.](#fr_81.md)  SALEM, Mass., July 30, 1892.--The
200th anniversary of the hanging of Rebecca Nurse of Salem village for
witchcraft, was commemorated in Danvers Centre, old Salem village, by
the Nurse Monument Association. The distinct feature of the occasion was
the dedication of a granite tablet to commemorate the courage of forty
men and women, who at the risk of their lives gave written testimony in
favor of Rebecca Nurse in 1692.

<span id="fn_page_290">p. 290</span>  

<span id="fn_82"></span>[82.](#fr_82.md)  Howes.--*Historical Collection of
Virginia*, p. 438.

<span id="fn_page_291">p. 291</span>  

<span id="fn_83"></span>[83.](#fr_83.md)  *Collection Massachusetts
Historical Society* for the year 1800. p. 241.

<span id="fn_page_292">p. 292</span>  

<span id="fn_84"></span>[84.](#fr_84.md)  No prosecution, suit or
proceedings shall be commenced or carried on in any court of this state
against any person for conjuration or witchcraft, sorcery or enchantment
or for charging another with such offense.

<span id="fn_page_293">p. 293</span>  

<span id="fn_85"></span>[85.](#fr_85.md)  Under the church theory that all
members of the witch's family are tainted, the husband of this
unfortunate woman hid himself, fearing the same fate.--*Telegram*.
