[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wcs05)  [Next](wcs07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

### MARQUETTE.

    The minds of people having been corrupted through centuries by the
doctrines of the Church in regard to woman, it became an easy step for
the State to aid in her degradation. The system of feudalism arising
from the theory that warfare was the normal condition of man, still
oppressed woman by bringing into power a class of men accustomed to
deeds of violence, who found their chief pleasure in the sufferings of
others. To be a woman appealed to no instinct of tenderness in this
class. To be a woman was not to be protected unless such woman held
power in her own right, or acted in place of some feudal lord. The whole
body of villeins, and serfs were under absolute dominion of the feudal
lords. They were regarded as possessing no rights of their own; the
priests had control of their souls, the lord, of their bodies. But it
was not upon the male serfs that the greatest oppression fell. Although
the tillage of the soil, the care of swine and cattle was theirs, the
masters claiming half or more of everything, even to one-half of the
wool shorn from the flock,<span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) and all
exactions upon them were great while their sense of security was slight,
it was upon their wives and daughters that the

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

greatest outrages were inflicted. It was a pastime of the castle
retainers to fall upon peaceful villages, to the consternation of the
women, who were struck, tortured, and made the sport of ribald
soldiers.<span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2) "Serfs of the body," they had
no protection. The vilest outrages were perpetrated by the feudal lords
under the name of "rights." Women were taught by church and state alike
that the feudal lord or seigneur had a right to them not only as against
themselves, but as against any claim of husband or father. The custom
known by a variety of names, but more modernly as "marchetta," or
"marquette," compelled newly married women to a most dishonorable
servitude. They were regarded as the rightful prey of the feudal lord
for from one to three days after their marriage,<span
id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3) and from this custom, the oldest son of the
serf was held as the son of the lord, "as perchance it was he who begot
him."

    From this nefarious degradation of woman the custom of
Borough-English arose, the youngest son becoming the heir<span
id="fr_4"></span>[4](#fn_4): The original signification of the word
borough, being *to make secure*, the peasant through Borough-English
made secure the right of his own son to what inheritance he might leave,
thus cutting

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

off his property from the possible son of his hated lord. France,
Germany, Prussia, England, Scotland, and all christian countries in
which feudalism existed, held to the enforcement of marquette, The lord
deemed this right his, as fully as be did his claim to half the crops of
the land, or half the wool shorn from the sheep. More than one reign of
terror arose in France from the enforcement of this law, and the
uprisings of the peasants over Europe during the twelfth century and the
fierce Jacquerie, or Peasants War, of the fourteenth century in France,
owed their origin among other causes to the enforcement of these claims
by the lords upon the newly married wife. The Edicts of Marley securing
the seigneural tenure in Lower Canada transplanted that claim to America
when Canada was under the control of France.<span
id="fr_5"></span>[5](#fn_5)

    During the feudal period when chivalry held highest rank in the
duties of the knight, women of the lower classes were absolutely
unprotected. Both Church and State were their most bitter enemies; the
lords even if in holy orders did not lessen their claims upon the bride.
Most of the bishops and *chanonies* were also temporal lords. The Bishop
of Amiens possessed this right against the women of his vassals and the
peasants of his fiefs, of which he was dispossessed at the commencement
of the fifteenth century, by an *arreet*, rendered at the solicitation
of husbands.<span id="fr_6"></span>[6](#fn_6) Although the clergy,
largely drawn from the nobility,<span id="fr_23"></span>[23](#fn_23)
whose portionless younger sons were thus easily provided for, sustained
the corruptions of the lords temporal

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

yet having connected themselves with the church, they did not fall to
preserve their own power even over the nobility.

    The canons of the Cathedral of Lyons, bore title of Counts of Lyons;
sixteen quarters of nobility, eight on side of the father; eight on side
of the mother. The marchetta or cuissage was still practiced by them in
the fourteenth century at the time Lyons was reunited to the crown of
France. It was but slowly, after a great number of complaints and
arrests of judgment that the canons of Lyons consented to forego this
custom. In several cantons of Piccardy, the cures imitated the bishops
and anciently took the right of cuissage, but ultimately the peasants of
this region refused to marry, and the priests gave up this practice
which they had usurped when the bishop had become too old to take his
right.<span id="fr_7"></span>[7](#fn_7) The resolution not to marry,
surprised and confounded the lord "suzerains," who perceived it would
cause the depopulation of their feifs. During the feudal period, bearing
children was the duty pre-eminently taught women. Serf children
increased the power and possessions of the lord, they also added to the
power of the church, and the strangest sermons in regard to woman's duty
in this respect fell from the lips if celibate monks and priests. She
was taught that sensual submission to man, and the bearing of children,
were the two reasons for her having been created, and that the woman who
failed in either had no excuse for longer encumbering the earth. The
language used from the Pulpit for the enforcement of these duties, will
not bear reproduction.<span id="fr_8"></span>[8](#fn_8) The villeins
were not entirely

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

submissive under such great wrongs, frequently protesting against this
right of their suzerains. At one time a number of Piedmont villages rose
in united revolt, compelling the lords to relinquish some of their
powers. Although<span id="fr_9"></span>[9](#fn_9) the concessions gained
were but small, not putting an end to the lord's claim to the bride but
merely lessening the time of his spoliation, the results were great in
establishing the principle of serf rights.

    Marquette began to be abolished in France towards the end of the
sixteenth century.<span id="fr_10"></span>[10](#fn_10) But an authority
upon this question says that without doubt the usage still continued in
certain countries, farther asserting that even in this century it
existed in the county of Auvergene, and several vassals plead to their
lords against the continuance of this custom because of the great
unhappiness it caused them. The lower orders of the clergy were very
unwilling to relinquish this usage, vigorously protesting to their
archbishops against the deprivation of the right, declaring they could
not be dispossessed.<span id="fr_11"></span>[11](#fn_11) Bœms states
that he was present at a spiritual council of the metropolitane of
Bourges, and heard a priest claim the right upon ground of immemorial
usage.<span id="fr_12"></span>[12](#fn_12)

    Although feudalism is generally considered the parent of this most
infamous custom, some writers attribute its origin to an evangelical
council, or to precepts directly inculcated by the church," whose

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

very highest dignitaries did not hesitate to avail themselves of the
usage. In 1471, quite the latter part of the fifteenth century, Pope
Sixtus IV<span id="fr_14"></span>[14](#fn_14) sought admission to the
very illustrious Piedmont family, Della Rovere, which possessed the
right of cuissage, allowing the lord absolute control of his vassals
newly wedded bride for three days and nights; a cardinal of the family
having secured the patent by which this outrageous and abominable right
was granted them. The rights of the Lords spiritual in the *jus prima
noctis*, at first, perchance, confined to those temporal lords who
holding this right entered the church, at last extended to the common
priesthood, and the confessional became the great fount of debauchery.
Woman herself was powerless; the church, the state, the family, all
possessed authority over her as against herself. Although eventually
redemption through the payment of money, or property, was possible, yet
a husband too poor or penurious to save her, aided in this debasement of
his wife.<span id="fr_15"></span>[15](#fn_15) This inexpressible abuse
and degradation of woman went under the name of pastime, nor were the
courts to be depended upon for defense.<span
id="fr_16"></span>[16](#fn_16) Their sympathies and decisions were with
the lord. Few except manorial courts existed. Even when freedom had been
purchased for the bride, all feudal customs rendered it imperative upon
her to bear the "wedding dish" to the castle. Accompanied by her
husband, this ceremony ever

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

drew upon the newly married couple a profusion of jeers and ribald jests
from which they were powerless to protect themselves. While in ancient
Babylon woman secured immunity by one service and payment to the temple,
the claim of the lord to the peasant wife was not always confined to the
marriage day, and refusal of the loan of his wife at later date brought
most severe punishment upon the husband.<span
id="fr_17"></span>[17](#fn_17)

    Blessing the nuptial bed by the priest, often late at night, was
also common, and accompanied by many abuses, until advancing
civilization overpowered the darkness of the church and brought it to an
end. When too poor to purchase the freedom of his bride, the husband was
in one breath assailed by the most opprobrious names,<span
id="fr_18"></span>[18](#fn_18) and in the next he was congratulated upon
the honor to be done him in that perchance his oldest child would be the
son of a baron.<span id="fr_19"></span>[19](#fn_19) So great finally
became the reproach and infamy connected with the *droit de cuissage*,
as this right was generally called in France<span
id="fr_20"></span>[20](#fn_20) and so recalcitrant became the peasants
over its nefarious exactions, that ultimately both lords spiritual and
lords temporal fearing for their own safety, commenced to lessen their
demands.<span id="fr_21"></span>[21](#fn_21) This custom had its origin
at the time the

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

great body of the people were slaves bound either to the person or land
of some lord. At this period personal rights no more existed for the
lower classes than for the blacks of our own country during the time of
slavery. Under feudalism, the property, family ties, and even the lives
of the serfs were under control of the suzerain, It was a system of
slavery without the name; the right of the lord to all first fruits was
universally admitted;<span id="fr_22"></span>[22](#fn_22) the best in
possession of the serf, by feudal custom belonged to the lord. The
feudal period was especially notable for the wrongs of women. War, the
pastime of nobles and kings, brought an immense number of men into
enforced idleness. Its rapine and carnage were regarded as occupations
superior to the tillage of the soil or the arts of peace. Large numbers
of men, retainers of every kind, hung about the castle dependent upon
its lord, obedient to his commands.<span id="fr_23"></span>[23](#fn_23)
At an age when books were few and reading an accomplishment of still
greater rarity, these men, apart from their families, or totally unbound
by marriage, were in readiness for the grossest

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

amusement. At an age when human life was value, less, and suffering of
every kind was disregarded, We call readily surmise the fate likely to
overtake unprotected peasant women. They were constantly ridiculed and
insulted; deeds of violence were common and passed unreproved. For a
woman of this class to be self-respecting was to become a target for the
vilest abuse. Morality was scoffed at; to drag the wives and daughters
of villeins and serfs into the mire of lechery was deemed a proper
retribution for their attempted pure lives; they possessed no rights of
person or morality against the feudal lord and his wild retainers. All
christian Europe was plunged into the grossest immorality.<span
id="fr_24"></span>[24](#fn_24) A mistress was looked upon as a necessary
part of a monarch's state.<span id="fr_25"></span>[25](#fn_25) Popes,
cardinals, and priests of lesser degrees, down to the present century,
still continued the unsavory reputation of their predecessors;"<span
id="fr_26"></span>[26](#fn_26) "nephews," "nieces," and "sacrilegious"
children are yet supported by the revenues of the Church, or left to
poverty, starvation and crime. It was long the custom of christian
municipalities to welcome visiting kings by deputations of naked
women,<span id="fr_27"></span>[27](#fn_27) and as late as the eighteenth
century, a mistress whose

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

support was drawn from the revenues of the kingdom, was recognized as
part of the pageantry of the kingdom.

    The heads of the Greek and Protestant Churches, no less than of the
Catholic, appear before the world as men of scandalous lives. The
history of the popes is familiar to all students. No less is that of the
English Eighth Henry, the real father of the Reformation, in England,
and founder of the Anglican Church, whose adulteries and murders make
him a historic Blue Beard. The heads of the Greek Church figure in a
double sense as fathers of their people. The renowned Peter the Great
amused himself by numberless **liaisons**, filling Russia with
descendants whose inherited tendencies are those of discontent and
turmoil. When he visited the Court of Prussia, 1717, he was accompanied
by his czarina, son, daughter, and four hundred ladies in waiting, women
of low condition, each of whom carried an elegantly dressed infant upon
her arms. If asked in regard to the paternity of the child they
invariably replied "my lord has done me the honor to make me its
mother."<span id="fr_28"></span>[28](#fn_28)

    In no country has a temporal monarch under guise of a spiritual
ruler been more revered than in Russia. Even amidst nihilism a belief
that the czar can do no wrong is the prevailing conviction among the
Slavic peoples. This is both a great cause of, and a result of Russian
degradation, If we except the proportionately few liberal thinkers, that
conviction is as strong as it was in the time of Ivan the Terrible. In
no civilized or half-civilized nation is ignorance as dense as among the
peasantry of that vast empire embracing one-sixth of the habitable
globe. Nor to the

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

czar alone was such disregard of woman's right of person confined. The
system of serfdom which existed until within the last half of the
present century, was a system of feudalism in its oppression of women,
although if possible even more gross. The sale of young peasant girls
regularly took place, and the blood of the nobility of that country runs
in the veins of its most degraded and ignorant population.<span
id="fr_29"></span>[29](#fn_29) Although Italy the seat of the papal
power is noted for the ignorance, squalor, and superstition of its
people, we no less find such a condition of affairs existing in Russia.
Amid the starvation of its people, accompanied by "hunger-typhus" that
form of disease which in the Irish famine of 1848 was known as
"ship-fever," the peasants will not accept aid from Count Tolstoi, whom
they have been taught to regard as Anti-Christ, fearing that by so doing
they will condemn themselves to eternal torment.<span
id="fr_30"></span>[30](#fn_30) While the peasantry are thus suffering
wrongs of every nature, the priesthood and churches are as thriving as
before.

    Having shown the results of power in the hands of a controlling
class, upon women of low degree in both the Catholic and Greek divisions
of christendom, we have but to look at our own country to find like
condition

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

under Protestantism. The state of the slave women of the South was that
of serfs of the body under feudalism, or of the serf peasant women of
Russia. Nor is other proof of this statement required than the hue of
this race, no longer spoken of as the blacks, but as colored people. Let
the condition of woman as to her rights of person, under the three great
divisions of Christianity, be answer to all who without examination of
history, or the customs of ancient and modern times, and with eyes
closed to these most patent facts, so falsely assert that woman has been
elevated by christianity, and is now holding a position never before in
the world accorded her. But what has already been shown of her
degradation under christian teachings and laws is but a small portion of
the wrongs woman has suffered during the christian centuries.

    Under theory of the divine rights of man, society has everywhere
been permeated with disregard for woman's rights of person. Monarchs not
posing as spiritual heads of their people have yet equally made use of
their place and power for woman's degradation, and an indefinite
fatherhood outside of marriage. Augustus of Saxony, King of Poland, is
chiefly renowned in history as the father of three hundred illegitimate
children.<span id="fr_31"></span>[31](#fn_31) Of Charles II. not alone
King of England, but also head of the Anglican Church, one of his
subjects declared him to be the father of many of his people in the
literal as well as in the spiritual sense. Four English dukes of the
present day trace their lineage to this monarch., who left no legitimate
descendants.<span id="fr_32"></span>[32](#fn_32)

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

    H. R. H. the present heir-apparent to the English throne bears an
equally unsavory record.<span id="fr_33"></span>[33](#fn_33) To him and
his aristocratic companions in guilt is due the support and protection
of England's notorious and infamous purchase and sale, outrage, and
exploitation of helpless young girls. An English clergyman writing the
"New York Sun," at the time of the disclosures made by the "Pall Mall
Gazette," declared he had in his possession a list of the names of the
royal princes, dukes, nobles, and leading men who had been the principal
patrons and supporters of the "gilded hells" devoted to the ruin of the
merest children, girls from the ages of nine to thirteen.<span
id="fr_34"></span>[34](#fn_34) The reputation of the male members of the
Hanoverian dynasty has ever been bad. Trace as you will the path of
either ecclesiastical or temporal rulers claiming authority by "divine
right," and you will find the way marked with the remains of women and
children whose life has been wrecked by man under plea of created
superiority. While Italy within the last forty years has escaped from
the temporal control of the pope, its kings have no less copied the
immorality of the "Vicar of God"; the predecessor of the late king of
Italy having left thirty-three illegitimate children. An instance of the
survival of the feudal idea as to the right of the lord to the person of
his vassal women occurred in Ireland within the past few years,
graphically described in a letter upon landlords, from Mr. D. R. Locke
(Nasby), December, 1891, in which he says;

    One was shot a few years ago and a great ado was made about it. In
this case as in most of the others it was not a question of rent. My
Lord had visited

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

his estates to see how much more money could be taken out of his tenants
and his lecherous eye happened to rest upon a very beautiful girl, the
eldest daughter of a widow with seven children. Now this beautiful girl
was betrothed to a nice sort of a boy, who, having been in America, knew
a thing or two. My Lord, through his agent, who is always a pimp as well
as a brigand, ordered Kitty to come to the castle. Kitty knowing very
well what that meant, refused.

    "Very well," says the agent, "yer mother is in arrears for rent, and
you had better see My Lord, or I shall be compelled to evict her."

    Kitty knew what that meant also. It meant that her gray haired
mother, her six helpless brothers and sisters would be pitched out by
the roadside to die of starvation and exposure, and so Kitty without
saying a word to her mother or any one else, went to the castle and was
kept there three days, till My Lord was tired of her, when she was
permitted to go.

    She went to her lover, like an honest girl as she was, and told him
she would not marry him, but refused to give any reason.

    Finally the truth was wrenched out of her, and Mike went and found a
shot gun that had escaped the eye of the royal constabulary, and he got
powder and shot and old nails, and he lay behind a hedge under a tree
for several days. Finally one day My Lord came riding by all so gay and
that gun went off, and 'subsequent proceedings interested him no more.'
There was a hole, a blessed hole, clear through him, and he never was so
good a man as before because there was less of him.

    Then Mike went and told Kitty to be of good cheer and not be cast
down, that the little difference between him and My Lord had been
happily settled, and that they would be married as soon as possible. And
they were married, and I had the pleasure of taking in my hand the very
hand that fired the blessed shot and of seeing the wife, to avenge whose
cruel wrongs the shot was fired.

    Nor is this the only instance in modern Ireland. A

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

certain lord Leitram was noted a few years since for his attempts to
dishonor the wives and daughters of the peasantry upon his vast estate
comprising 90,000 acres. His character was that of the worst feudal
barons, and like those he used his power as magistrate and noble, in
addition to that of landlord, to accomplish his purpose. After an
assault upon a beautiful and intelligent girl, by a brutal retainer of
his lordship, her character assailed, his tenantry finally declared it
necessary to resort to the last means in their power to preserve the
honor of their wives and daughters. Six men were chosen as the
instruments of their rude justice, and among them the brother of this
girl, upon whom the leadership fell. They took oath to be true to the
end, in life or death, raised a sum of money, purchased arms, and
seeking a convenient opportunity shot him to death. Nor were the
perpetrators ever discovered; yet it is now known that two of them died
in Australia, two in the Boer war in South Africa, and the leader who
came to the United States, changing his name, passed away in the summer
of 1892 in the State of Pennsylvania.

    Under head of "A Story of to-day," another tale is related of
woman's oppression in Ireland aided by the Petty Sessions Bench in 1880.

    Recently, a young girl named Catherine Cafferby, of Belmullet, in
County Mayo--the pink of her father's family--fled from the "domestic
service" of a landlord as absolute as Lord Leitrim, the moment the poor
creature discovered what that "service" customarily involved. The great
man had the audacity to invoke the law to compel her to return, as she
had not given statutable notice of her flight. She clung to the
door-post of her father's cabin; she

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

told aloud the story of her terror, and called on God and man to save
her. Her tears, her shrieks, her piteous pleadings were all in vain. The
Petty Sessions Bench ordered her back to the landlord's "service," or
else to pay five pounds, or two weeks in jail. This is not a story of
Bulgaria under Murad IV. but of Ireland in the reign of the present
sovereign. That peasant girl went to jail to save her chastity. If she
did not spend a fortnight in the cells, it was only because friends of
outraged virtue, justice, and humanity paid the fine when the story
reached the outer world.

    These iniquities have taken place in Christian lands<span
id="fr_35"></span>[35](#fn_35) and these nefarious outrages upon women
have been enforced by the Christian laws of both church and state. The
degradation and unhappiness of the husband at the infringement of the
lord's spiritual and temporal upon his marital rights, has been depicted
by many writers but history has been quite silent upon the despair and
shame of the wife.<span id="fr_36"></span>[36](#fn_36) No hope appeared
for woman anywhere. The Church which should have been the great
conserver of morals dragged her to the lowest depths through the
vileness of its teachings and its priestly customs. The State which
should have defended her civil rights followed the example of the church
in crushing her to the earth. Christian laws were detrimental to woman
in every relation of life.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

    The brilliant French author, Legouvé, gives from among the popular
songs of Brittany during the fourteenth century, a pathetic ballad, "The
baron of Jauioz," which vividly depicts the condition of the peasant
women of France at that date. In the power of the male members of her
family over her, we also find an exact parallel in the condition of
English women of the same era. The moral disease thus represented being
due to the same religious teaching, the change of country and language
but more fully serves to depict the condition of woman every where in
christendom at this period.

    BRETON BALLAD OF THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY. THE BARON OF JAUIOZ.

    I.

    As I was at the river washing,  
I heard the sighing of the bird of death.  
"Good little Jina, you do not know it, but you are sold to the Baron of
Jauioz."  
Is this true, my mother, that I have heard?  
Is it true that I was sold to old Jauioz?  
"My poor little darling, I know nothing about it; ask your father."  
"My nice good father, tell me now-is it true that I am sold to Loys de
Jauioz?"  
"My beloved child, I know nothing about it; ask your brother."  
Lannik, my brother, tell me now--is it true that I am sold to that lord
there?  
"Yes you are sold to the Baron, and you must be off at once. Your price
is paid-fifty crowns of the white silver and as much of the yellow
gold."

    II.

    She had not gone far from the hamlet

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

when she heard the ringing of the bells; whereat she wept.  
"Adieu Saint Ann. Adieu, bells of my fatherland;  
Bells of my village church, adieu!"

    III.

    "Take a seat and rest thee till the repast is ready."  
The lord sat near the fire; his beard and hair all white, and his eyes
like living coals.  
"Behold the young maiden whom I have desired this many a day!"  
"Come my child, let me show thee, crown by crown, how rich I am; come,
count with me, my beauty, my gold and my silver."  
"I should like better to be with my mother counting the chips on the
fire."  
"Let us descend into the cellar and taste of the wine that is sweet as
honey."  
"I should like better to taste the meadow stream  
Whereof my father's horses drink."  
"Come with me from shop to shop to buy thee a holiday cloak."  
"I should better like a linsey petticoat, that my mother has woven for
me."  
"Ah, that my tongue had been blistered when  
I was such a fool as to buy thee!  
Since nothing will comfort thee.

    IV.

    "Dear little birds as you fly, I pray you listen to me,  
You are going to the village whither I cannot.  
You are merry but I am sad."  
"Remember me to my playmates,  
To the good mother who brought me to light,  
And to the father who reared me; and tell my brother  
I forgive him."

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

    V.

    Two or three months have passed and gone when as the family are
sleeping,  
A sweet voice is heard at the door,  
"My father, my mother, for God's love pray for me;  
Your daughter lies on her bier."

    This ballad founded upon historic facts represents the social life
of christendom during the fourteenth century. The authority of the son,
the licentiousness of the lord, the powerlessness of the mother, the
despair of the daughter, the indifference of society, are vividly
depicted in this pathetic ballad. It shows the young girl regarded as a
piece of merchandise, to be bought and sold at the whim of her masters
who are the men of her own household and the lord of the manor. During
the feudal period the power of the son was nearly absolute. For his own
aggrandisement he did not hesitate to rob his sisters, or sell them into
lechery.<span id="fr_38"></span>[38](#fn_38) Hopelessly despairing in
tone, this ballad gives us a clear picture of feudal times when chivalry
was at its height, and the church had reached its ultimate of power.
Woman's attitude to-day is the echo of that despair. At this period the
condition of a woman was not even tolerable unless she was an heiress,
with fiefs in possession.<span id="fr_29"></span>[29](#fn_29) Even then
she was deprived of her property in case of loss

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

of chastity, of which it was the constant aim to deprive her. Guardians,
next of kin, and if none such existed, the church threw constant
temptations in her way. Ruffians were hired, or reckless profligates
induced to betray her under plea of love and sympathy, well paid by the
next heir for their treachery.

    Although Sir William Blackstone in his Commentaries said that he
discovered no traces of marquette in England, a reminiscence of that
custom is to be found in the "fine" or "permit" known in that country as
Redemption of Blood, and designated as *Merchetum Sanguinis*, by
Fleta.<span id="fr_40"></span>[40](#fn_40) This was a customary payment
made by a tenant to his lard for license to give his daughter in
marriage. Such redemption was considered a special mark of tenure in
villeinage.<span id="fr_41"></span>[41](#fn_41) It was not exacted from
a free man, which is corroborative proof of its origin in the *Jus Primæ
Noctis*, of the feudal lord. Of the free man this fine was not
permissible, because of the privilege of free blood. Raepsaet, M.
Hoffman, Dr. Karl Schmidt, and other authors writing in the interest of
the church and finding it impossible to deny the existence of some power
over the bride, have questioned its character, declaring it not to be
feudal, but a spiritual authority, to guard the bride by enforcing a
penitence of marital abstinence of one to three days after the nuptials.
It is not to be doubted that under the peculiar teachings of the church
in regard to the uncleanliness of marriage, such continence was at a
certain period part of church law.<span id="fr_42"></span>[42](#fn_42)
Nevertheless this does not invalidate the fact that a widespread
contrary custom

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

existed in feudal times and at a still later period. The present usages
of society point back to an age when right to the peasant's bride was
enforced by the lord. A reminiscence<span id="fr_43"></span>[43](#fn_43)
of this period is to be found in charivari and the buying off of a party
of this character with refreshments from the house, or with money for
the purchase of cigars and liquor. Such occurrences constantly fall
within our knowledge, personally or through the press.<span
id="fr_44"></span>[44](#fn_44) The very fact of such persecution of the
bridal pair is a symbol of that custom under which the retainers of the
feudal lord jeered and flouted the bridegroom, throwing him into foul
water,<span id="fr_45"></span>[45](#fn_45) and other most unseemly
practices. To others outside of the charivari party this practice still
affords amusement, few persons inclining to interfere or prohibit such
pastimes. Society no longer as sharply defined as in the feudal period,
yet has preserved in this practice a symbol of the times when even the
highborn dames in the castle equally as degraded as its lord, amused
themselves while

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

bride was in the company of the lord by ridiculing and torturing the
husband who in anxiety for his wife ventured too near the castle. The
present nearly universal custom of a wedding journey must be referred in
its origin to the same period, arising from an inherited tendency in the
bride and groom to escape the jeers and ill treatment that in past ages
invariably accompanied entrance into the married state.

    In some European countries redemption was demanded from all women,
not alone the daughters of villeins and serfs, but also of those of
noble birth who were freed by payment of a ransom in silver known as the
"Maiden Rents." Lands were even held under Maiden Redemption.<span
id="fr_46"></span>[46](#fn_46) In Scotland this ransom became known as
"Marquette," Margaret wife of Malcolm Canmore, generally spoken of for
her goodness as Saint Margaret,<span id="fr_47"></span>[47](#fn_47)
exercising her royal influence in 1057 against this degradation of her
sex. Numberless seditions having arisen from this claim upon the bride
the king more willingly established a release upon the payment of a
piece of silver, a *demi-marc*, called marquette (whence the name), and
a certain number of cows. The piece of silver went to the king, the cows
to the queen, and from that period cuissage was known as the droit de
marquette. But this nefarious custom possessed such strength, appealing
directly to man's basest passions, his love of power, his profligacy

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

human beast within him--that it continued in existence nearly seven
hundred years after the royal edict in Scotland against its
practice.<span id="fr_48"></span>[48](#fn_48) This vile power extended
over all ranks of women; the king holding it over the daughters of the
grand seigneur, the suzerain over the daughters of his vassals; the
seigneur over the daughters of his serfs, even the judge or bailie
enforcing this right upon all women who passed upon his road.<span
id="fr_49"></span>[49](#fn_49)

    The Church has ever been the bulwark of this base claim. Holding the
powers of penance and of excommunication, such custom could neither have
originated nor been sustained without the sanction of the church.<span
id="fr_50"></span>[50](#fn_50) At this date the privileges of the lower
clergy were extraordinary. Even in England they were not amenable to the
common law; they ruled the laity with iron hand, but the laity possessed
no power over the priesthood.<span id="fr_51"></span>[51](#fn_51) All
appointments were in priestly hands, the union of church and state
complete.

    God himself seemed to have forsaken woman, and the peasantry lost
all belief in the justice of earth or heaven. The customs of feudalism
which were akin to the customs of power wherever existing throughout

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

christendom did more to create what the church terms "infidelity" than
all the reason of the philosophers. No human being is so degraded as not
to possess an innate sense of justice; a wrong is as keenly felt by the
most humble and ignorant as by the educated and refined, its effect more
lasting because of the impossibility of redress. The power of the
seigneur was nearly equal to that of the king himself. Manorial courts
entirely local aided the seigneur in the enforcement of his traditional
privileges<span id="fr_52"></span>[52](#fn_52) at the expense of the
villeins. The crown possessed no jurisdiction over these courts. The
lord held the right to make laws, render justice, lay imposts, declare
war, coin money, dispose of the goods and lives of his subjects, and
other prerogatives still more closely touching their personal rights,
especially of the women living in his dominion.<span
id="fr_53"></span>[53](#fn_53)

    To persons not conversant with the history of feudalism and the
church it will seem impossible that such foulness could ever have been
part of christian civilization. That the vices they have been taught to
consider the outgrowth of paganism, and as the worst heathendom could
have existed in Christian Europe upheld many hundred years by both
church and state will strike most people with incredulity. Such however
is the truth; we are compelled to admit well attested facts of history,
however severe a blow they strike our preconceived beliefs.

    The seigneural tenure of the feudal period was a law of Christian
Europe more dishonorable than the worship of Astarte at Babylon.<span
id="fr_54"></span>[54](#fn_54) In order to fully comprehend

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

the vileness of marquette, we must remember that it did not originate in
a pagan country, many thousand years since; that it was not a heathen
custom transplanted to Europe with many others adopted by the
church,<span id="fr_55"></span>[55](#fn_55) but that it arose in
christian countries a thousand years after the origin of that religion,
continuing in existence until within the last century.

    The attempt made by some modern authors to deny that the claim of
the feudal lord to the person of his female serf upon her marriage ever
existed, on the ground that statutes sustaining such a right have not
been discovered, is extremely weak.<span id="fr_56"></span>[56](#fn_56)
The authority of custom or "unwritten law" is still almost absolute. A
second objection that such customs are unchristian has been answered.
The third plea in opposition, namely that those so outraged, so
oppressed, left no record of resistance is false. Aside from the fact
that education was everywhere limited, no peasant and but few of the
nobility knowing how to read or write, and within the church learning
very rare, we have indisputable evidence of strong character in the
revolt of serfs at different periods, through which concessions were
gained; the final refusal of the serfs to marry, and in the travesty
upon religion known as the "Black Mass."

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

    We can not measure the serf's power of resistance by the same
standard as our own. The degradation of man with but a few exceptions
was as great as that of woman. Civilly and educationally the peasant man
was on a par with the peasant woman. No more than she had he a voice in
making the laws; the serf was virtually a slave under the absolute
dominion of his lord. No power existed for him higher than that of his
feudal superior. It is nearly impossible to realize the hopeless
degraded condition of the peasant serf of the middle ages. It has had no
parallel in the present century, except in the slavery of the southern
states. Free action, free speech, free thought was impossible. But our
respect for humanity is increased when we know that these vassals,
although under the life and death power of their lords, did not tamely
submit to the indignities enforced upon their wives and daughters.

    It must also be remembered that the historians of that period were
generally priests by whom the fact of such usage or custom would pass
unmentioned, especially as the church taught that woman was created to
meet the special demands of man. Other important historical facts have
been as lightly touched upon, or passed over entirely. The deification
of Julius Cæsar while Emperor of Rome, is scarcely referred to in the
more familiar literary sources of Roman history. And yet his worship was
almost universal in the provinces, where he was adored as a god. The
records of this worship are only to be found in scattered monuments and
inscriptions but recently brought to light, and deciphered within the
last few years. Through these it is proven that there was an organized
worship of this emperor, and an order of

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

consecrated priests devoted to him.<span id="fr_57"></span>[57](#fn_57)
Higgins refers to this deification of Cæsar.<span
id="fr_58"></span>[58](#fn_58) It is not alone proof of the low
condition of morality at this period, but also of the universal
disbelief in woman's authority over, or right to herself, that so few
writers upon feudal subjects have treated of the libidinous powers of
the lord over his female serfs. Even those presenting the evils of
feudalism in other respects, have merely expressed a mild surprise that
christian people should have admitted that right of the lord over his
feminine vassals. The various names under which this right was known as
jus primæ noctis,<span id="fr_59"></span>[59](#fn_59) droit de
seigneur,<span id="fr_60"></span>[60](#fn_60) droit de jambage,<span
id="fr_61"></span>[61](#fn_61) droit de cuissage,<span
id="fr_62"></span>[62](#fn_62) droit d' afforage,<span
id="fr_63"></span>[63](#fn_63) droit de marquette,<span
id="fr_64"></span>[64](#fn_64) and many other terms too indelicate for
repetition, indicating this right of the lord over all the women in his
domain, is still another incontestable proof of the universality of the
custom.

    The Mosaic teaching as to sacredness of "first fruits," under
Judaism, dedicated to the Lord of Heaven, doubtless was in part the
origin of the claim of the feudal lord. The law of primogeniture, or
precedence of the first born son as the beginning of "his

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

father's strength" is also a translation from Judaism into the customs
of many nations, but nowhere under the law of primogeniture at the
present day does even a first born daughter receive as high
consideration as a first born son. This is especially noticeable in
royal families. It is not therefore singular that men who took the
literal sense of the bible in science, who believed that the world had
been created in six days, this work having so greatly fatigued the Lord
Almighty as to make rest on the seventh day necessary for him, should
under example of that lord, claim the first fruits in all their
possessions. No Christians of the present day, except the Mormons, so
fully base their lives upon the teachings of the bible as the Catholics
of the middle ages. If we accord divine authority to this book,
accepting the literal word as infallible and sacred, we must admit that
both Church and State were at this period in unison with its teachings,
and even during the nineteenth century have not freed themselves from
the stigma of sustaining woman's degradation; the theory of the feudal
ages remains the same, although the practice is somewhat different.
Legal bigamy or polygamy, non-marital unions, are common in every large
city of christendom. Government license has created a class in many
European countries devoted to the most degraded lives under government
sanction, protection, and control; in England known as "Queen's Women,"
"Government Women." Thus the State places itself before the world as a
trafficker in women's bodies for the vilest purposes. The culmination of
nearly two thousand years of Christian teaching is the legalization of
vice for women and the creation of a new crime. Previous to the
enactment of this law the rules of

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

modern jurisprudence held an accused person as innocent until proven
guilty. Under this legalization of vice all women within a certain
radius of recruiting, or other army stations, are "suspects," looked
upon as immoral, and liable to arrest, examination, and registration
upon government books as government women. It required seventeen years
of arduous work to repeal this law in England. This legalization of
prostitution in the nineteenth century by the State is its open approval
of that doctrine of the Church that woman was created for man. It is an
acknowledgment by men that vice is an inherent quality of their natures.
It is in accord with man's repeated assertion that only through means of
a class of women pursuing immorality as a business, is any woman safe
from violence.

    In a letter to the National Woman Suffrage Convention at St. Louis,
May, 1879, Mrs. Josephine E. Butler, Honorable Secretary of the
Federation and of the Ladies National Association for the Protection of
Women, wrote:

    England holds a peculiar position in regard to the question. She was
the last to adopt this system of slavery, and she adopted it in that
thorough manner which characterizes the actions of the Anglo-Saxon race.
In no other country has prostitution been registered by law. It has been
understood by the Latin race, even when morally enervated, that the law
could not without risk of losing its majesty and force sanction
illegality and violate justice. In England alone the regulations are
law.

    This legalization of vice, which is the endorsement of the
"necessity" of impurity of man and the institution of the slavery of
woman, is the most open denial which modern times have seen of the
principle of the sacredness of the individual human being. An English
high-class journal dared to demand that women

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

who are unchaste shall henceforth be dealt with "not as human beings,
but as foul sewers," or some such "material nuisance" without souls,
without rights, and without responsibility. When the leaders of public
opinion in a country have arrived at such a point of combined skepticism
and despotism as to recommend such a manner of dealing with human
beings, there is no crime which that country may not presently legalize,
there is no organization of murder, no conspiracy of abominable things
that it may not, and in due time will not--have been found to embrace in
its guilty methods. Were it possible to secure the absolute physical
health of a whole province or an entire continent by the destruction of
one, only one poor and sinful woman, woe to that nation which should
dare, by that single act of destruction, to purchase this advantage to
the many! It will do it at its peril. God will take account of the deed
not in eternity only, but in time, it may be in the next or even in the
present generation.

    Although a long and active work through seventeen years eventually
brought about the repeal of this law in England, it still continues in
the British colonies, being forced upon the people in opposition to
their own action. After the Cape Parliament of the Colony of Good Hope
had repealed the law, Sir Bartle Frere re-introduced it by means of an
edict.<span id="fr_65"></span>[65](#fn_65) When in London, 1882, Sir
John Pope Hennessey, Governor and Commander in Chief of British China,
was waited upon by an influential deputation of members of parliament
and others to whom he made known the practical workings of
**governmental** regulation of prostitution introduced by England into
that colony. He did not hesitate to characterize it as a system of
slavery for the registered women and girls. He also declared that they
detested the life they are thus compelled to enter having both a dread
and an abhorrence of foreigners,

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

especially foreign sailors and soldiers. He said such Chinese girls are
the real slaves of Hong Kong.

    Now to that statement I adhere. I give it to you or, the full
authority of the Governor of the colony, I have been five years looking
at the operation of this law in Hong Kong, and that is the result to
which I have arrived that, under the flag of England there is slavery
there, but it is slavery created and protected by these ordinances."

    The relation of Christianity to this treatment of Chinese women, and
the contempt with which this religion is regarded by these heathen, is
most fully shown by Sir John's conversation with the leading Chinese
merchant of Canton, as given by himself, upon the material progress of
the colony. To this merchant Sir Pope said: "Your people are making a
large fortune here. Why not send down your second son to enter the house
of the Chinese merchant and learn the business there?" The merchant
replied, "I can not for this reason; Hong Kong is a sink of iniquity."
Sir Pope Hennessey answered. "This is a Christian colony; we have been
here now for forty years, we are supposed to be doing the best we can to
spread civilization and christianity." The Chinaman repeated: "It is a
sink of iniquity in my mind. As Chinamen we think of domestic and family
life--we reverence such things--but how do I see the poor Chinese
treated in this colony?" And he related stories of the abuses to which
his countrywomen were subjected.

    In repeating this conversation to Her Majesty's government, Sir Pope
Hennessey declared the words that the merchant of Canton who called Hong
Kong a "sink of iniquity" have a wide application, because

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

the British colony at Hong Kong is geographically a part of a great
Empire, an empire where you have missionaries of various churches. I
have been asked to explain the curious and distressing fact that
christianity is declining in China. I think it is declining mainly on
account of the treaties we have forced upon the Chinese; but I will
frankly tell you, it is declining also because they see these girls
registered in such houses for "Europeans" and made practically slaves
under our flag."<span id="fr_66"></span>[66](#fn_66)

    Nor are the Cape of Good Hope, and China, the sole foreign countries
in which this system of the legalized moral degradation of women has
been carried by England, nearly one hundred places in India showing the
same vice under license from the British Government, even to bearing the
same name.<span id="fr_67"></span>[67](#fn_67) Nor have innumerable
petitions and protests from native and foreign ladies, from zenana
workers, from missionaries, and even from all ranks of the resident
English civil service for immediate repeal of this vilest of all laws,
been of the least effect. So thoroughly imbued are English legislators
with contempt for womanhood, as not only to maintain these outrageous
laws but also to cause fear in the minds of those women who for twenty
years wrought for the repeal of these acts in Great Britain and Ireland,
of their again being introduced under more insidious and dangerous
form.<span id="fr_69"></span>[69](#fn_69) A memorial signed by a number
of native born and English ladies was presented to the Viceroy praying
that the age of protection for young girls be raised. While in India a
man's dog, horse, elephant, and

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

even the plants of his garden are under the protection of English law,
his daughter of ten years is Outside this protection."' The penal code
punishes with imprisonment or a fine, or both, the man who injures an
animal valued at ten rupees; if the animal be worth fifty rupees his
imprisonment may be for five years, while for dishonestly coaxing his
neighbor's dog to follow him, the punishment is three years
imprisonment, or a fine or both; while the man who induces "consent"
from a girl-child of ten years escapes all punishment.

    In deference to the bitter opposition these acts created, it was
declared that legalized prostitution was abolished in British India,
June 5th, 1888. A statement was made in the House of Commons that the
contagious disease acts had been suspended in Bombay. But an
investigation of these statements by the English Social Purity Society,
proved them false, the "Sentinel," its organ, stating, June 1890, that
upon inquiry it was found that the licensing of prostitution
systematically prevails in British India, and is always attended with
results most disastrous to health of body as well as morals of the
community. The most extraordinary course is taken towards the
accomplishment of their ends, by the advocates of legalizing vice. In
1888 having failed to secure an act of the

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

legislature of the state of New York, in its favor, a society to this
end was formed in the city of New York, incorporated as a "Voluntary
Association;" borrowing the name used in England at time its women were
most degraded by the state.<span id="fr_70"></span>[70](#fn_70) This
society grants certificates to women presenting themselves for
examination. And thus step by step under many forms more extended than
even under feudal law, is woman's moral degradation made the effort of
the christian civilization of to-day.

    The "ten thousand licensed women of the town" of the City of
Hamburg, are required by the State to show certificates that they
regularly attended Church, and also partake of the sacrament. And even
in Protestant Berlin, the capital of Protestant Prussia, the Church upon
demand of the State furnishes certificates of their having partaken of
holy communion to those women securing license to lead vicious lives;
the very symbol and body of him, whom the christian world worships as
its saviour, thus becoming the key to unlock the doors of woman's moral
degradation.<span id="fr_71"></span>[71](#fn_71)

    The fact of governments lending their official aid to demoralization
of woman by the registration system, shows an utter debasement of law.
This system is directly opposed to the fundamental principle of right,
that of holding of the accused innocent until proven guilty, which until
now has been recognized as a part of modern law. Under the registration
or license system, all women within the radius of its action are under
suspicion;

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

all women are held as morally guilty until they prove themselves
innocent. Where this law is it, force, all women are under an
irresponsible police surveillance, liable to accusation, arrest,
examination, imprisonment, and the entrance of their names upon the list
of the lewd women of the town. Upon this frightful infraction of
justice, we have the sentiments of the late Sheldon Amos, when Professor
of jurisprudence in the Law College of London University. In "The
Science of Law," he says, in reference to this very wrong:

    The loss of liberty to the extent to which it exists, implies a
degradation of the State, and, if persisted in, can only lead to its
dissolution. No person or class of persons, must be under the cringing
fear of having imputed to them offenses of which they are innocent, and
of being taken into custody in consequence of such imputation. They must
not be liable to be detained in custody without so much as a *prima
facie* case being made out, such as in the opinion of a responsible
judicial officer leaves a presumption of guilt. They must not be liable
to be detained for an indefinite time without having the question of
their guilt or innocence investigated by the best attainable methods.
When the fact comes to be inquired into, the best attainable methods of
eliciting the truth must be used. In default of any one of these
securities, *public liberty* must be said to be proportionately at a
very low ebb.

    Great effort has been made to introduce this system into the United
States, and a National Board of Health, created by Congress in 1879, is
carefully watched lest its irresponsible powers lead to its encroachment
upon the liberties and personal rights of women. A resolution adopted
March 5, 1881, at a meeting of the New York committee appointed

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

to thwart the effort to license vice in this country, shows the need of
its watchful care.

    Resolved, That this committee has learned with much regret and
apprehension of the action of the American Public Health Association, at
its late annual meeting in New Orleans, in adopting a sensational report
commending European governmental regulation of prostitution, and looking
to the introduction in this country, with modifications, through the
medium of State legislative enactments and municipal ordinances, of a
kindred immoral system of State-regulated social vice.

    Even the Latin races in their lowest degradation did not put the
sanction of law upon the open sale of women to vice, says Mrs. Butler.
This remained for the Anglo-Saxon and Teutonic races, under the highest
christian civilization in a class of women licensed by the State, under
protection and name of the head of the Anglican Church, as "Queen's
Women," "Government Women," both Church and State here uniting in the
nefarious bus I ness of making women, by law, the slaves of man's lowest
nature. A system which openly declares "the necessity" for woman's
foulest degradation, in order to protect man in his departure from the
moral law, a system that annually sends its tens of thousands down to a
death from which christian society grants no resurrection. Similar
religious beliefs beget similar results. Times change, and with them
methods, but as long as the foundation of the christian church of every
name, rests upon the belief in woman's created inferiority to man, and
that she brought sin into the world, so long will similar social,
industrial, and moral results follow. The Catholic, Greek, and
Protestant divisions, all degrade Women but under different forms. That
the woman of

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

every christian land fears to meet man in a secluded place by day or by
night, is of itself sufficient proof of the low state of christian
morality. Several states have at different times attempted the enactment
of similar laws through bills introduced into their legislatures;
requiring constant watchfulness on part of the friends of social purity
least this great wrong be consummated, a wrong primarily against woman.
In certain cities, as St. Louis, where such registration and license was
for sometime demanded, the foulest injuries were perpetrated upon
entirely innocent and reputable women, injuries for which they had no
redress.<span id="fr_72"></span>[72](#fn_72) Under the legalized vice
system, women are slaves, not possessing even the right of repudiating
this kind of life.

    A gentleman traveling in France, 1866, relates a

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

most pathetic instance of the attempted escape and the forcible return
to the house of infamy, of a young girl whose person there was at the
command of every brute who chose to pay the price of her master. The
tram car in which this gentleman was riding, crowded with ladies and
girls of refined appearance, was suddenly stopped on one of the
principal streets of Havre, by a dense crowd swaying back and forth
across the track. He said:

    I then became aware that two men, tall powerful fellows, were
carrying or rather trying to carry, a young woman seemingly between
sixteen and eighteen years of age, who occupied herself in violently
clutching at everything and anything from a lamp-post to a shop door
handle, a railing, and the pavement itself.

    "As a matter of course, her body swayed between the two men, half
dragging on the pavement, her clothing besmeared with mud and blood. For
the rough handling had superadded crimson to other stains. This proved
the case to be not one of accident, although the screams, shrieks and
cries of the poor girl might well have led to the belief of her having
been the victim of a run over, and of being in convulsions of acute
agony. Her agonizing cries for 'pity' 'police,' 'protection,' 'help,'
murder,' 'Oh! oh! oh!' were reiterated incessantly. At one particular
moment her contortions, and the violence of her efforts to free herself,
or even to bring her head into a more convenient position than hanging
face downward, while a yard or so of long, bedraggled hair, all loose,
was sweeping up the dirt from the pavement, were so violent that her two
carriers had to let her slip from their grasp on to the flagstones.

    "All this time, unmoved by, and totally indifferent to her piercing
cries, stood by, or strolled calmly onward with the crowd, a policeman
in uniform and on duty. My enquiry of, 'What is all this piece of work
about? is it an accident? Is the woman drunk, or what?' He smilingly
answered: 'Oh! not drunk, sir,

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

not at all, not at all. It's only one of those young licensed girls, who
has been trying to escape from her house, and that's her master, who has
just caught her again, and is carrying her back to his place. That's
all!"'

    "I was powerless to help." In many christian countries a traffic in
girls exists under government protection and license.

    Criminal vice chiefly finds its feminine prey among the poorest and
most helpless class who are the victims of this new commercial business,
its customers scattered in every christian land, and accepting their
spoil only upon the certificate of some reputable physician as to their
innocence and previous uncontamination. Crime, vice, and cruelty, were
never before so closely united in one infamous system; the purchase of
young innocence by old iniquity under protection of law.<span
id="fr_73"></span>[73](#fn_73) A bill was introduced into the English
parliament to check this business of girl destruction, accompanied by
proof so direct, and proof of the necessity of immediate action so
great, that it was not doubted that the bill would pass at once. Yet it
encountered secret<span id="fr_74"></span>[74](#fn_74) and powerful
opposition, was finally referred to a committee already so overburdened
with work and so far behindhand that it was manifest that the bill could
not be reached in years. Gilded vice laughed at this result, and the
iniquitous business

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

proceeded as before. At that period the "Pall Mall Gazette" entered into
an investigation whose results roused the whole civilized world. Even
clergymen, ignoring the fact that christian teaching had brought this
vice into being, joined the press in scathing reproof of patrician
London iniquity.<span id="fr_75"></span>[75](#fn_75) Societies were
formed for the protection of young girls from the vice of men who used
the power of wealth and station to corrupt the daughters of the
poor.<span id="fr_76"></span>[76](#fn_76)

    Under English christian law it has never been a crime to morally
destroy a girl of thirteen, because under that law she is held
responsible for her own undoing. Girls of this tender age, infants, in
all that pertains to the control of property, incapable of making a
legal contract, because of immaturity of understanding, are yet held by
that law as of age to protect themselves from a seducer; held to possess
sufficient judgment to thwart all the wiles of men old in years. and
crime--of men protected in their iniquities by laws of their own
making-men shielded by the legislation of their own sex--men who escape
all punishment because men alone enact the laws. It is not alone the
waifs of society who fall a prey to the seducer, but the children of
reputable parents and good homes are waylaid on their way to and from
school and lured to ruin." To the modern ghoul it is of no

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

moment upon whom he preys, provided his victim be but young and
innocent. Lecky has portrayed the standard of morals of the present day
as far higher than in pagan Rome, but we must be allowed to doubt this.
Immoral sentiment is more deftly hidden, and law more dependent upon
public opinion. As soon as the general consensus of public opinion rises
in **opposition** to girl destruction, the law will regulate itself in
accordance with this standard.

    Lord Shaftesbury, upon this point, said:

    The "Pall Mall Gazette" has published to the world disclosures of a
most horrible, and many would think of an incredible character. Not even
the questionings of peace or war or most intricate foreign policy, ought
to **interfere** with energetic measures to suppress these evils. But
before we can make any great advance, there must be a considerable move
of public opinion. It must be vigorous and determined, and I will tell
you why. You may depend upon it that no government undertakes a question
of a really important and social character until it has been forced upon
it by the voice of public opinion. Consequently it is our duty to bring
the voice of that public opinion to bear on this question. Law can be
evaded in every possible way. The only thing that defies evasion is a
wide spread and universally extended public opinion. I hope that we
shall be able to create such a public opinion throughout the country
that persons will be induced to come forward voluntarily and give
evidence. The plague spot is too deep, too wide, and there are too many
persons interested in the continuance of it, to enable us easily to wipe
it out. Uncommon energy will be necessary, and I hope we shall raise
such an amount of popular indignation that the effect will be
**irresistible**.

    But the public feeling, the public indignation against these
enormities did not rise to the height of restrictive legislation. The
policy of a portion both

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

of the English and the American press was that of suppression, upon the
plea that a knowledge of these crimes would be injurious to the morals
of society. Suppression was also the aim of the "royal princes, dukes,
nobles, and leading men," who were the principal patrons and supporters
of this nefarious system. suppression is the strongest opposing weapon
against reform. To compel change needs light and discussion. It is only
when wrongs find a tongue that they become righted." Woman, legally
powerless in the doing away with abuses, or the punishment of crime,
must depend upon publicity for the creation of a public sentiment in her
favor.

    One of the most remarkable facts connected with disclosures of this
crime against womankind was the extent to which men of all ages and
character were found identified with it. The world of business and that
of politics were equally as well known in the haunts of vice as in the
outside world, but there were judged by a different standard and their
relative importance was altogether changed.<span
id="fr_78"></span>[78](#fn_78) It was a literal day of judgment, in
which evil character, deftly hidden during public life, was there
unveiled.

    The most horribly striking fact connected with this investigation
was the extreme youth of these victims. The report of the committee of
the House of Lords, 1882, declared the evidence proved beyond doubt that
juvenile vice from an almost incredibly early age was increasing at an
appalling extent in England, and especially in London; ten thousand
girls, thirteen,

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

fourteen, and fifteen years of age, had been drawn into this vice, an
English paper declaring the ignorance of these girls to be almost
incredible. The condition of these girl-children is far more horrible
than that of the victims of infant marriage in Syria, Egypt, India; the
infant victims of christian lands are more fully destroyed, soon
becoming mental, physical and moral wrecks; alternate imbecility and
wild screaming being common among these child victims of vice.<span
id="fr_79"></span>[79](#fn_79)

    Christianity created the modern brothel, which as closely follows in
the wake of evangelical work of the Moody and Sankey style, as did
public women the ancient church councils.<span
id="fr_80"></span>[80](#fn_80) While in the past the legal wrongs of
woman in the marriage relation, in which she is robbed of name,
personality, earnings, children, had a tendency to drive her to live
with man outside of the authority of church or state, the occupations
recently opened to her whereby she can gain a reputable livelihood by
her own exertions, has greatly increased the ranks of single women.<span
id="fr_81"></span>[81](#fn_81) No longer compelled to marry for a home
or position, the number of young girls who voluntarily refrain from
marriage, by choice living single, increases each year. No longer driven
to immorality for bread, a great diminution has taken place in the ranks
of "public women."<span id="fr_82"></span>[82](#fn_82) No longer forced
by want into this life, the lessening

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

number of such women not meeting the requirements of patrons of vice,
resulted in the organization of a regular system for the abduction,
imprisonment, sale, and exportation of young girls; England and Germany
most largely controlling this business, although Belgium, Holland and
France, Switzerland, several counties of South America, Canada, and the
United States are to some extent also engaged in this most infamous
traffic.<span id="fr_83"></span>[83](#fn_83)

    Foreign traffic in young English girls was known to exist long
before the revelation of the "Pall Mall Gazette" made English people
aware of the extent of the same system under the home government. It was
this widely extended and thoroughly organized commerce in girl-children
which roused a few people to earnest effort against it, and secured the
formation of a society called "Prevention of Traffic in English Girls."
To the chairman of this society, Mr. Benjamin Scott, was the first
official suggestion due that terminated in that investigation by Editor
Stead, which for a moment shook the civilized world, and held Christian
England to light as a center of the vilest, most odious, most criminal
slave traffic the world ever knew.

    London, the great metropolis of christian England, the largest city
of ancient or modern times, is acknowledged by statisticians and
sociologists to be the point where crime, vice, despair, and misery are
found in their deepest depth and greatest diversity. Not Babylon of old,
whose name is the synonym of all that is vile; not Rome, "Mother of
Harlots," not Corinth, in whose temple a thousand women were kept for
prostitution in service of the god, not the most

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

savage lands in all their barbarity have ever shown thousandth part of
the human woe to be found in the city of London, that culmination of
modern christian civilization. The nameless crimes of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the vileness of ancient Greece, which garnered its most heroic
men, its most profound philosophers, are but amusements among young men
of the highest rank in England; West End, the home of rank and wealth,
of university education, being the central hell of this extended radius
of vice. The destruction of girl-children by old men is paralleled by
the self-destruction of boys and youth through vices that society
hesitates to name. Yet each is the result of that system of teaching
which declares woman a being divinely created for the use and sensual
gratification of man.

    Having for years tacitly consented to the destruction of the
girl-children of its poor, at the rate of twenty thousand annually,
England was yet greatly shocked to find its boys of tender age and
aristocratic lineage sunken in a mire of immorality. Eton, the highest
institution of its kind in Great Britain, having in charge the education
of boys connected with the most illustrious English families, recently
became the source of a scandal which involved a great number of
students. An extensive secret inquiry resulted in the suspension of
nearly three hundred boys after full confession. Supplied with unlimited
pocket money, they had bribed parkkeepers and the police to silence.

    But a few years previous to these disclosures in reference to Eton,
the civilized world was horrified at the discovery of the vice which
destroyed Sodom, among some of the most wealthy, aristocratic young men
of London. And yet with knowledge of the depravity

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

into which this most christian city had sunk, the shocking character of
the disclosures of the "Pall Mall Gazette" in **reference** to the
traffic in young girls, involved details of vice so atrocious as to
exceed belief had not the testimony been of the most convincing
character. These mere children were lured by the most diabolical vices
into traps, where by drugs, force, or cajoling, tens of thousands were
brought to moral and physical ruin, innocent victims of a religious
theory which through the christian ages has trained men into a belief
that woman was but created as a plaything for their passions. That boys
of the highest families, in the earliest years of their adolescence,
should voluntarily associate with those vicious women who form a class
created by the public sentiment of man as necessary to the safety of the
feminine element in households, is not surprising to a philosophic
observer. It was the direct result of an adequate cause. The wrong to
woman passed so silently by, reached its culmination in the destruction
of young boys. At Eton, suspension was tenderness, expulsion from that
school ruining a boy's future.

    Succeeding the revelation of London vice, came divulgence of similar
shameless practices on the part of high government officials and men
foremost in public life, in the Canadian Colonies. in Ottawa and other
Canadian cities in which upon this side of the Atlantic the wholesale
despoliation of young girls but too closely paralleled London and other
trans-Atlantic cities. These were closely followed by the revelations in
regard to the north-western pineries of the United States, to whose
camps women are decoyed, under pretense of good situations and high
wages into a life whose horrors are not equaled in any other part

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

of the Christian world;--where the raw-hide is used to compel drinking
and dancing, and high stockades, bull-dogs and pistols prevent escape,
until death,--happily of quick occurrence,--releases the victim. As
elsewhere, men of wealth and high position, law-makers, are identified
with this infamy.<span id="fr_84"></span>[84](#fn_84)

    Among the notable facts due to an investigation of prostitution is
that its support largely comes from married men, the "heads of
families;" men of mature years, fathers of sons and daughters. To those
seemingly least exposed to temptation is the sustaining of this vice
due. Men of influence and position no less in this country than in
England frequent disreputable houses. In 1878, the body of a woman
buried in the principal cemetery of Syracuse, N. Y. was exhumed on
suspicion of poison. One of the prominent city dailies said, she
commenced leading an abandoned life and went to Saratoga where she ran a
large establishment of that character. Her place was the center for men
of influence and position.' A few years since the Rev. T. DeWitt Talmage
accompanied by high police officials investigated such houses in person.
In a sermon based upon knowledge there obtained Mr. Talmage declared
those dens of infamy to be supported by married men, chiefly of the
better classes.

    He found them to be judges of courts, distinguished lawyers,
officers in churches, political orators that talk on the Republican,
Democratic and Greenback platforms about God and good morals till you
might almost take them for evangelists expecting a thousand

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

converts in one night. On the night of our exploration I saw their
carriages leaving these dignitaries at the shambles of death. Call the
roll in the house of dissipation, and if the inmates will answer you
will find stock-brokers from Wall street, large importers on Broadway,
iron merchants, leather merchants, wholesale grocers and representatives
from all the wealthy classes.

    But I have something to tell you more astonishing than that the
houses of iniquity are supported by wealthy people when I tell you that
they are supported by the heads of families--fathers and husbands, with
the awful perjury upon them of broken marriage vows; and while many of
them keep their families on niggardly portions, with hardly enough to
sustain life, have their thousands for the diamonds and the wardrobe and
equipage of iniquity. In the name of high heaven I cry out against this
popular iniquity. Such men must be cast out from social life and from
business relations. If they will not reform, overboard with them from
all decent circles. I lift one-half the burden of malediction from the
un-pitied head of woman and hurl it upon the blasted pate of offending
man. What society wants is a new division of its anathema.

    Without the support of the heads of families, in one month the most
of the haunts of sin in New York, Philadelphia and Boston, would crumble
into ruin.

    That one-half of the children born into the world die before
maturity, is acknowledged. Physiologists and philanthropists seek for
the cause except where most likely to be found. To that mysterious
interchange of germs and life principles, whose chemistry is still not
understood, must we look for a d in solving this great problem. These
questions woman is forced to consider; their investigation belong to her
by right, as she and her children are the chief victims. She can no
longer close her lips in silence, saying it does

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

not concern me. No longer does the modern woman allow her husband to
think for her; she is breaking from church bonds, from the laws of men
alone, from all the restrictions the state has pressed upon her; she is
no longer looking without, for guidance, but is heeding the commands of
her own soul.

    With such facts before us, we are not surprised that women are found
who prefer the freedom and private respect accorded to a mistress,
rather than the restrictions and tyranny of the marital household. Mr.
Talmage but followed in the footsteps of Anna Dickinson, who took upon
herself an acquaintance with this class of women. Asking one women
living as mistress why she did not marry, the girl contemptuously
ejaculated:

    "Marry! umph! I too well know what my mother suffered in the married
state. She was my father's slave, cruelly treated, subject to all manner
of abuse, neglected, half-starved, all her appeals and protests
unheeded. How is it with me? I am free. I have all the money I want to
use, a thing my mother never had. I come and go as I please, something
my mother could never do, I am well treated, my mother was not. Should I
be abused there is no law to hold me, no court to sit upon my right to
my own child as there was with my mother. No, no, no, I am infinitely
better off as a mistress than as a wife."

    And yet so pronounced in difference are the moral codes by which men
and women are judged, that while living together in un-legalized marital
relations, the man is welcomed into society, is looked upon as fit for
marriage with the most innocent young girl, while should he partially
condone the wrong done the woman whose life under present condition of
society he has ruined, by marriage with her, society for this one
reputable

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

act brands him as most unworthy. It is but a few years since a cavalry
officer in Washington was court-martialled, found guilty and sentenced
to dismissal from the army on charge of conduct unbecoming an officer
and a gentleman, because of his legally marrying a woman with whom he
had been living un-married. What a commentary upon christian
civilization! While living in illicit relation with this woman, he was
regarded as an officer and a gentleman; when taking upon himself a legal
relation he was court-martialled. Lecky says: "Much of our own feeling
on this subject is due to laws and moral systems which were founded by
men and were in the first instance deigned for their own protection." As
far as he has examined this question, Lecky is correct, but he has
failed to touch the primal cause of such laws and systems;--the church
doctrine of woman's created inferiority to man. View these questions
from any stand-point the cause remains the same. To this cause we trace
the crime and criminals of society to-day. To this cause the darkness of
an age which has not yet realized that civilization means a recognition
of the rights of others at every point of contact.

    To the honor of the pulpit the sins of men are occasionally made the
subject of condemnation. Evangelist Davidson preaching in Syracuse, N.
Y. 1887, said: "I pray God to haste the day when vice in man will be
marked by society the same as in woman. I know all the popular theories.
You admit it is a fearful thing for a woman. There are poor women who
are driven to it and you are the ones who drive them . You smile at the
one thing in this sermon that ought to make a thinking man cry; the
world is so depraved that you laugh at the very idea of a man's saying
he is a pure man."

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

    Like Lecky, Mr. Davidson was correct as far as he went, but he, too,
failed to reach the cause of this double code of morals. He did not
touch it because in striking that, he would strike a blow at the very
foundations of the church.

    Christendom is percolated with immorality, large cities and small
towns alike giving daily proof. Legislative and police investigations
substantiate this statement; woman's protective agencies and private
investigations alike proclaim the same fact. As under the same organic
teachings results must continue the same, we find the United States no
more free from immorality than European lands; Catholic countries no
more vile than Protestant; although feudal law no longer exists, men
still rule in church and state. Men's beliefs, their desires, their
passions, create the laws under which the degradation of woman still
continues. Evil consequences are not confined to the past, to days of
comparative ignorance and tyranny; and in no country has the effect of
belief in woman as a mere instrument for man's pleasure produced more
horrible results than in our own. Not to speak of the effort made in
Congress a few years since to place all women of the country under
suspect law, many cities, among them Washington, Philadelphia,
Syracuse,<span id="fr_85"></span>[85](#fn_85) have at **different**
periods taken initial steps towards a prohibition of a woman's appearing
in the street un-accompanied by male escort, during the evening, even
its earliest hours. Such ordinances, primarily directed against working
girls whose chief time for out of door exercise and recreation is during
evening hours, and to that other rapidly increasing

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

class of business women, **physicians** and others, whose vocation calls
them out at all hours of day or night; places the liberty of woman at
the option of every policeman, as though she were a criminal or a
slave.<span id="fr_86"></span>[86](#fn_86) There is also proof of
regularly organized kidnapping schemes and deportation of girls for the
vilest purposes not only abroad, but to the pineries and lumber camps of
Michigan and Wisconsin.

    Bloodhounds kept for this purpose, or hunting down the girls with
shot guns, prevents escape when attempted. In January, 1887,
representative Breen appeared before the House judiciary Committee of
the Michigan legislature, confirming the charge that a regular trade in
young girls existed between Milwaukee, Chicago and the mining regions of
the upper peninsula of that state.<span id="fr_87"></span>[87](#fn_87)
In case of conviction, the punishment is totally inadequate to the crime
of those men; the law giving only one year of imprisonment.

    The freedom, innocence and lives of such women are of less account
in law than the commonest larceny of

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

property. If these girls were robbed of fifty cents the law would punish
the theft, but robbed of themselves, enduring such brutal outrages that
life continues only from two to twelve months, there have yet no laws of
adequate punishment been passed. So little attention have legislators
given, that policemen, judges and sheriffs are found aiding and abetting
the proprietors of these dens.<span id="fr_88"></span>[88](#fn_88) Their
emissaries find young girls between thirteen and sixteen the easiest to
kidnap, and when once in power of these men, their hair is cut in order
that they may be known. A regular system of transfer of the girls exists
between the many hundred such dens, where clubs, whips, and irons are
the instruments to hold them in subjection.<span
id="fr_89"></span>[89](#fn_89) "The New York World" sent a
representative disguised as a woodman in order to investigate the truth
of these statements. He found these houses surrounded by stockades
thirty feet in height, the one door guarded night and day by a man with
a rifle, while within were a number of chained bull-dogs that were let
loose if a girl attempted escape. Certain men even in these forest
depths are especially noted for their cruelty to these victims, who are
compelled with club and whips to obey the master of the den. Suicide the
only door of escape is frequent among these girls, who

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

almost without exception were secured under promise of respectable
employment at Green Bay, Duluth, or other points. From forty to
seventy-five girls are found at the largest of such pinery dens.

    The "World" reporter saw them strung up by the thumbs, beaten with
clubs, kicked by drunken brutes and driven with switches over the snow.
He afterwards interviewed a rescued girl who had engaged to work in a
lumberman's hotel, supposing it to be a respectable place, but instead
she was taken to a rough building, surrounded by a slab fence nearly
twenty feet in height, within which was a cordon of thirteen bull dogs
chained to iron stakes driven in the ground. Many of the details given
by this girl are too horrible for relation. Three times she tried to
escape and three times she was caught and beaten. The visitors, by whom
she tried to smuggle notes to the outer world would hand them to the
proprietor, who liberally paid for such treason. Even county officers
visited the place to drink and dance with the girls, who were not
permitted to refuse any request of the visitors. A complaint of any
kind, even of sickness, meant a whipping, frequently with a rawhide upon
the naked body; some times with the butt of a revolver. Many denkeepers
wield a powerful influence in the local elections; one of the worst of
such after paying the constable twelve dollars for the return of a girl
who had tried to escape, beat her with a revolver until tired and was
then only prevented by a woodman from turning loose a bull dog upon her;
but such was his political influence that he was elected justice of the
peace the following spring.

    Under the head of "White Slaves in Michigan" the "New York World" of
January 24, 1887, published a

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

special dispatch from Detroit, Mich., in regard to the case of a rescued
girl.

    DETROIT, Jan. 23--One of the infamous resorts maintained in the new
iron region in the upper peninsulas, near the Wisconsin state line, was
raided last September by the Sheriff's officers. Hers is the first word
to reach the world direct from one of those dens. Many of the details
she gave were too horrible to be even hinted. On the strength of
inducements now familiar, she went to work in a lumberman's hotel in the
North. She went, accompanied by another girl, both believing the
situation to be respectable. She and her companion were taken to a rough
two story building, four and a half miles from Iron Mountain, in
Wisconsin. The house was surrounded by a slab fence nearly twenty feet
high, within which about the building was a cordon of bull dogs,
thirteen in number, chained to iron stakes driven into the ground. She
said. "Scarcely a day passed that I was not knocked down and kicked.
Several times when I was undressed for bed I was beaten with a rawhide
on my bare back. There were always from eleven to thirty-two girls in
the house and I did not fare a bit worse than the rest. A complaint of
any kind, even of sickness, meant a whipping every time. When the log
drives were. going on there would be hundreds of men there night and
day. They were not human beings, but fiends, and we were not allowed to
refuse any request of them. Oh, it was awful, awful! I would rather stay
in this prison until I die than to go back there for one day. I tried to
escape three times and was caught. They unchained the dogs and let them
get so near me that I cried out in terror and begged them to take the
dogs away and I would go back. Then, of course, I was beaten. I tried,
too, to smuggle out notes to the Sheriff by visitors, but they would
take them to the proprietor instead and be would pay them. Once I did
get a note to the deputy sheriff at Florence, Wis., and he came and
inquired, but the proprietor gave him $50 and he went away. I was
awfully beaten then. While I lived

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

the life, from March until September, two inmates died, both from brutal
treatment. They were as good as murdered. Nearly all the girls came
without knowing the character of the house at first implored to get
away. The county officers came to the places to drink and dance with the
girls. They are controlled by a rich man in Iron Mountain, who owns the
houses and rents them for $100 a month. I am twenty-four years old and
was a healthy woman when I went into the first house, weighing 156
pounds. I was transferred to the house from which I was released by the
officers in August last. When I left it I weighed 120. 1 now weigh less.
When I go home I will be a good woman, if I can only let liquor alone. I
was forced to drink that while there."

    The traffic in girls from one part of the American continent to
another is under a well organized plan that seldom meets discovery,
although a trader of this character is now serving a sentence in
Sing Sing prison, N. Y., for sending girls to Panama. Three decoyed
young girls found in Jamaica, were happily returned uninjured, to their
parents.<span id="fr_90"></span>[90](#fn_90) From Canada, girls are
imported to the large cities of the United States. The prices paid to
agents depend upon a girl's youth and beauty, varying from $20 to $200
each.<span id="fr_91"></span>[91](#fn_91) The traffic at Ottawa
resembled that of London in that prominent citizens, leading
politicians,

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

and members of the government were implicated.<span
id="fr_92"></span>[92](#fn_92) The number of women and girls constantly
reported "missing" is startling in its great extent. Stepping out on
some household errand for a moment they vanish as though swallowed by
the earth. A few years ago the "Chicago Herald" sent one of its
reporters into the pineries of Wisconsin, to trace a little girl living
on State street of that city who went one evening to get a pitcher of
milk and did not return. Not a month, scarcely a week passes, that the
disappearance of some woman, girl, or child, is not chronicled through
the press, besides the infinitely greater numbers of whom the world
never hears. As it was abroad, so in our own country, no energetic steps
are taken to put an end to these foul wrongs. Woman herself is needed in
the seats of justice; woman must become a responsible factor in
government in order to the enactment of laws which shall protect her own
sex. The spring of 1892, the "Chicago Herald" called attention to the
continuance of this condition of things.

    MARINETTE, Wis., April 17.--Four years ago when "The Herald" exposed
the pinery dens of Wisconsin, Marinette was known as the wickedest city
in the country. It was the rendezvous of every species of bad men.
Thugs, thieves and gamblers practically held possession of the town.
Their influence was felt in all municipal affairs. Certain officers of
the law seemed in active sympathy with them, and it was almost

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

impossible to secure the arrest and conviction of men guilty of infamous
crimes. Dives of the vilest character ran open on the outskirts of the
town. Their inmates, recruited from all parts of the country by the
subtle arts of well known procurers, were kept in a state of abject
slavery. Iron balls and chains, suffocating cords and the whistling lash
were used on refractory girls and women. The dens were surrounded by
stockades, and savage dogs were kept unmuzzled to scare those who might
try to escape. Bodies of ill-starred victims were sometimes found in the
woods, but the discovery was rarely followed by investigation. The dive
keepers were wealthy and knew how to ease the conscience of any
over-zealous officer.

    The outburst of indignation which followed "The Herald's" exposure
compelled certain reforms in the neighborhood. Sporadic efforts were
made to clean out the criminal element; restrictions were placed on
saloons and gambling houses; stockades and bloodhounds were removed from
the dives near the woods, and gradually an air of semi-decency crept
over the district. But the snake was scotched, not killed. For a time
more attention was paid to the proprieties, vice and crime were not so
open as formerly. By degrees, however, the old conditions assumed sway
again. Games of every kind were run openly night and day, dives and
dance halls have been thronged and the usual quota of men from the woods
deliberately robbed of their winter's savings.

    Man's assertion that he protects woman is false. Under laws solely
enacted by men young girls in christian countries are held as assenting
to their own degradation at an age so tender that their evidence would
not be received in courts of law. Nor are these the laws of a remote age
come down to the present time. As late as 1889, the Kansas State Senate
voted 25 to 9 that a girl of twelve years was of sufficiently
responsible age "to consent" to take the first step in immorality; the
same senate afterwards unanimously voting

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

that a boy of sixteen years was not old enough to decide for himself in
regard to smoking cigarettes.<span id="fr_93"></span>[93](#fn_93) It
should be remembered that youth is the most impressible season of life
as well as the most inexperienced. Young girls from thirteen to sixteen,
mere children, are most easily decoyed, their youth and innocence
causing them to fall the readiest prey; and scarcely a large city but
proves the existence of men of mature years whose aim is the destruction
of such young girls.<span id="fr_94"></span>[94](#fn_94) The state of
Delaware yet more infamous, still retaining seven years as the "age of
consent." Seven short years of baby life in that state is legally held
to transform a girl-infant into a being with capacity to consent to an
act of which she neither knows the name nor the consequences, her
"consent" freeing from responsibility or punishment, the villain,
youthful or aged, who chooses to assault such baby victim of man-made
laws.<span id="fr_95"></span>[95](#fn_95) While the doors of
irresponsible vice are legally thrown open to men of all ages with girl
victims as their prey, the restrictions against marriage with a minor
without the parents' consent are in most states very severe. That the
girl-wife herself has consented to the marriage ceremony is of no
weight. Where a legitimate union is under consideration she is held as
possessing no power to form a contract and can be arrested under a writ
of habeas corpus, and kept from her husband at her father's pleasure.
Instances have also

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

occurred where the wife has been punished by him for thus daring to
marry.<span id="fr_96"></span>[96](#fn_96) Both the husband and the
officiating clergyman are also held amenable, the former under charge of
abduction, the latter as an accessory in performing the marriage
ceremony.

    A significant fact is the rapid increase of child criminals
throughout christendom; Germany, France and England showing one hundred
per cent within ten years, while in the United States more than one-half
the inmates of state prisons are under thirty years of age. From
criminals it is necessary to look back to crime-making men sitting in
earth's loftiest places, and note the fact that crime germs are not
alone generated with the child, but that through the gestative period
the mother, a religious and legal slave, struggles between a newly
awakened sense of that responsibility which within the last four decades
has come to woman, and the crushing influence of religious, political
and family despotism which still overshadows her. Moralists have long
striven for the suppression of immorality by efforts directed to the
reformation of corrupt women alone; for two reasons they have been
unsuccessful.

    First: the majority of women entering this life are found to have
done so under the pressure of abject poverty, and as long as the
conditions of society continue to foster poverty for woman it was
impossible to create a marked change in morals.

    Second: all efforts were directed towards the smallest and least
culpable class, as it has been proven that ten

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

men of immoral life are required for the support of one woman of like
character. In London alone with its population of five millions, 100,000
women, one-fiftieth of its population are thus enumerated, requiring
1,000,000 men, one-fifth of its population, for their support.
Recognizing the fact that men, not women, were most sunken in vice, the
number leading vicious lives very much larger, the degradation of these
men very much greater, an Italian lady, Madam Venturi, at the
International Conference of the British Continental and General
Federation for the abolition of governmental regulation of prostitution,
while making a brief eloquent address upon the general subject of rescue
work, referred to the great importance of reclaiming men as the
fundamental work upon which others should be built up. Teach men, she
said, to understand that he who degrades a fellow creature, commits a
crime, the crime of high treason against humanity. In quick response to
those fitly-spoken words, the women of many countries combined in the
work of man's reformation in an organization known as the "White Cross
Society" founded in 1886, by Miss Ellice Hopkins of England, and now
possessing branches in every part of the civilized world.<span
id="fr_97"></span>[97](#fn_97) To this society, men alone belong; its
work is of a still broader character than mere reformation of the
vicious; it seeks to train young men and boys to a proper respect for
woman and for themselves.

    As the world is indebted to Christine of Pisa for the first public
protest against the immorality of christendom, so to Mrs. Josephine
Butler,<span id="fr_98"></span>[98](#fn_98) Madam Venturi, and Miss
Ellice Hopkins are due the inauguration

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

of a new moral standard for man whose results must be of incalculable
value to the world. The "White Cross" is a simply organized society
without an admission fee, but requiring adherence to a fivefold
obligation binding its members to purity of thought and action,<span
id="fr_99"></span>[99](#fn_99) and maintaining that the law of chastity
is equally binding on men and women. The International Federation, a
union existing in several European countries, its chief object, work
against state protection of vice, roused public thought in this
direction as never before. People began to comprehend that a large
vicious class was common to every community, a class whose reclamation
had never been systematically attempted, never thought necessary or even
deemed possible, because of the religious and social training that
taught indulgence in vice to be a necessity of man's nature; and the
co-ordinate statement, that protection to the majority of women was to
be secured only through the debasement and moral degradation of the
minority. For many hundreds of years this has been man's treatment of
the question of vice in Christian lands.

    But as soon as advancing civilization permitted woman's thought to
be publicly heard, vice in man was declared to be upon the same basis as
vice in woman. Had not man been trained by his religion into a belief
that woman was created for him, had not the church for 1800 and more
years preached woman's moral debasement, the long course of legislation
for

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

them as slaves would never have taken place, nor the obstacles in way of
change been so numerous and so persistent. For nine years the Criminal
Reform Act was before Parliament. During that period, petitions,
speeches and appeals of every kind in favor of its passage were made by
those outside the halls of legislation aided by a few honest men within.
But the vicious and immoral fought the act with energy, despite the fact
that the women of their own families were exposed to destruction through
government protected iniquity. The bitter opposition by legislators to
this act, is an additional proof that woman cannot trust man in the
state to any greater extent than in the church.

    Until woman holds political power in her own hands, her efforts for
protective legislation will be arduous and protracted. Among the customs
of the early Christian church, we are able to trace the inception of
marquette, the mundium, the legalization of vice and crimes of kindred
character. With exception of among some savage races, that woman should
appear unclothed before man, has been regarded as evidence of the
deepest sensuality, yet throughout the history of Christianity from its
earliest years when women were required to divest themselves of clothing
before baptism down to the Endowment House ceremonies of the Mormon
Church, we constantly find proof of like sensual exactions by the
"Fathers," priests and lay masculinity of the church. During the
earliest days of Christianity, women were baptized quite nude, in the
presence of men, by men, their bodies being afterwards anointed with oil
by the priest who had baptized them. One of the earliest schisms in the
church arose from the protest of women against this indignity,

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

their demand to be allowed to baptize those of their own sex, and the
opposition of men to this demand.<span id="fr_100"></span>[100](#fn_100)

    The early bishops of the church **strenuously** used their influence
against the baptism of nude women by elders of their own sex. Women were
sometimes brought entirely nude upon the stage at Rome, but it was in
connection with religious representation, the theater at that period
being an element of religious teaching. Lecky speaks of the undisguised
sensuality of this practice.<span id="fr_101"></span>[101](#fn_101) What
must be our conception of a Christian custom that placed nude maidens
and wives in the very hands of men, not alone for baptism but also for
anointing with oil? Nude baptism is still practiced when converts are
received into the Greek church, no position or station in life excusing
from it, Catharine, the first wife of Peter the Great being baptized in
this primitive Christian manner.<span id="fr_102"></span>[102](#fn_102)
As

    The converts were first exorcised of the evil spirits that were
supposed to inhabit them; then, after undressing and being baptized,
they were anointed with oil.--*Bunsen's Christianity of Mankind*, Vol.
VII, p. 386-393; *3d Vol. Analecta*.

    Women were baptized quite naked in the presence of these
men.--*Philosophical Dictionary*.

    Some learned men have enacted that in primitive churches the persons
to be baptized, of whatever age or sex, should be quite naked.
Pike.--History Of Crime in England. See Joseph Vicecomes.--*De Ritibus
Baptismi. Varrius.--Thesibus de Baptisme*.}

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

late as the seventeenth century a work upon the "Seven Sacraments" set
certain days in which female penitents were to appear entirely unclothed
before the confessor in order that he might discipline them on account
of their sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Witchcraft.](wcs07)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_page_152">p. 152</span>  

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1.](#fr_1)  in the dominion of the Count de
Foix, the lord had right once in his lifetime to take, without payment,
a certain quantity of goods from the stores of each tenant. Cesar
Cantu.--*Histoire Universelle*.

<span id="fn_page_153">p. 153</span>  

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2.](#fr_2)  Two women seized by German soldiers
were covered with tar, rolled in leathers, and exhibited in the camp as
a new species of bird.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3.](#fr_3)  Among the privileges always claimed,
and frequently enforced by the feudalry, was the custom of the lord of
the manor to lie the first night with the bride of his
tenant.--*Sketches of Feudalism*, p. 109.

By the law of "Marquette" under the feudal system (which rested on
personal vassalage), to the "lord of the soil" belonged the privilege of
first entering the nuptial couch unless the husband had previously paid
a small sum of money, or its equivalent, for the ransom of his bride;
and we read that these feudal lords thought it was no worse thus to levy
on a young bride than to demand half the wool of each flock of sheep,
*Article on Relation of the Sexes*.--Westminster Review.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4.](#fr_4)  The custom of Borough-English is
said to have arisen out of the Marchetta or plebeian's first born son
being considered his lord's progeny.--*Dr. Tusler*.

<span id="fn_page_154">p. 154</span>  

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5.](#fr_5)  "It is not very likely that Louis
XIV. thought the time would ever come when the peasant's bride might not
be claimed in the chamber of his seigneur on her bridal night. Those
base laws, their revocation has been written in the blood of successive
generations."

<span id="fn_6"></span>[6.](#fr_6)  See *Feudal Dictionary*.

<span id="fn_page_155">p. 155</span>  

<span id="fn_7"></span>[7.](#fr_7)  The interests of ecclesiastics as
feudal nobles were in some respects identical with those of the barons,
but the clergy also constituted a party with interests of its own.

S. M. Gérun, as quoted by Grimm, gives curious information upon this
subject.

<span id="fn_page_156">p. 156</span>  

<span id="fn_9"></span>[9.](#fr_9)  Par example, dans quelques
seigneuries, on le seigneur passent trois nuits avec les nouvelles
marriées, il fut convenu qu'il n'eu passant qu'une. Dans d'autres, on le
seigneur avant le premiere nuit seulment, ou ne lui accordes plus qu'une
heure.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[10.](#fr_10)  *Calling de Plancy*.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[11.](#fr_11)  *Feudal Dictionary*, p. 179.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[12.](#fr_12)  Claiming the right of the first
night with each new spouse.--*Bœms Decisions* 297, 1-17.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[13.](#fr_13)  *Raepsaet*. p. 179.

<span id="fn_page_157">p. 157</span>  

<span id="fn_14"></span>[14.](#fr_14)  The popes anciently had universal
power over the pleasures of marriage.--*Feudal Dictionary*, 174.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[15.](#fr_15)  In the transaction the
alternative was with the husband; it was he who might submit, or pay the
fine, as he preferred or could afford. *Relation of the
Sexes*.--Westminster Review.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[16.](#fr_16)  These (courts) powerfully
assisted the seigneur to enforce his traditional Privileges at the
expense of the villeins.--*H. S. Maine*.

The courts of Bearn openly maintained that this right grew up naturally.

<span id="fn_page_158">p. 158</span>  

<span id="fn_17"></span>[17.](#fr_17)  Sometimes the contumacious
husband was harnessed by the side of a horse or an ox, compelled to do a
brute's work and to herd with the cattle.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[18.](#fr_18)  He is followed by bursts of
laughter, and the noisy rabble down to the lowest scullion give chase to
the "cuckold."--Michelet.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[19.](#fr_19)  The oldest born of the peasant is
accounted the son of his lord, for he, perchance it was, that begat him.
When the guests have retired, the newly wedded husband shall permit his
lord to enter the bed of his wife, unless he shall have redeemed her for
five shillings and four pence.--*Grimm*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[20.](#fr_20)  Droit de cuissage c'est le droit
de mettre une cuisse dans le lit d'une autra, on de coucher avec le
femme d'une vassal on d'une serf.

So much scandal was caused that finally the archbishop of Bourges
abolished this right in his diocese.--*Feudal Dictionary*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[21.](#fr_21)  A yoke of cattle and a measure of
wheat was afterwards substituted for a money ransom, but even this
redemption was in most cases entirely beyond the power of the serf.
<span id="fn_page_159">p. 159</span>

Under the feudal system the lord of the manor held unlimited sway over
his serfs. He farther possessed the so-called *Jus Primæ Noctis* (Right
of the First Night), which he could, however, relinquish in virtue of a
certain payment, the name of which betrayed its nature. It has been
latterly asserted that this right never existed, an assertion which to
me appears entirely unfounded. It is clear the right was not a written
one, that it was not summed up in paragraphs; it was the natural
consequence of the dependent relationship, and required no registration
in any book of law. If the female serf pleased the lord he enjoyed her,
if not he let her alone. In Hungary, Transylvania, and the Danubian
principalities, there was no written *Jus Primæ Noctis* either, but one
learns enough of this subject by inquiry of those who know the country
and its inhabitants, as to the manners which prevail between the land
owners and the female population. That imposts of this nature existed
cannot be denied, and the names speak for themselves. August
Bebel.--*Woman in the Past, Present and Future*.

<span id="fn_page_159">p. 159</span>  

<span id="fn_22"></span>[22.](#fr_22)  In a parish outside Bourges the
parson as being a lord especially claimed the first fruits of the bride,
but was willing to sell his rights to the husband.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[23.](#fr_23)  The Infamous noble who
accompanied a certain notorious actress to this country in the fall of
1886, possessed forty livings in his gift.

<span id="fn_page_160">p. 160</span>  

<span id="fn_24"></span>[24.](#fr_24)  No greater proof of this
statement is needed than the rapidity with which the disease brought by
the sailors of Columbus spread over Europe; infecting the king on his
throne, the peasant in the field, the priest at the altar, the monk and
nun in the cloister.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[25.](#fr_25)  In deference to that public
sentiment which required the ruler to pose before the world as a
libertine, Friedrich Wilhelm I., of Prussia (1713-1740), although old
and in feeble health, kept up the pretense of a **liaison** with the
wife of one of his generals, the intimacy consisting of an hour's daily
walk it, the castle yard.--*August Bebel*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[26.](#fr_26)  Down to Pius IX. See *The Woman,
the Priest and the Confessional*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[27.](#fr_27)  When the Emperor Charles II.
entered Bourges, he was saluted by a deputation of perfectly naked
women. At the entrance of King Ladislaus into Vienna, 1452, the
municipal government sent a deputation of public women to meet him, the
beauty of whose forms was rather enhanced than concealed by their
covering of gauze. Such cases were by no means unusual.--*Woman in the
Past, Present and Future*.

<span id="fn_page_161">p. 161</span>  

<span id="fn_28"></span>[28.](#fr_28)  *Memoirs of the Princess of
Bareith*, a sister of Frederick the Great.

<span id="fn_page_162">p. 162</span>  

<span id="fn_29"></span>[29.](#fr_29)  In Russia the nobles have such
rights by law over the women of their lands that the population scarcely
resent the sale by auction of all the young peasants of their village.
These nobles, a race once proud and mean, extravagant and covetous, full
of vice and cunning, are said to be a class superior to the people, Yet
they are working the ruin of their influence by multiplying in the
masses the number of individuals, already very considerable, to whom
they have transmitted their genius with their blood.--*A. R. Craig,
M.A.*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[30.](#fr_30)  LONDON, February 1.--The Odessa
correspondent of "The Daily News" says: Hunger typhus is spreading
alarmingly. In large towns in this region all the hospitals are filled,
and private buildings are being converted into hospitals. This is the
state of affairs in Moskovskia and Viedomosti. A correspondent writing
from Russia declares that the more fanatical and superstitious portion
of the peasantry believe that Count Tolstoi is Antichrist, and decline
to accept his bounty for fear they will thus commit their souls to
perdition.

<span id="fn_page_163">p. 163</span>  

<span id="fn_31"></span>[31.](#fr_31)  Two celebrated women, Augusta, of
Koningsmark, and Madame Dudevant (George Sand), traced their descent to
this king.--Letters to "New York Tribune."

<span id="fn_32"></span>[32.](#fr_32)  Adam Badeau.--*Aristocracy in
England*.

<span id="fn_page_164">p. 164</span>  

<span id="fn_33"></span>[33.](#fr_33)  The at one time famous "Alexandra
Limp," affecting the princess of Wales, and copied in walk by
ultra-fashionable women, was said to be due to the effects of an
infamous disease contracted by the princess from her husband.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[34.](#fr_34)  Rev. Dr. Varley.--"New York Sun,"
July, 1883.

<span id="fn_page_167">p. 167</span>  

<span id="fn_35"></span>[35.](#fr_35)  At the beginning of the Christian
era, Corinth possessed a thousand women who were devoted to the service
of its idol, the Corinthian Venus. "To Corinthianize" came to express
the utmost lewdness, but Corinth, as sunken as she was in sensual
pleasure, was not under the pale of Christianity. She was a heathen
city, outside of that light which, coming into the world, is held to
enlighten every man that accepts it.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[36.](#fr_36)  Les Cuisiniers et les marmitons
de l'archeveques de Vienne avaient imposé un tribut sur les mariages; on
croit que certains feuditaires exigeaient un droit obscène de leur
vassaux qui se mariaient, quel fut transformé ensuite en droit de
*cuissage* consistant, de la part du seigneur, a mettre une jambe nue
dans le lit des nouveaux époux. Dans d'autres pays l'homme ne pouvait
coucher avec sa femme les trois premières nuits sans le consentement de
l'eveque ou du seigneur du fief. Cesar Cantu.--*Histoire Universelle*,
Vol. IX, p. 202-3.

<span id="fn_page_168">p. 168</span>  

<span id="fn_37"></span>[37.](#fr_37)  Moral History of Women.

<span id="fn_page_170">p. 170</span>  

<span id="fn_38"></span>[38.](#fr_38)  There are those who to enrich
themselves would not only rob their sisters of their portion, but would
sell for money the honor of those who bear their name. The authority of
the son during the feudal period was so absolute that the father and
mother themselves often winked at this hideous traffic.--*Ibid*, p. 46.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[39.](#fr_39)  Unless an heiress, woman
possessed no social importance; unless an in mate of a religious house,
no religious position. There are some records of her in this last
position, showing what constant effort and strength of intellect were
demanded from her to thwart the machinations of abbots and
monks.--*Sketches of Fontervault*.

<span id="fn_page_171">p. 171</span>  

<span id="fn_40"></span>[40.](#fr_40)  See page 193.--*Fleta*.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[41.](#fr_41)  *Bracton*, 26. 195, 208.
*Littleton's Tenures*, 55, 174, 209.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[42.](#fr_42)  Gratian, Canon for Spain in 633,
says the nuptial robe was garnished with white and purple ribbons as a
sign of the continence to which young married people devoted themselves
for a time.

<span id="fn_page_172">p. 172</span>  

<span id="fn_43"></span>[43.](#fr_43)  Eight young men, living in the
vicinity of North Rose, Wayne County, have been held to await the action
of the grand jury for rioting. A young married couple named Garlic were
about to retire for the night when they were startled by the appearance
of a party of men in the yard. The party immediately commenced beating
on pans, discharging guns and pistols, pounding with clubs, screaming
and kicking at the doors of the house. The bride and groom were
terrified, but finally the groom mustered enough courage to demand what
the men wanted there. Shouts of "Give us lots of cider or we'll horn you
to death," were the answers. An attempt was made to break in a rear door
of the house. The bride and groom and John Wager, who was also present
in the house, braced the doors from the inside to prevent a forcible
entrance, and the inmates had to defend the property nearly all night.
The horning party, at last weary of calling for cider, left the
premises, giving an extra strong fusillade of firearms and a series of
yells as they departed. The eight young men were arrested a few days
later on suspicion of being in the horning party.--*Press Report*, Jan.
14, 1887.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[44.](#fr_44)  Whenever we discover symbolized
forms, we are justified in inferring that in the past life of the people
employing them there were corresponding realities. McLennon.--*Studies
in Ancient History*, p, 6.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[45.](#fr_45)  He was thrown into the moat to
cool his ardor, pelted with stones, derided as a proud and envious
wretch.--*Michelet*.

<span id="fn_page_173">p. 173</span>  

<span id="fn_46"></span>[46.](#fr_46)  The maids redeeme their
virginities with a certain piece of money, and by that Terme their lands
are held to this day. Heywoode.--*History of Women*, London, 1624; Lib.
7, 339.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[47.](#fr_47)  Margaret was canonized in 1251,
and made the Patron Saint of Scotland in 1673. Several of the Scotch
feudalry, despite royal protestation, kept up the infamous practice
until a late date. One of the earls of Crawford, a truculent and lustful
anarch, popularly known and dreaded as "Earl Brant," in the sixteenth
century, was probably among the last who openly claimed leg-right, the
literal translation of *droit de jambage*.--*Sketches of Feudalism*.

<span id="fn_page_174">p. 174</span>  

<span id="fn_48"></span>[48.](#fr_48)  The feeling is common in the
north that a laird, or chieftain, getting a vassal's or clansmen's wife
or daughter with child, is doing her a great honor. Burke.--*Letters
from an English Gentleman*, about 1730.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[49.](#fr_49)  *Pres de cet étang, et devant sa
maison*.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[50.](#fr_50)  In days to come people will be
slow to believe that the law among Christian nations went beyond
anything decreed concerning the olden slavery; that it wrote down as an
actual right the most grievous outrage that could ever wound man's
heart. The Lord Spiritual had this right no less than the Lord Temporal.
The parson being a lord, expressly claimed the first fruits of the
bride, but was willing to sell his rights to the husband. The courts of
Berne openly maintain that this right grew up naturally. Michelet--*La
Sorciere*. p, 62.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[51.](#fr_51)  Among the rights asserted by the
Protestant clergy in the middle ages, and which caused much dispute, was
exemption from lay jurisdiction even in cases of felony.

From the throne downward every secular office was dependent upon the
church. Froude.--*Times of Erasmus and Luther*.

<span id="fn_page_175">p. 175</span>  

<span id="fn_52"></span>[52.](#fr_52)  Among these de coucher avec leur
femmes, d'enlever les prémices de leurs filles.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[53.](#fr_53)  H. S. Maine.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[54.](#fr_54)  In Babylon every young woman was
obliged once in her life to <span id="fn_page_176">p. 176</span> offer
her person for sale, nor was she permitted to leave the temple, where
she sat with a cord about her waist, until some stranger taking it in
hand led her away. The money thus obtained passed into the treasury of
the temple as her "purchase money, or redemption, releasing her from
farther prostitution, and permitting her marriage, which was forbidden
until such sale had been consummated."

<span id="fn_page_176">p. 176</span>  

<span id="fn_55"></span>[55.](#fr_55)  Although a similar custom is said
to have prevailed in India under Brahaminical rule, it must be
remembered that wherever found it is an accompaniment of the
Patriarchate, and under some form of religion where the feminine is no
longer considered a portion of the divinity, or woman allowed in the
priesthood.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[56.](#fr_56)  It has been too readily believed
that the wrong was formal, not real. But the price laid down in certain
countries exceeded the means of almost every peasant. In Scotland, for
instance, the demand was for several cows, a price immense, impossible.

<span id="fn_page_178">p. 178</span>  

<span id="fn_57"></span>[57.](#fr_57)  *Christian History, First
Period*, by Joseph Henry Allen.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[58.](#fr_58)  In the history of Julius Caesar
there is something peculiarly curious and mythical. Cæsar had all the
honors paid to him as to a divine person. At the end of five years a
festival was instituted to his honor, as to a person of divine
extraction, A college of priests was established to perform the rites
instituted for the occasion. A day was dedicated to him, and he had the
title also of Julian love, and a temple was erected to
him.-*Anacalypsis*, I, 611.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[59.](#fr_59)  Law of the first night.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[60.](#fr_60)  The lord's right.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[61.](#fr_61)  Leg right--the right to place a
naked leg in bed with the bride.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[62.](#fr_62)  Droit de cuissage, c'est le droit
de mettre une cuisse dans le lit d'une autre, ou de coucher avec le
femme d'un vassal, ou d'un serf.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[63.](#fr_63)  Droit d'afforge, the right to
prey upon the bride.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[64.](#fr_64)  Droit de marquette, took its name
in Scotland from the redemption piece of money, a demi-mark, marquette,
or little mark, a weight of gold or silver used in Great Britain and
many other European countries.

<span id="fn_page_181">p. 181</span>  

<span id="fn_65"></span>[65.](#fr_65)  Mrs. Josephine Butler. so
stating.

<span id="fn_page_183">p. 183</span>  

<span id="fn_66"></span>[66.](#fr_66)  A government license reads:
"Chinese women for the use of Europeans only."

<span id="fn_67"></span>[67.](#fr_67)  *Contagious Disease Acts*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[68.](#fr_68)  *The Emancipation of Women*,
January, 1888.

<span id="fn_page_184">p. 184</span>  

<span id="fn_69"></span>[69.](#fr_69)  The penal code provides for the
punishment of a man who commits mischief by injuring an animal of the
value of ten rupees or upwards, with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. If the animal be worth
fifty rupees, the punishment may be for five years. If a man induces his
neighbor's dog, by bait or otherwise, to follow him with the intention
of dishonestly taking the dog out of his neighbor's possession, he may
be punished with imprisonment for three years, or with fine, or with
both. But while a man's dog, his horse, his elephant are taken care of
by legislation; while the very plants in his garden are protected; his
young daughter, the light of his eyes and the joy of his home, may be
ruined and her fair fame stolen with impunity, provided she has attained
the age of ten years and is unmarried, and proof is wanting that she has
resisted her seducer."

<span id="fn_page_185">p. 185</span>  

<span id="fn_70"></span>[70.](#fr_70)  The New York Society for the
"Prevention of Diseases."

<span id="fn_71"></span>[71.](#fr_71)  Of Berlin, August Bebel says:
"Now things are neither better nor worse in Berlin than in any other
large town. It would be difficult to decide which most resembled ancient
Babylon; orthodox Greek St. Petersburg, Catholic Rome Christian Germanic
Berlin, heathen Paris, puritan London, or lively Vienna.--*Woman in the
Past, Present and Future*.

<span id="fn_page_188">p. 188</span>  

<span id="fn_72"></span>[72.](#fr_72)  The latest attempt for licensing
vice in the United States was made in New Orleans, 1892, in the form of
an ordinance proposing to grant to Dr. Wm. Harnon the privilege of
levying an inspection tax upon those known as "Public Women" of $0.50 a
week for fifteen years.

The "Louisiana Review" said of it:

"A more revolting proposition than this has never come under our notice,
and we are amazed that the health committee failed to detect its
character, however artfully it may have been screened by the pretext
that it was intended to lessen the harm of the social evil."

The "New Delta," in its issue of August 31, said:

"The queer and ill-favored monopoly which the ordinance for the
regulation of houses of bad repute sought to establish has not been
successful on the first effort. It goes back to a committee. Let us hope
that it will remain buried there forever, and decent people be saved the
infliction of a public discussion of the miserable scheme. Such systems
of 'regulation' would disgrace the devil, and the proposition for the
city to share in the plunder of these poor wretches would shame a Piute
village."

The Woman's journal, September 19, said:

"It is well that this measure has failed on the first attempt; but to
refer a matter to a committee is not necessarily to kill it, and its
fate in the committee should be closely watched. The laws establishing
the state regulation of vice in England were smuggled through Parliament
about 1 o'clock in the morning, when half the members were absent or
asleep; but it took seventeen years Of painful and distasteful agitation
to repeal them. Prevention of bad legislation is better than cure."

This attempt was finally defeated through the energetic opposition and
work of Mrs. Elizabeth Lyle Saxon.

<span id="fn_page_190">p. 190</span>  

<span id="fn_73"></span>[73.](#fr_73)  The reporter, while the committee
was still in session, went to a procuress and ordered a pretty girl, 14
years of age, certified by a physician to be good, to be delivered to
his order as "*agent for gentleman of 60*." The madame accepted the
order, and in a short time produced the girl certified. The reporter
investigated the child's history, and ascertained that her father was
dead and her mother was a poor working woman, The girl was dressed in an
old black frock. Having completed the purchase of the girl, the reporter
hastened to arrange for her delivery anywhere and to any person
designated by the committee.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[74.](#fr_74)  A committee composed of Cardinal
Manning, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Bishop of London and two laymen,
examined the evidence respecting criminal vice in London, becoming
satisfied that the statements made by the "Pall Mall Gazette" were
substantially true.

<span id="fn_page_191">p. 191</span>  

<span id="fn_75"></span>[75.](#fr_75)  The Rev. Mr. Spurgeon preached a
powerful sermon upon the patrician iniquity of London, comparing it to
the worst sins of ancient nations, one sure, Sooner or later, to bring
destruction upon both individual and nation.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[76.](#fr_76)  When you see a girl on the street
you can never say without inquiry whether she is one of the
most-to-be-condemned or the most-to-be-pitied of her Sex. Many of them
find themselves where they are because of a too trusting disposition;
others are as much the innocent victims of crime as if they had been
stabbed or maimed by the dagger of the assassin. \* \* \* These women
constitute a large **standing** army, whose numbers no one can
calculate. Gen. Booth.--*Darkest England*, 51-56.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[77.](#fr_77)  Children as they go to and from
school are waited for and watched until the time has come for running
them down.--*Report of the Secret Commission*.

<span id="fn_page_193">p. 193</span>  

<span id="fn_78"></span>[78.](#fr_78)  It seemed a strange inverted
world, that in which I lived those terrible weeks, the world of the
streets and brothel. It was the same, and yet not the same as the world
of business and the world of politics. I heard of much the same people
in the house of ill-fame as those of whom you hear in caucuses, in law
courts and on 'change; but all were judged by a different standard, and
their relative importance was altogether changed. Mr. Stead.--"Pall Mall
Gazette."

<span id="fn_page_194">p. 194</span>  

<span id="fn_79"></span>[79.](#fr_79)  *Report of Secret Commission*.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[80.](#fr_80)  An immense number of public women
congregated at Nice during the time of its Historic Council, which
settled the genuineness of the books of the Bible.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[81.](#fr_81)  So fast has this class of
pecuniarily independent single women increased within the past two and a
half decades. women who prefer a single life with its personal
independence, to a married life with its legal dependence and
restrictions, as to call from the "London Times" the designation of
"Third Sex."

<span id="fn_82"></span>[82.](#fr_82)  The statistics of prostitution
show that the great proportion of those who have fallen into it have
been impelled by the most extreme poverty, in many instances verging
upon starvation.--*Hist. European Morals*, 2, 203.

<span id="fn_page_195">p. 195</span>  

<span id="fn_83"></span>[83.](#fr_83)  Belgium and Holland entered into
an agreement a few years since for its suppression.

<span id="fn_page_198">p. 198</span>  

<span id="fn_84"></span>[84.](#fr_84)  When Hon. Henry Blair presented a
petition, asking for the better protection of girls, he said: "Our
civilization seems to have developed an almost unknown phase of crime in
the annals of the race, and to-day the traffic in girls and young women
in this country, especially in our large cities, has come to be more
disgraceful and worse than ever was that in the girls of Circassia."

This Christianity of ours has much to answer for.--*Woman's Tribune*.

<span id="fn_page_202">p. 202</span>  

<span id="fn_85"></span>[85.](#fr_85)  It was at one time proposed to
arrest all women out alone in the city of Syracuse, N. Y., after 9
o'clock in the evening. Had the ordinance been enacted, a lady of mature
years and position was prepared to test its legality.

<span id="fn_page_203">p. 203</span>  

<span id="fn_86"></span>[86.](#fr_86)  Eighteen women were arrested on
Monday night in the fifteenth and twenty-ninth police precincts, and
after being held in confinement over night, were taken before justice
Duffy at the Jefferson Market Police Court Tuesday morning.

" What were these women doing?" asked the justice.

"Nothing," replied the officer.

"Then why did you arrest them?"

"We have to do it, sir. It is the order of the police superintendent
when we find them loitering on the streets."-New York "Sunday Sun," June
28, 1885.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[87.](#fr_87)  Mr. Breen said the horrors of the
camps into which these girls are inveigled cannot be adequately
described. There is no escape for these poor creatures. In one case a
girl escaped after being shot in the leg, and took refuge in a swamp.
Dogs were started on her trail, and she was hunted down and taken back
to her den. in another case a girl escaped while a dance was going on at
the shanty into which she had been lured. After several days and nights
of privation she made her way to an island near the shore in Lake
Michigan, where a man named Stanley lived. But the dogs and human
bloodhounds trailed her, Stanley was overcome, and the girl was taken
back. The law now provides for imprisonment of only one year in case of
conviction of any connection with this traffic, and it is proposed to
amend it.--*Telegraphic Report*.

<span id="fn_page_204">p. 204</span>  

<span id="fn_88"></span>[88.](#fr_88)  Tales of a horrible character
reach as from Michigan and other northern lumber districts of the manner
in which girls are enticed to these places on the promise of high wages,
and then subjected to brutal outrages past description. Some three
hundred of these dens are located. These girls are sold by the keepers,
passing from one den to another, from one degree of hellish brutality to
another (we beg pardon of all brutes), all escape guarded against by
ferocious bloodhounds. The maximum of life is two months.--"Union Labor
journal."

<span id="fn_89"></span>[89.](#fr_89)  Tony Harden used to keep dives in
Norway and Quinnesic, and it is said of him that after paying a
constable $12 to bring a girl back who had tried to escape, he beat her
with a revolver until he was tired, and was about to turn a bull-dog
loose at her, when a woodsman appeared and stopped him. The next spring
Harden was elected justice of the peace.--"Woman's Standard."

<span id="fn_page_207">p. 207</span>  

<span id="fn_90"></span>[90.](#fr_90)  The Rev. Mr. Kerr, of the
Protestant Church, Colon, recently discovered three young girls brought
to the Isthmus for improper purposes. He took the children away, and
with the assistance of others returned them to their parents in Jamaica.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[91.](#fr_91)  QUEBEC, April 11.--Wholesale
trading in young and innocent girls for purposes of prostitution has
come to the notice of the authorities. Disreputable houses in Chicago,
New York, Boston and other cities in the United States have agents here,
who ingratiate themselves with young women and induce them to go to the
states, where they are drawn into a life of infamy. The trade has been
carried on to an alarming extent, sometimes fifteen girls being shipped
in a week. The prices paid to agents depend on the looks of the girls,
and vary from $20 to $200. It is stated that over fifty girls have been
sent to one Chicago house within a year.--"Daily Press."

<span id="fn_page_208">p. 208</span>  

<span id="fn_92"></span>[92.](#fr_92)  The startling revelations within
the past few days as to the traffic at Ottawa in young girls of from 12
to 14, in which a number of prominent citizens as well as several
leading politicians are implicated, have caused the greatest
indignation. Tuesday night a meeting was held under the auspices of the
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, with a view to
devising some means by which the great stain on the capital's good name
might be removed. it was decided that the matter must become the subject
of special legislation at the next session of Parliament, before the
guilty scoundrels can be punished. Opposition is expected from the
members of Parliament who are implicated in the outrages.--"Daily
Press."

<span id="fn_page_210">p. 210</span>  

<span id="fn_93"></span>[93.](#fr_93)  "Topeka Leader."

<span id="fn_94"></span>[94.](#fr_94)  In Troy, N. Y., in the fall of
1891, discovery was made of an organized plan to ravish little girls. It
numbered in its ranks married men, members of the police force, and men
well known in business and church circles. With this discovery came the
statement from other cities that like offenders were common.--"The Daily
Press."

<span id="fn_95"></span>[95.](#fr_95)  Persistent effort has been made
by women to stop these great wrongs, but having no power in legislation,
her prayers and petitions have met with but scant success.

<span id="fn_page_211">p. 211</span>  

<span id="fn_96"></span>[96.](#fr_96)  MARRIED AT THIRTEEN YEARS.--Maud
Pearl Johnson, a thirteen-year-old girl of Fulton, who was married to
Franklin Foster of that place on Monday, has been placed in the State
industrial School in Rochester under sentence by Police Justice Spencer
of Fulton. Foster is a widower with three children. The minister at
Fairdale who performed the ceremony is said to have been fined $3 for
cruelty to children. The poor authorities arrested the young wife for
vagrancy.

<span id="fn_page_212">p. 212</span>  

<span id="fn_97"></span>[97.](#fr_97)  Africa, Australia, India, Canada
the United States among the number.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[98.](#fr_98)  Who gave seventeen years of her
life to work for the overthrow of government legislation of vice in
England.

<span id="fn_page_213">p. 213</span>  

<span id="fn_99"></span>[99.](#fr_99) --1. To treat all women with
respect, and endeavor to protect them from wrong and degradation.

2\. To endeavor to put down all indecent language and coarse jests.

3\. To maintain the law of purity as equally binding upon men and women.

4\. To endeavor to spread these principles among my companions, and try
to help my younger brothers.

5\. To use every possible means to fulfil the command: "Keep Thyself
Pure."

<span id="fn_page_215">p. 215</span>  

<span id="fn_100"></span>[100.](#fr_100)  The women claimed the right to
baptize their own sex. But the bishops and presbyters did not care to be
released from the pleasant duty of baptizing the female converts.
Waite.--*Hist. of Christian Religion to A. D. 700*, p. 23.

The Constitution of the Church of Alexandria, which is thought to have
been established about the year 200, required the applicant for baptism
to be divested of clothing, and after the ordinance had been
administered, to be anointed with oil.--*Ibid*, p. 384-5.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[101.](#fr_101)  Undisguised sensuality reached
a point we can scarcely conceive. Women were sometimes brought naked
upon the stage. By a curious association of ideas the theater was still
intimately connected with religious observance. *Rationalism in Europe*,
2-288.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[102.](#fr_102)  Catharine, the first wife of
Peter the Great, was received into the Greek Church by a rite nearly
approaching the primitive customs of the Christian Church. New converts
to that church are plunged three times naked in a river <span
id="fn_page_216">p. 216</span> or into a large tub of cold water.
Whatever is the condition, age or sex of the convert, this indecent
ceremony is never dispensed with. The effrontery of a pope (priests of
the Greek Church are thus called), sets at defiance all the reasons
which decency and modesty never cease to use against the absurdity and
impudence of this shameful ceremony. Count Segur.--*Woman's Condition
and Influence in Society*.
