[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wcs03)  [Next](wcs05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

# CHAPTER II.

### CELIBACY.

    While the inferior and secondary position of woman early became an
integral portion of Christianity, its fullest efforts are seen in Church
teachings regarding marriage. Inasmuch as it was a cardinal doctrine
that the fall of Adam took place through his temptation into marriage by
Eve, this relation was regarded with holy horror as a continuance of the
evil which first brought sin into the world, depriving man of his
immortality.<span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) It is a notable fact that
the expected millennium of a thousand years upon earth with its material
joys has ever had more attraction for Christians than the eternal
spiritual rapture of heaven. Many of the old Fathers taught that "the
world is a state of matrimony, but paradise of virginity."<span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2) To

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

such extent was this doctrine carried it was declared that had it not
have been for the fall, God would have found some way outside of this
relation for populating the world, consequently marriage was regarded as
a condition of peculiar temptation and trial; celibacy as one of
especial holiness.

    The androgynous theory of primal man found many supporters, the
separation into two beings having been brought about by sensual desire.
Jacob Bœhme and earlier mystics of that class recognized the double
sexuality of God in whose image man was made. One of the most revered
ancient Scriptures, "The Gospel according to the Hebrews," which was in
use as late as the second century of the Christian era, taught the
equality of the feminine in the Godhead; also that daughters should
inherit with sons. Thirty-three fragments of this Gospel have recently
been discovered. The fact remains undeniable that at the advent of
Christ, a recognition of the feminine element in the divinity had not
entirely died out from general belief, the earliest and lost books of
the New Testament teaching this doctrine, the whole confirmed by the
account of the birth and baptism of Jesus, the Holy Spirit,<span
id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3) the feminine creative force, playing the
most important part. It was however but a short period before the church
through Canons and Decrees, as well as apostolic and private teaching,
denied the femininity of the Divine equally with the divinity of the
feminine. There is however abundant proof that even under but partial
recognition of the feminine principle as entering in the divinity, woman

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

was officially recognized in the early services of the church, being
ordained to the ministry, officiating as deacons, administering the act
of baptism, dispensing the sacrament, interpreting doctrines and
founding sects which received their names.<span
id="fr_4"></span>[4](#fn_4)

    The more mystical among priests taught that before woman was
separated from man, the Elementals<span id="fr_5"></span>[5](#fn_5) were
accepted by man as his children and endowed by him with immortality, but
at the separation of the androgynous body into the two beings Adam and
Eve, the woman through accident was also endowed with immortality which
theretofore had solely inhered in the masculine portion of the
double-sexed being. These mystics also taught that this endowment of
woman with immortality together with her capability of bringing new
beings into existence also endowed with immortal life, was the cause of
intense enmity toward her on the part of the Elementals, especially
shown by their bringing suffering and danger upon her at this period.

    Still another class recognizing marriage as a necessity for the
continuance of the species, looked upon it with more favor, attributing
the fall to another cause, yet throwing odium upon the relation by
maintaining that the marriage of Adam and Eve did not take place until
after they had been driven from Paradise. This doctrine was taught by
the Father Hieronymus<span id="fr_6"></span>[6](#fn_6). Thus

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

with strange inconsistency the church supported two entirely opposing
views of marriage. Yet even those who upheld its necessity still taught
woman's complete subordination to man in that relation; also that this
condition was one of great tribulation to man, it was even declared that
God caused sleep to fall upon Adam at the creation of Eve in order to
prevent his opposition.<span id="fr_7"></span>[7](#fn_7) Lecky speaking
of the noxious influences of ascetics upon marriage, says it would be
difficult to conceive anything more coarse and repulsive than the manner
in which the church regarded it; it was invariably treated as a
consequence of the fall of Adam and regarded from its lowest
aspect.<span id="fr_8"></span>[8](#fn_8) But having determined that evil
was necessary in order to future good, the church decided to compel a
belief that its control of tins contract lessened the evil, to this end
declaring marriage illegal without priestly sanction; thus creating a
conviction of and belief in its sacramental nature in the minds of the
people. Despite the favoring views of a class regarding marriage,
celibacy was taught as the highest condition for both man and woman, and
as early as the third century many of the latter entered upon a celibate
life, Jerome using his influence in its favor. Augustine, while
admitting the possibility of salvation to the married, yet speaking of a
mother and daughter in heaven, compared the former to a star of the
second magnitude, but the latter as shining with great brilliancy. The
superior respect paid to the celibates even among women is

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

attributed to direct instruction of the apostles. The 'Apostolic
Constitutions' held even by the Episcopal church as regulations
established by the apostles themselves, and believed to be among the
earliest christian records, give elaborate directions for the places of
all who attend church, the unmarried being the most honored. The virgins
and widows and elder women stood or sat first of all.

    The chief respect shown by the early fathers towards marriage was
that it gave virgins to the church, while the possibility of salvation
to the married, at first recognized, was denied at later date even to
persons otherwise living holy lives. The Emperor Jovinian banished a man
who asserted the possibility of salvation to married persons provided
they obeyed all the ordinances of the church and lived good lives.<span
id="fr_9"></span>[9](#fn_9) As part of this doctrine, the church taught
that woman was under an especial curse and man a divinely appointed
agent for the enforcement of that curse. It inculcated the belief that
all restrictions placed upon her were but parts of her just punishment
for having caused the fall of man. Under such teaching a belief in the
supreme virtue of celibacy--first declared by the apostle Paul,--was
firmly established. To Augustine is the world indebted for full
development of the theory of original sin, promulgated by Paul as a
doctrine of the Christian Church in the declaration that Adam, first
created, was not first in sin. Paul, brought up in the strictest
external principles of Judaism, did not lose his educational bias or
primal belief when changing from Judaism to Christianity.<span
id="fr_10"></span>[10](#fn_10) Neither was his character as persecutor
changed when he united

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

his fortunes with the new religion. He gave to the Christian world a
lever long enough to reach down through eighteen centuries, all that
time moving it in opposition to a belief in woman's created and
religious equality with man, to her right of private judgment and to her
personal freedom. His teaching that Adam, first created, was not first
in sin, divided the unity of the human race in the assumption that woman
was not part of the original creative idea but a secondary thought, an
inferior being brought into existence as an appendage to man.

    Although based upon a false conception of the creative power, this
theory found ready acceptance in the minds of the men of the new church.
Not illiterate, having received instruction at the feet of Gamaliel,
Paul was yet intolerant and credulous, nay more, unscrupulous. He was
the first Jesuit in the Christian church, "Becoming all things to all
men." The Reformed church with strange unanimity has chosen Paul as its
leader and the accepted exponent of its views. He may justly be termed
the Protestant Pope, and although even among Catholics rivalling Peter
in possession of the heavenly keys, yet the Church of Rome has accepted
his authority as in many respects to be more fully obeyed than even the
teachings of St. Peter.<span id="fr_11"></span>[11](#fn_11) Having been
accepted by the Church as the apostolic exponent of its views upon
marriage, it was but to be expected that his teachings should be
received as divine. That Paul was unmarried has been assumed because of
his bitterness against this relation, yet abundant proof of his having a
wife exists. For the membership of the Great Sanhedrim,

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

marriage was a requisite. St. Clement of Alexandria positively declared
that St. Paul had a wife. Until the time of Cromwell, when it was
burned, a MS. letter of St. Ignatius in Greek was preserved in the old
oxford Library; this letter spoke of "St. Peter and Paul and the
apostles who were married." Another letter of St. Ignatius is still
extant in the Vatican Library. Tussian and others who have seen it
declare that it also speaks of St. Paul as a married man.<span
id="fr_12"></span>[12](#fn_12) But tenderness toward woman does not
appear in his teachings; man is represented as the master, "the head" of
woman. In consonance with his teaching, responsibility has been denied
her through the ages; although the Church has practically held her
amenable for the ruin of the world, prescribing penance and hurling
anathemas against her whom it has characterized as the "door of hell."

    At a synod in Winchester in the eight century, St. Dunstan, famed
for his hatred of women, made strenuous effort to enforce celibate life.
It was asserted to be so highly immoral for a priest to marry, that even
a wooden cross had audibly declared against the horrid practice.<span
id="fr_13"></span>[13](#fn_13) Although in the third century marriage
was permitted to all orders of the clergy," yet the very ancient "Gospel
of the Egyptians," endorsed as canonical by Clement of Alexandria,
taught celibacy. These old christian theologians found the nature of

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

woman a prolific subject of discussion, a large party classing her among
brutes without soul or reason. As early as the sixth century a council
at Macon (585) fifty-nine bishops taking part, devoted its time to a
discussion of this question, "Does woman possess a soul?" Upon one side
it was argued that woman should not be called "homo;" upon the opposite
side that she should, because, *first*, the Scriptures declared that God
created man, male and female; *second*, that Jesus Christ, son of a
woman, is called the son of man. Christian women were therefore allowed
to remain human beings in the eyes of the clergy, even though considered
very weak and bad ones. But nearly a thousand years after this decision
in favor of the humanity of the women of Christian Europe, it was still
contended that the women of newly discovered America belonged to the
brute creation, possessing neither souls nor reason.<span
id="fr_15"></span>[15](#fn_15) As late as the end of the sixteenth
century an anonymous work appeared, arguing that women were no part of
mankind, but a species of intermediate animal between the human and the
brute creation. (*Mulieres non est homines, etc.*) Mediæval Christian
writings show many discussions upon this point, the influence of these
old assertions still manifesting themselves.

    Until time of Peter the Great, women were not recognized as human
beings in that great division of Christendom known as the Greek church,
the census of that empire counting only males, or so many

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

"souls"--no woman named. Traces of this old belief have not been found
wanting in our own country within the century. As late as the Woman's
Rights Convention in Philadelphia, 1854, an objector in the audience
cried out: "Let women first prove they have souls; both the Church and
the State deny it."

Everything connected with woman was held to be unclean. It is stated
that Agathro desired the Sophist Herodes to get ready for him the next
morning a vessel full of pure milk, that is to say which had not been
milked by the hand of a woman. But he perceived as soon as it was
offered to him that it was not such as he desired, protesting that the
scent of her hands who had milked it offended his nostrils. In the
oldest European churches great distinction was made between the purity
of man and woman. At an early date woman was forbidden to receive the
Eucharist into her naked hand on account of her impurity,<span
id="fr_16"></span>[16](#fn_16) or to sing in church on account of her
inherent wickedness. To such an extent was this opposition carried, that
the church of the middle ages did not hesitate to provide itself with
eunuchs in order to supply cathedral choirs with the soprano tones
inhering by nature in woman alone. One of the principal charges against
the Huguenots was that they permitted women to sing in church, using
their voices in praise of God contrary to the express command of St.
Paul, Catherine de Medicis reproaching them for this great sin.<span
id="fr_17"></span>[17](#fn_17) The

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

massacre at St. Bartholomew, when 30,000 men, women and children lost
their lives, and the entire destruction of many families of purest
character took place, with an additional great loss to France from the
self-imposed banishment of hundreds more, may be traced to the teaching
of St. Paul that woman should keep silence in the church. This doctrine
also crossed the ocean with the Puritan Fathers, and has appeared in
America under many forms.<span id="fr_18"></span>[18](#fn_18)

    The Christianity of the ages teaching the existence of a superior
and inferior sex, possessing different rights under the law and in the
church, it has been easy to bring man and woman under accountability to
a different code of morals. For this double code the church is largely
indebted to the subtle and acute Paul, who saw in the new religion but
an enlarged Judaism that should give prominence to Abraham and his seed
from whom Christ claimed descent. His conversion did not remove his old
Jewish contempt for woman, as shown in his temple service, the law
forbidding her entrance beyond the outer court. Nor could he divest
himself of the spirit of the old morning prayer which daily led each Jew
to thank, God that he was not born a heathen, a slave or a woman.

    He brought into the new dispensation the influence of the old
ceremonial law, which regarded woman as unclean. The Jewish exclusion of
forty days from even the outer court of the sanctuary to the woman who
had given birth to a son, and of twice that period, or eighty days, if a
daughter had been born, was terminated

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

in both religions by a sin-offering in expiation of the mother's crime
for having, at the peril of her own, brought another human being into
life.<span id="fr_19"></span>[19](#fn_19) This Old Testament teaching
degraded the life-giving principle exemplified in motherhood, and in a
twofold way lessened the nation's regard for womanhood. *First*, through
the sin-offering and purification demanded of the mother; *second*, by
its doubling the period of exclusion from the temple in case a girl was
given to the world.<span id="fr_20"></span>[20](#fn_20) The birth of
girls even under Christianity has everywhere been looked upon as an
infliction, and thousands have been immured in convents, there to die of
despair or to linger through years,<span id="fr_21"></span>[21](#fn_21)
the victim alike of father and of priest.

    The influence of Judaism extended through Christendom. The custom of
purification after maternity inherited by the church from Judaism
brought with it into Christianity the same double restriction and
chastening of the mother in case her infant proved a girl,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

a gift as propitiation or expiation being required. Uncleanliness was
attributed to woman in every function of her being; the purification of
the Virgin Mary, who was not exempt, when after the birth of a God,
being used as an incontrovertible argument in proof. A festival of the
purification of the Virgin Mary, adopted from paganism, was introduced
into Rome at an early date, thus perpetuating a belief in the
uncleanliness of motherhood. The Church in the Roman Empire soon united
with the State<span id="fr_22"></span>[22](#fn_22) in imposing new
restrictions upon women. Since the Reformation the mother's duty of
expiation has been confirmed by the Anglican Church, and is known in
England as "churching." Directions as to the woman's dress at this time
was early made the subject of a canon.<span
id="fr_23"></span>[23](#fn_23) She was to be decently appareled. This
term "decently," variously interpreted, was at times the occasion of
serious trouble. In 1661, during the reign of James I, the Chancellor of
Norwich ordered that every woman who came to be churched should be
covered with a white veil. A woman who refused to conform to this order
was excommunicated for contempt. She prayed a prohibition, alleging that
such order was not warranted by any custom or Canon of the Church of
England. The judges of the civil court, finding themselves incompetent
to decide upon such a momentous question, requested the opinion of the
archbishop of Canterbury. Not willing to trust his own judgment, that
dignitary convened several bishops for consultation. Their decision was
against

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

the woman, this Protestant Council upon woman's dress declaring that it
was the ancient usage of the Church of England for women who were to be
churched to come veiled, and a prohibition was denied.

    The doctrine that woman must remain covered when in the sacred
church building shows itself in the United States.<span
id="fr_24"></span>[24](#fn_24) In many instances under Christianity,
woman has been entirely excluded from religious houses and church
buildings. When Pope Boniface<span id="fr_25"></span>[25](#fn_25)
founded the abbey of Fulda he prohibited the entrance of women into any
of the buildings, even including the church. This rule remained unbroken
during the tenth and eleventh centuries, and even when in 1131 the
Emperor Lothair went to Fulda to celebrate Pentecost, his empress was
not permitted to witness the ceremonies. When Frederick Barbarossa,
1135, proposed to spend his Easter there, he was not even allowed to
enter the house because of having his wife with him. In 1138 Boniface
IX, at the request of the abbot, John Merlow, relaxed the rule and
permitted women to attend the services of the church. Shortly afterwards
the building was destroyed by lightning, which was looked upon as
evidence of the divine displeasure at the desecration. The monastery of
Athos under the Greek church, situated upon an

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

island, does not permit the entrance of a female animal upon its
confines. Even in America woman has met similar experience.<span
id="fr_26"></span>[26](#fn_26)

    At certain periods during the middle ages, conversation with women
was forbidden. During the Black Death, the Flaggellants, or Brotherhood
of the Cross, were under such interdict<span
id="fr_27"></span>[27](#fn_27). In this last decade of the XIX century,
the Catholic church still imposes similar restrictions upon certain
religious houses. Early in 1892 the queen-regent of Spain visited the
monastery of Mirzaflores; its rules not all-owing a monk to speak to a
woman, the queen was received in silence. Her majesty immediately
telegraphed to the pope asking indulgence, which was granted, and during
four hours the monks were permitted the sin of speaking to a woman. It
is curious to note that the first sentence uttered by one of the monks
was a compliment upon the simplicity of her majesty's attire. But the
most impressive evidence of the contempt of the church towards all
things feminine was shown in a remark by Tetzel the great middle-age
dealer in indulgences. Offering one for sale he declared it would insure
eternal salvation even if the purchaser had committed rape upon the
mother of God.<span id="fr_28"></span>[28](#fn_28)

    A knowledge of facts like these is necessary in order to a just
understanding of our present civilization, especially as to the origin
of restrictive legislation concerning woman. The civilization of to-day
is built

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

upon the religious theories of the middle ages supplemented by advancing
freedom of thought. Lea, declares thus:

    The Latin church is the great fact which dominates the history of
modern civilization. All other agencies which molded the destinies of
Europe were comparatively isolated or sporadic in the their
manifestations.

    The influence of church teaching is most strikingly manifested in
the thought of to-day. Without predetermined intention of wrong doing,
man has been so molded by the Church doctrine of ages and the coordinate
laws of State as to have become blind to the justice of woman's demand
for freedom such as he possesses. Nor is woman herself scarcely less
bound, although now torn by the spirit of rebellion which burned in the
hearts of her fore-mothers, so cruelly persecuted, so falsely judged,
during past ages, when the most devout Christian woman possessed no
rights in the church, the government or the family. The learning which
had been hers in former periods, was then interdicted as an especial
element of evil. Her property rights recognized in former periods then
denied; as a being subordinate to man she was not allowed a separate
estate or control over the earnings of her own hands. Her children were
not her own but those of a master for whose interest or pleasure she had
given them birth. Without freedom of thought or action, trained to
consider herself secondary to a man, a being who came into the world not
as part of the great original plan of creation but as an afterthought of
her Creator, and this doctrine taught as one of the most sacred
mysteries of religion which to doubt was to insure her eternal
damnation, it is not strange that the great body of women are not now
more outspoken in demanding equal religious and

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

governmental rights with man. But another phase of heredity shows itself
in the eagerness with which women enter all phases of public life which
does not place them in open antagonism with Church or State. Education,
industries, club life and even those great modern and religious
organizations which bring them before the public, throwing active work
and responsibility upon them, would be entirely unexplainable were it
not for the tendency of inherited thought to ultimately manifest itself.

    The long continued and powerfully repressing influence of church
teaching in regard to the created inferiority of women, imposed upon
millions of men and women a bondage of thought and action which even the
growing civilization of the nineteenth century has not yet been able to
cast off. To this doctrine we can trace all the irregularities which for
many centuries filled the church with shame; practices more obscene than
those of Babylon or Corinth dragged Christendom to a darkness blacker
than the night of heathendom in the most pagan countries--a darkness so
intense that the most searching efforts of the historian but now and
then cast a ray of light upon it;--a darkness so profound that in Europe
from the seventh to the eleventh centuries no individual thought can be
traced, no opinion was formed, no heresy arose. All Christendom was sunk
in superstition. Lange<span id="fr_29"></span>[29](#fn_29) says "The
disappearance of ancient civilization in the early centuries of the
Christian era is an event the serious problems of which are in great
part still unexplained." Had Lange not been influenced by the subtle
current of heredity which unwittingly influenced nations and systems
equally with individuals, he could easily have discovered the cause of
this

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

disappearance of olden civilization, to be in the degradation of the
feminine element under Christianity. While this darkness of Christian
Europe was so great that history knows less of it a thousand years since
than it does of Egypt 5,000 years ago, one corner of that continent was
kept luminous by the brilliance of Mohammedan learning. The Arabs alone
had books from the eighth to the thirteenth centuries of the Christian
era. The Moors of Spain kept that portion of Europe bright, while all
else was sunk in darkness. Universities existed, learning was fostered
and women authors were numerous. For many hundred years Rome possessed
no books but missals and a few Bibles in the hands of priests. Men were
bound by church dogmas looking only for aggrandisement through her. The
arts ceased to flourish, science decayed, learning was looked upon as a
disgrace to a warrior,<span id="fr_30"></span>[30](#fn_30) the only
occupation deemed worthy of the noble.

    The priesthood who alone possessed a knowledge of letters,
prostituted their learning to the basest uses; the nobility when not
engaged against a common foe, spent their time battling against each
other; the peasantry were by turns the sport and victim of priest and
noble, while woman was the prey of all. Her person and her rights
possessed no consideration except as she could be made to advance the
interest or serve the pleasure of priest, noble, father, husband; some
man-god to whose lightest desire all her wishes were made to bend. The
most pronounced doctrine of the church at this period was that through
woman sin had entered the world; that woman's whole tendency

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

was towards evil, and had it not been for the unfortunate oversight of
her creation, man would then be dwelling in the paradisal innocence and
happiness of Eden, with death entirely unknown. When the feminine was
thus wholly proscribed, the night of moral and spiritual degradation
reached its greatest depth, and that condition ensued which has alike
been the wonder and the despair of the modern historians, whose greatest
fault, as Buckle shows, has been the reading of history from a few
isolated facts rather than building up its philosophy from an
aggregation of events upon many different planes.

    Under all restrictions woman did not fail to show her innate power
even within the fold of the church. She founded devout orders,<span
id="fr_31"></span>[31](#fn_31) established and endowed religious
institutions, and issued her commands to the pope himself, in more than
one instance seating that holy personage in the papal chair.<span
id="fr_32"></span>[32](#fn_32) From St. Paulina, whose life was written
by St. Jerome, to the promulgation of the dogma of the Immaculate
Conception of the Virgin Mary by the Ecumenical Council under Pius IX,
and the later canonization of Joan of Arc, woman has not failed to
impress even the Christian world with a sense of her intellectual and
spiritual power. Yet despite the very great influence exerted by so many
women in the affairs of the church--

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

notwithstanding the canonization of so many women, she has only been
able to show her capacity at an immense expenditure of vital force
against constant priestly opposition and the powerful decrees of
councils. Subtle and complex as are the influences that mould thought
and character, we cannot comprehend the great injustice of the church
towards woman in its teaching of her mental and spiritual inferiority
without a slight examination of the great religious institutions that
have been under her charge. Of these none possess more remarkable
history than the Abbey of Fontervault,<span
id="fr_33"></span>[33](#fn_33) founded in 1099, for both monks and nuns.
It belonged in the general rank of Benedictines, and was known as the
Order of Fontervault. It was ruled by an abbess under title of General
of the Order, who was responsible to no authority but that of the pope
himself. Forming a long succession of able women in thirty-two abbesses
from the most eminent families of France, woman's capacity for the
management of both ecclesiastical and civil affairs was there shown for
six hundred years. It was the abbess who alone decided the religious
fitness of either monk or nun seeking admission to the order. It was the
abbess who decreed all ecclesiastical and civil penalties; who selected
the confessors for the different houses of the order throughout France
and Spain; who managed and controlled the vast wealth belonging to this
institution; it was the abbess who drew up the rules for the government
of the order, and who

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

also successfully defended these privileges when attacked.<span
id="fr_34"></span>[34](#fn_34) For neither the protection of the pope,
the wealth of the order, or the family influence connected with it,
prevented priestly attack,<span id="fr_34"></span>[34](#fn_34) and no
argument in favor of woman's governing ability is stronger than the fact
that its abbesses ever successfully resisted these priestly assaults
upon the privileges of their order. The abbey of Fontervault, with its
grounds of forty or fifty acres, was surrounded by high walls; its soil
was tilled by the monks of the abbey, who received even their food as
alms from the nuns, returning all fragments for distribution to the
poor.<span id="fr_35"></span>[35](#fn_35) The authority of women was
supreme in all monasteries of the order. The ecclesiastical power
maintained by these abbesses is the more remarkable, as it was in direct
contravention of the dictates of the early councils, that of Aix-la
Chapelle, 816, forbidding abbesses to give the veil or take upon
themselves any priestly function; the later council of Paris, A. D. 824,
bitterly complained that women served at the altar, and even gave to
people the body and blood of Jesus Christ.

    Among the convents controlled by women, which have largely
influenced religious thought, was that of the Paraclete in the 12th
century under Heloise. Its teachings that belief was dependent upon
knowledge, attacked the primal church tenet, that belief depends upon
faith alone. The convent of Port Royal des Champs during the 17th
century exerted much influence. Its abbess, the celebrated Mother
Angélique Arnault, was inducted into this office in her eleventh

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

year upon death of her abbess-aunt, whose co-adjutrix she had been. This
convent, both in person of the nuns as well as the monks connected with
it, became a protest against the jesuitical doctrine of the seventeenth
century, and like the Paraclete is intimately connected with reform
questions in the Catholic Church. Notwithstanding such evidences of
woman's organizing mind and governing qualities under the most favorable
conditions, as well as of piety so unquestioned as to have produced a
long calendar of female saints, the real policy of the church remained
unchanged; nor could it be otherwise from its basis of woman's created
inferiority and original sin. The denial to women of the right of
private judgment and the control of her own actions, the constant
teaching of her greater sinfulness and natural impurity, had a very
depressing effect upon the majority of women whose lowly station in life
was such as to deprive them of that independence of thought and action
possible to women of rank and wealth. Then, as now, the church catered
to the possessors of money and power; then, as now, seeking to unite
their great forces with its own purpose of aggrandizement, and thus the
church has ever obstructed the progress of humanity, delaying
civilization and condemning the world to a moral barbarism from which
there is no escape except through repudiation of its teachings. To the
theory of "God the Father," shorn of the divine attribute of motherhood,
is the world beholden for its most degrading beliefs, its most infamous
practices. Dependent upon and identified with lost Motherhood is the
"Lost Name" of ancient writers and occultists. When the femininity of
the divine is once again acknowledged, the "Lost Name" will be
discovered

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

and the holiness (wholeness) of divinity be manifested.<span
id="fr_36"></span>[36](#fn_36)

    As the theory of woman's wickedness gathered force, her
representative place in the church lessened. From century to century
restrictive canons multiplied, and the clergy constantly grew more
corrupt, although bearing bad reputation at an early date.<span
id="fr_37"></span>[37](#fn_37) Tertullian, whose heavy diatribes are to
be found in large libraries, was bitter in his opposition to,
marriage.<span id="fr_38"></span>[38](#fn_38) While it took many
hundreds of years for the total exclusion of woman from the christian
priesthood the celibacy of the clergy during this period was the
constant effort of the Church. Even during the ages that priestly
marriage was permitted, celibates obtained a higher reputation for
sanctity and virtue than married priests, who infinitely more than
celibates were believed subject to infestation by demons.<span
id="fr_39"></span>[39](#fn_39)

    The restriction upon clerical marriages proceeded gradually. First
the superior holiness of the unmarried was taught together with their
greater freedom from infestation by demons. A single marriage only was
next allowed, and that with a woman who had

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

never before entered the relation.<span id="fr_40"></span>[40](#fn_40)
The Council of A. D. 347, consisting of twenty-one bishops, forbade the
ordination of those priests who had been twice married or whose wife had
been a widow.<span id="fr_41"></span>[41](#fn_41) A council of A. D. 395
ruled that a bishop who had children after ordination should be excluded
from the major orders. The Council of A. D. 444, deposed Chelidonius,
bishop of Besancon, for having married a widow. The Council of Orleans,
A. D. 511, consisting of thirty-two bishops, decided that monks who
married should be expelled from the ecclesiastical order. The Church was
termed the spouse of the priest. It was declared that Peter possessed a
wife before his conversion, but that he forsook her and all worldly
things after he became Christ's, who established chastity; priests were
termed holy in proportion as they opposed marriage.<span
id="fr_42"></span>[42](#fn_42) The unmarried among the laity who had
never entered that relation, and the married who forsook it, were
regarded as saintly. So great was the opposition to marriage that a
layman who married a second time was refused benediction and penance
imposed.<span id="fr_43"></span>[43](#fn_43) A wife was termed "An
Unhallowed Thing."

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

    So far from celibacy producing chastity or purity of life, church
restrictions upon marriage led to the most debasing crimes, the most
revolting vices, the grossest immorality, As early as the fourth century
(370) the state attempted purification through a statute enacted by the
emperors Valentinian, Valerius and Gratian, prohibiting ecclesiastics
and monks from entering the houses of widows, single women living alone,
or girls who had lost their parents.<span id="fr_44"></span>[44](#fn_44)
The nearest ties of relationship proved ineffectual in protecting woman
from priestly assault, and incest became so common it was found
necessary to prohibit the residence of a priest's mother or sister in
his house.<span id="fr_45"></span>[45](#fn_45) This restriction was
renewed at various times through the ages. The condemnation of the
Council of Rome, Easter, 1051, under the pontificate of Pope Leo IX, was
not directed against married priests, but against those who held
incestuous relations. Yet although the Church thus externally set her
seal of disapprobation upon this vice, her general teaching sustained
it. Gregory, bishop of Venelli, convicted of this crime by the Council
of Rome, was punished by excommunication, but in a short time was
restored to his former important position. The highest legates were
equally guilty with the inferior priests. Cardinal John of Cremona, the
pope's legate to the Council of Westminster 1125,

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

sent by Pope Honorius for the express purpose of enforcing celibacy,
became publicly notorious and disgraced, and was obliged to hastily
leave England in consequence of his teaching and his practice being
diametrically opposed.<span id="fr_46"></span>[46](#fn_46)

    Through this clerical contempt of marriage, the conditions of
celibacy and virginity were regarded as of the highest virtue. Jerome
respected marriage as chiefly valuable in that it gave virgins to the
church, while Augustus in acknowledging that marriage perpetuated the
species, also contended that it also perpetuated original sin.

    These diverse views in regard to marriage created the most opposite
teaching from the church. By one class the demand to increase and
multiply was constantly brought up, and women were taught that the
rearing of children was their highest duty. The strangest sermons were
sometimes preached toward the enforcement of this command. Others taught
an entirely different duty for both men and women, and a large celibate
class was created under especial authority of the church. "Women,
especially those of wealth, were constantly urged to take upon
themselves the vow of virginity, their property passing into possession
of the church, thus helping to build up priestly power. Another class
held the touch of a woman to be a contamination, and to avoid it holy
men secluded themselves in caves and forests.<span
id="fr_47"></span>[47](#fn_47) Through numerous decretals

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

confirmation was given to the theory that woman was defiled through the
physical peculiarities of her being. Even her beauty was counted as an
especial snare and temptation of the devil for which in shame she ought
to do continual penance.<span id="fr_48"></span>[48](#fn_48) St.
Chrysostom, whose prayer is repeated at every Sunday morning service of
the Episcopal church, described women as a "necessary evil, a natural
temptation, a desirable calamity, a domestic peril, a deadly
fascination, and a painted ill." But to escape her influence was
impossible and celibacy led to the most direful results. Monks and
hermits acknowledged themselves tormented in their Solitary lives by
visions of beautiful women. Monasteries were visited by an illness to
which celibacy imparted a name,<span id="fr_49"></span>[49](#fn_49) and
impurity of body and soul spread throughout Christendom. The general
tone of the church in regard to marriage; its creation of a double code
of morality; its teaching of woman's greater sinfulness, together with
that of her absolute subordination to man, subverted the moral character
of the Christian world within whose borders the vilest systems of
immorality arose which the world has ever known; its extent being a
subject of historical record.<span id="fr_50"></span>[50](#fn_50)

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

    According to the teaching of men who for many hundreds of years were
molders of human thought, priests, philosophers and physicians alike,
nature never designed to procreate woman, her intention being always to
produce men. These authorities asserted that nature never formed the
feminine except when she lost her true function and so produced the
female sex by chance or accident. Aristotle<span
id="fr_51"></span>[51](#fn_51) whose philosophy was accepted by the
church and all teaching of a contrary character declared heretical,
maintained that nature did not form woman except when by reason of
imperfection of matter she could not obtain the sex which is
perfect.<span id="fr_52"></span>[52](#fn_52) Cajetan enunciated the same
doctrine many hundred years later.<span id="fr_53"></span>[53](#fn_53)
Aristotle also denied creative power to the mother.<span
id="fr_54"></span>[54](#fn_54) While throughout its history the course
of the Christian Church against marriage is constantly seen, no less
noticeable are the grossly immoral practices resulting from celibacy.
Scarcely a crime or a vice to which it did not give birth. Celibacy was
fostered in the interests of power, and in order to its more strict
enforcement barons were permitted to enslave the wives and children of
married priests.<span id="fr_55"></span>[55](#fn_55) Those of Rome were
bestowed upon the Cathedral church of the Lateran, and bishops
throughout Christendom were ordered to enforce this law 1 n their own
dioceses and to seize the

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

wives of priests for the benefit of their churches. At no point of
history do we more clearly note the influence of the Church upon the
State than in the union of the temporal power with the ecclesiastical
for purposes of constraining priestly celibacy.

    Under reign of Philip I of France, a council was held at Troyes
which condemned the marriage of priests.<span
id="fr_56"></span>[56](#fn_56) In 1108, the following year, King Henry I
of England<span id="fr_57"></span>[57](#fn_57) summoned a council to
assemble in London for purpose of upholding priestly celibacy, urging
its enforcement upon the bishops, and pledging his kingly honor in aid.
A new series of canons was promulgated, strengthened by severe penalties
and the co-operation of the king. Finding it impossible either through
spiritual or temporal power to compel absolute celibacy<span
id="fr_58"></span>[58](#fn_58) the king for the benefit of his exchequer
established a license for concubinage upon the payment of a tax known as
cullagium.<span id="fr_59"></span>[59](#fn_59)

    Notwithstanding all the powerful enginery of the church, priestly
celibacy, so contrary to nature, was not rendered absolutely imperative
until the thirteenth century. The Fourth Lateran Council, (Twelfth
Ecumenical), 1215, under pope Innocent III, is especially famous because
of its final settlement of the policy of the church in regard to
priestly marriage, This was a large council, 1300 prelates taking part
in the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

adjudication of this question. While with St. Augustine acknowledging
that marriage was requisite for the preservation of the race, it
strictly confined this relation to the laity.

    The subject of celibacy as we see had agitated the church from its
foundation. A more renowned council even than the Twelfth Ecumenical,
namely, the First Nicene or Second Ecumenical, having seriously
discussed it, although after prolonged debate pronouncing against
celibacy and in favor of priestly marriage. St. Paphinutius, the martyr
bishop of Thebes, although himself a celibate advocated marriage which
he declared to be true chastity, the council adopting his opinion.
Although the tendency of the church for so many hundred years had been
towards celibacy yet when adopted as a dogma, a belief in its propriety
or its scriptural authority was by no means universal even among the
most eminent members, but in no instance has the control of the church
over the consciences and will of its adherents been more forcibly
illustrated. Many illustrious and learned theologians as Gratian the
Canonist, St. Thomas Aquinas and Giraldus Cambrensis, Arch-Deacon of St.
Davids, while thereafter sustaining celibacy *as a law of the church*
declared it had neither scriptural nor apostolic warrant; St. Thomas
affirming it to be merely a law of human ecclesiastical origin.<span
id="fr_60"></span>[60](#fn_60)

    Absolute celibacy of the priesthood proved very difficult of
enforcement. At the great council of London, 1237, twenty-three years
afterwards, Cardinal Otto deplored the fact that married men still
received holy orders and held office in the church, and in 1268 only
fifty-three years after the great council

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

confirming celibacy as a doctrine of the church, another great council
was convened in London, when Cardinal Legate Ottoborn, the direct
representative of the Pope, demanded the establishment of concubinage
for priests. The institutions of Otto and Ottoborn long remained the law
of the English church. Yet to their honor be it remembered that despite
council and cardinal, pope and church, there were priests who still
persistently refused either to part from their wives or to relinquish
their priestly functions, and who when excommunicated for contumacy,
laughed at the sentence and continued their priestly offices.<span
id="fr_61"></span>[61](#fn_61) Others sufficiently conformed to the
edicts to lock up their churches and suspend their priestly
administrations, yet refusing to part with their wives. The relatives of
wives also exerted their influence against the action of the church.

    The struggle was bitter and long. New canons were promulgated and
celibacy enforced under severe penalties, or rather marriage was
prohibited under severe penalties. The holy robbery which made slaves of
the wives and children of priests confiscating their property to the
church, had more effect in compelling celibacy than all anathemas upon
the iniquity of marriage. Priests who retained their wives preferring
the chastity of this relation to the license allowed celibates, were
prohibited from their offices and their wives denounced as harlots. If
this did not suffice, such priests were finally excommunicated. But a
way of return was left open. In case this measure coerced them into
abandoning wives and children, a short penance soon restored the
priestly rank with all its

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

attendant dignities. Nor was the re-instated priest compelled to live
purely. So little was it expected that the tax upon concubinage soon
became a component part of the celibate system. So gross and broadspread
became the immorality of all classes that even the Head of the Church
pandered to it in the erection by Pope Sixtus V. of a magnificent
building devoted to illicit pleasure.<span
id="fr_62"></span>[62](#fn_62)

    The example of Christ himself was pointed to in favor of celibacy,
even upon the cross saying to his mother, "Woman, what have I to do with
thee?" The saints of the Old Testament as well as the New, were quoted
as having opposed marriage. Abel, Melchisedeck, Joshua, Elias, Jonah,
Daniel, St John the Baptist, St. John the Evangelist, St. Paul with his
disciples, and all saintly personages were declared to have been
celibates.

    A concubinage tax was exacted from all the clergy without exception,
and rendered compulsory even upon those priests who still kept their
wives, or who lived chastely outside of the marital relation. Protests
were of no avail. Those whom disinclination, age or ill-health kept
chaste, were told the privilege of unchastity was open to them; the
bishop must have the money and after payment they were at liberty to
keep concubines or not.<span id="fr_63"></span>[63](#fn_63) Under
concubinage the priest was

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

free from all family responsibility; his mistress possessed neither
present nor future claim upon him; children, who according to church
teaching followed the condition of the mother, were born to him, but for
their education and maintenance neither **ecclesiastical** nor civil law
compelled him to provide.

    For many centuries this immoral tax brought enormous sums into the
treasuries of both Church and State. Although the laws against the
marriage of priests were enacted on pretense of the greater inherent
wickedness of woman, history proves their chief object to have been the
keeping of all priestly possessions under church control. It was openly
asserted that the temporal possessions of the church were imperilled by
sacerdotal marriage, and it has been declared with every proof of
truthfulness that edicts against the marriage of priests were
promulgated to prevent the alienation of property from the church.<span
id="fr_65"></span>[65](#fn_65) The saying of Paul was quoted; "He that
is married careth for his wife, but he that is unmarried for the Lord."
Married bishops were occasionally confirmed in their sees upon condition
that their wives and children should not inherit their property, which
upon their death should fall to the church.<span
id="fr_66"></span>[66](#fn_66)

    The struggle against the absolute celibacy of the priesthood was
bitter. A few priests still kept their benefices while retaining their
wives and acknowledging

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

their children as legitimate. The sons of such contumacious priests were
declared forever incapable of taking holy orders, unless by a special
dispensation. The church showed almost equal determination in the
establishment of concubinage as in the enforcement of priestly celibacy,
each of these systems tending to its enrichment.

    Opposition proved of no permanent avail. Holding control over the
conscience of men, asserting the power to unlock the doors of heaven and
hell, a strongly organized body working to one end, it is not a subject
of astonishment that the church, its chief object the crushing of body
and soul, should in the end prove conqueror, and the foulest crimes
against woman receive approval of the entire christian world. Many
notable consequences followed the final establishment of celibacy as a
dogma of the church.

    First The doctrine of woman's inherent wickedness and close
fellowship with Satan took on new strength.

    Second. Canon Law gained full control of civil law.

    Third. An organized system of debauchery arose under mask of
priestly infallibility.

    Fourth. Auricular confession was confirmed as a dogma of the church.

    Fifth. Prohibition of the Scriptures to the laity was enforced.

    Sixth. Crime was more openly protected, the system of indulgences
gained new strength, becoming the means of great revenue to the church.

    Seventh. Heresy was more broadly defined and more severely punished.

    Eight. The Inquisition was established.

    When Innocent III completed the final destruction of sacerdotal
marriage, it was not upon disobedient priests

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

the most severe punishment fell, but upon innocent women and
children.<span id="fr_67"></span>[67](#fn_67) Effort was made to force
wives to desert their husbands. Those who proved contumacious were
denied christian burial in an age when such denial was looked upon as
equivalent to eternal damnation; property left such wives was
confiscated to the church; they were forbidden the eucharist; churching
after childbirth was denied them; they were termed harlots and their
children bastards, while to their sons all office in the church was
forbidden. If still contumacious they were handed over to the secular
power for condign punishment, or sold as slaves for the benefit of the
church. They were regarded as under the direct control of Satan himself,
as beings who iniquitously stood between their husbands and heaven.

    At numerous times in the history of the church women have been
brought to despair by its teachings, and large numbers driven to
suicide. A similar period was inaugurated by the confirmation of
priestly celibacy. The wives of such men, suddenly rendered homeless and
with their children classed among the vilest of earth, powerless and
despairing, hundreds shortened their agonies by death at their own
hands. For all these crimes the church alone is responsible.

    Under celibacy, auricular confession, and extended belief in
witchcraft, a new era of wrong toward woman was inaugurated. From
thenceforth her condition was more degraded than even during the early
centuries of Christianity. Accusations of heresy, which included
witchcraft as well as other sins against the church

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

were constantly made against that being who was believed to have brought
sin into the world. Whosoever dared question the infallibility of the
church by use of their own judgment, even upon the most trivial
subjects, immediately fell into condemnation.

    Canon Law gaining full control over civil law, the absolute
sinfulness of divorce, which maintained by the church has yet been
allowed by civil law, was fully established. Woman was entirely at the
mercy of many the Canon Law maintaining that the confession of a guilty
woman could not be received in evidence against her accomplice, although
it held good against herself<span id="fr_68"></span>[68](#fn_68) and the
punishment due to both was made to fall on the woman alone.<span
id="fr_69"></span>[69](#fn_69) The best authorities prove that while the
clergy were acquainted with the civil codes that had governed the Roman
Empire, they made but little use of them.<span
id="fr_70"></span>[70](#fn_70) Upon coming to the throne, Justinian<span
id="fr_71"></span>[71](#fn_71) had repealed the law of the Patriarchate
which gave the father sole right and title to, and interest in the
children of legal marriage, but this was soon again subverted by
ecclesiasticism and under Canon Law a mother was prohibited all
authority over

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

her child, its relationship to her even being denied. While under Common
Law children followed the condition of their fathers, who if free
transmitted freedom to their children, yet in the interests of priestly
celibacy, under church legislation, an entire reversal took place and
children were held to follow the condition of their mothers. Thus
serf-mothers bore serf-children to free-born fathers; slave mothers bore
slave children to their masters; while unmarried mothers bore bastard
children to both priestly and lay fathers, thus throwing the taint of
illegitimacy upon the innocent child, and the sole burden of its
maintenance upon the mother. This portion of Canon Law also became the
law of the State in all Christian countries,<span
id="fr_72"></span>[72](#fn_72) and is in existence at the present time,
both civil codes and statue laws enforcing this great wrong of the
Church.<span id="fr_73"></span>[73](#fn_73) The relations of men and
women to each other, the sinfulness of marriage and the license of
illicit relations for the priesthood, employed the thought of the
church. The duty of woman to obey, not alone her male relatives, but all
men by virtue of their sex, was sedulously inculcated. She was trained
to hold her own desires and even thoughts in abeyance to those of man,
as to one who was rightfully her master. Every holy principle of her
nature was subverted by this degrading assumption.

    When auricular confession became confirmed as a dogma of the church,
it threw immense power over the family into the hands of the priesthood,
a power capable of being converted to many ends, but was specially

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

notable in its influence upon morals.<span
id="fr_74"></span>[74](#fn_74) Although auricular confession was not
established as a dogma until the Council of 1215, it had been
occasionally practiced at early date, carrying with it the same
immorality in lesser form as that which afterwards became so great a
reproach to the church.<span id="fr_75"></span>[75](#fn_75) Through its
means the priesthood gained possession of all family, social and
political secrets, thus acquiring information whose power for evil was
unlimited. The spirit of evil never found a more subtle method of
undermining and destroying human will, its most debasing influences
falling upon woman, who through fear of eternal damnation made known her
most secret thoughts to the confessor, an unmarried and frequently a
youthful man. It soon became a source of very great corruption to both
priest and woman.

    Another effect of this council was the formal prohibition of the
scriptures to the laity, and thenceforth the Bible was confined to the
priest who explained its

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

teachings in the interests of his own order, adding to, or taking from,
to suit his own interests; the recent new version showing many such
interpolations.<span id="fr_76"></span>[76](#fn_76) Nothing was held
sacred by these men, who sacrificed everything to their own advancement
and that of their order.

    The insolence of the priesthood was that of all periods; claiming
direct inspiration from God, they taught their own infallibility and in
name of Him, whom they professed to serve, the grossest crimes were
perpetrated, and this profession became a protecting sanctuary to men
whose villainous lives would otherwise have brought them to the
gallows.<span id="fr_77"></span>[77](#fn_77)

    With conviction of woman's supreme wickedness, increased through the
formal recognition of celibacy as a dogma of the church, with the
establishment of auricular confession, and the denial of the Bible to
the laity, the persecution of woman for witchcraft took on new phase.
The belief that it was the ordinary method through which the devil won
souls, together with the persuasion that woman through her greater
wickedness fell more readily than men into such practices,

{77. Cardinal Wolsey complained to the Pope that both the secular and
regular priests were in the habit of committing actions for which if not
in orders, they would have been promptly executed.

The claim of direct inspiration from God exists equally among
Protestants as among Catholics, and even among the Unitarians, who deny
Christ's divinity. A notable instance of this kind, both because of the
high scientific and moral character of the clergyman, took place in the
pulpit of the May Memorial Church, Syracuse, N. Y., December 4th, 1887,
as reported in the Morning Standard of the 5th.

Luther declared that priests believed themselves to be as superior to
the laity in general as males were held superior to females.}

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

acquired a firmer seat in theology. Heresy, of which witchcraft was one
phase, became a greater sin; the inquisition arose, and the general
characteristics of the Christian world rapidly grew more inimical to
humanity, and especially to woman's freedom, happiness and security.

    The influence of the church daily grew more unfavorable to all
virtue; vice was sustained, immorality dignified. The concubines of
priests called "wives," in bitter mockery of that relation in which the
legal wife was termed concubine, were known as "The Hallowed Ones," "The
Honored Ones." No stigma attached to such a life; these women formed
quite a class in mediæval society, themselves and their children ranking
the wives of ordinary laymen;<span id="fr_78"></span>[78](#fn_78) the
touch of a priest had sanctified them. In the estimation of the church
an immoral life led with a priest was more honorable than marriage with
a layman, and all the obligations such a relation implied. Priests
assumed immunity from wrong doing. So far from celibacy causing purity
of life, through it the priesthood grew to look upon themselves as
especially set apart for indulgence in vice. Did not history so
faithfully portray this condition, it would seem impossible that it had
existed among people asserting the highest morality, and is proof of the
danger of irresponsible power to possessor and victim alike, and the
ease with which the true meaning of right and wrong is lost under such
circumstances.

    The theory of the church that as the fall and sin really existed,
priestly immorality became a necessity

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

in order to perpetuate the world even through a continuance of the
original sin, was a species of fine casuistry for which the church in
all ages has been remarkable. The general tenor of the church against
marriage, together with its teaching of woman's greater sinfulness, were
the chief causes which undermined the morality of the christian world
for fifteen hundred years. With these doctrines were also taught the
duty of woman to sacrifice herself in every way for man, a theory of
which the present century is not unfamiliar. The loss of chastity in
woman was held as light sin in comparison to the degradation that
marriage would bring to a priest, and young girls ruined by some
candidate or priest, considered themselves doing God service in refusing
a marriage that would cause the expulsion of the priestly \]over from
the ecclesiastical order. With woman's so-called "divine," but rather
demoniac self-sacrifice, Heloise chose to be deemed the mistress of
Abelard rather than by acknowledging their marriage destroy his
prospects of advancement in the church.<span
id="fr_79"></span>[79](#fn_79)

    The State sustained the Church in its opposition to marriage, and we
find the anomaly of marriage for political reasons where the parties
forever separated at the altar. St. Jerome, and at a later date St.
Dunstan, sustained the policy of such marriages. The history of Britain
gives instances of early queens thus separating from their newly made
husbands at the close of the ceremony, dedicating their lives to
celibacy and their fortunes to the church.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

    Nor did this institution neglect that large class of Women to whom
marriage was made impossible because of the numbers of men to whom it
was forbidden. After the Lateran Council had permanently settled the
action of the church in favor of priestly celibacy, great effort was
made to draw women of wealth into a monastic life. Religion was the
chief method of acquiring Power, and as an abbess of a religious
institution it opened opportunity for power to women scarcely possible
outside the church. The two highest womanly virtues inculcated by the
church were a celibate life and liberality to religious houses. It was
taught if anything could possibly mitigate woman's sin through Eve's
transgression, it was the observance of these two conditions.

    To the student this is the most remarkable period in the history of
the church, not merely as a culmination of the effort of centuries in
finally deciding the questions of celibacy, so long agitated with such
varying results, but in the immediate change and permanent settlement it
brought about in regard to other church dogmas, as well as its
pronounced influence in causing the Lutheran Reformation.

    It was asserted that the spiritual office of the priest sanctified
sin; it became a maxim that whatever a priest might do was holy; by
their taking part in lasciviousness it became consecration. To disobey a
priest was to endanger salvation; it was libellous and treasonable to
question the purity of a priest's motives, hence religion became a
screen for all vice and a source of moral degradation to all women. To
such extent was belief carried in the superior purity of a celibate life
that but little more than 300 years since a man was burned at the stake
in England for asserting

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

the lawfulness of priestly marriage.<span id="fr_80"></span>[80](#fn_80)
The action of the council of 1215, so powerfully sustaining the olden
claims of the superior holiness of celibacy soon created a belief in the
inability of a priest to commit sin. During the middle ages his
infallibility was constantly maintained, his superior sanctity in
consequence of his celibacy universally asserted. It was impossible not
to connect the idea of great wickedness with those incapable of entering
this holy office, and as woman by virtue of sex was prohibited priestly
functions, and as her marriage had been declared a necessity for the
world, these conditions were used as arguments against her. The
conscience and morality of tens of thousands were destroyed by these
teachings, enforced as they were by all the dread authority of the
church. The christian world was under entire control of a class whose
aim was chiefly that of personal aggrandizement, and that hesitated at
no means for securing wealth and power.

    The Inquisition was firmly established; under its reign six hundred
methods of torture were known, and it was conducted with such secrecy
that not until dragged before it were many of its victims aware they
were under suspicion. Even when imprisoned in its torture chambers, the
charges against them were kept secret in hopes thereby to compel
self-accusation upon other points. The inferiority of woman, her
proneness to evil and readiness to listen to all suggestions of Satan,
was taught with renewed vigor and power for evil.

    The priest regarded himself as the direct representative of
divinity; the theory of infallibility was not

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

confined to the pope, but all dignitaries of the church made the same
claim. Asserting themselves incapable of wrong doing, maintaining an
especial sanctification by reason of their celibacy, priests
nevertheless made their holy office a cover for the most degrading
sensuality. Methods were taken to debauch the souls as well as the
bodies of women. Having first taught their special impurity, it was now
maintained that immorality with a priest was not sin, but on the
contrary hallowed the woman, giving her particular claim upon heaven. It
was taught that sin could only be killed through sin.<span
id="fr_81"></span>[81](#fn_81) The very incarnation was used as a means
of weakening woman's virtue. That Christ did not enter the world through
the marriage relation, stamped with christian honor a system of
concubinage in the church, for whose warrant woman was pointed to the
Virgin Mary. As an enforcement of her duty of absolute surrender of soul
and body to the will of the priest the course of the Virgin was adduced,
"who obeyed the angel Gabriel and conceived without fear of evil, for
impurity could not come of a spirit."<span
id="fr_82"></span>[82](#fn_82) The chastity of concubinage and the
unchasteness of marriage was constantly asserted by the church, and thus
the mysteries upon which its foundations were laid were used by it for
the degradation of woman, who was at all times depicted as a being of no
self-individuality, but one who had been created solely for man's
pleasure. As late as the seventeenth century, it was taught that a
priest could commit no sin. This old doctrine took new strength from the
Illumes,

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

who claimed an inner divine light.<span id="fr_83"></span>[83](#fn_83)
We find reference to priestly immorality and claim of infallibility
among old writers, Boccaccio in many of his stories putting arguments of
this kind in the mouth of his priestly characters.<span
id="fr_84"></span>[84](#fn_84)

    It was asserted too that sin was of the body alone, the soul knowing
nothing, partaking nothing of it. As an argument in favor of woman's
throwing herself entirely in the hands of Priests for immoral purposes,
it was declared that, "The devout having offered up and **annihilated**
their own selves exist no longer but in God; thenceforth they can do no
wrong. The better part of them is so divine that it no longer knows what
the other is doing."

    In confirmation of this doctrine it was said that Jesus threw off
his clothing and was scourged naked before the people. The result of
this teaching was the almost universal immorality of christendom. Under
such religious doctrine it could but be expected that the laity would
closely imitate the priesthood. Europe became a continent of moral
corruption, of which proof is overwhelming. Could we but relegate
christian immorality to the dark ages we might somewhat palliate it
under plea of ignorance. But unfortunately for such claim ample proof is
found to show that the enlightenment of modern civilization has not yet
been able to overthrow the basic idea upon which this immorality rests.
Amid the material and intellectual advancement of the last hundred

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

years we find spiritual darkness still profound in the church and the
true foundation of immorality almost unrecognized.

    As long as the church maintains the doctrine that woman was created
inferior to man, and brought sin into the world, rendering the sacrifice
of the Son of a God a necessity, just so long will the foundation of
vice and crime of every character remain. Not until the exact and
permanent equality of woman with man is recognized by the church, aye,
even more, the greater power and capacity of woman in the creative
function, together with the accountability of man to woman in everything
relating to the birth of a new being, is fully accepted as a law of
nature, will vice and crime disappear from the world. Until that time
has fully come, prostitution in its varied forms will continue to exist,
together with alms-houses, reformatories, jails, prisons, hospitals and
asylums for the punishment, reformation or care of the wretched beings
who have come into existence with an inheritance of disease and crime
because of church theory and church teaching.

    The system of celibacy produced its same effects wherever preached.
So constant was the system of debauchery practiced in England during the
reign of Henry VII. that the gentlemen and farmers of Carnarvonshire
laid complaint against the clergy of systematically seducing their wives
and daughters.<span id="fr_85"></span>[85](#fn_85) Women were everywhere
looked upon as slaves and toys, to obey, to furnish pleasure and
amusement, and to be cast aside at will. Under the religious teaching of
christendom it could not but be expected that the laity would closely
imitate the priesthood, and to victimize

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

women became the custom of all men.<span id="fr_86"></span>[86](#fn_86)
When a priest failed to take a concubine his **parishioners** compelled
him to do so in order to preserve the chastity of their own wives and
daughters. Draper<span id="fr_87"></span>[87](#fn_87) tells us that in
England alone 100,000 women became victims of the priests. Houses of
vile character were maintained for especial use of the priesthood. The
marriage of a priest was called a deception of the devil who thus led
him into an adulterous relation<span id="fr_88"></span>[88](#fn_88) for
sake of alienating property from the church.

    This mediæval doctrine that sin can only be killed through sin,
finds expression to-day not alone in religion<span
id="fr_89"></span>[89](#fn_89) but in society novels;<span
id="fr_90"></span>[90](#fn_90) its origin, like many other religious
wrongs, being directly traceable to the teaching of St. Paul.<span
id="fr_91"></span>[91](#fn_91)

    The incontinence of these celibate priests ultimately became so
great a source of scandal to the church

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

that it was obliged to take action. Edicts and bulls were fulminated
from the papal chair, although the facts of history prove Rome itself,
its popes and its cardinals, to have been sunk in the grossest
immorality. Spain, the seat of the Inquisition, and at that period the
very heart of Christendom, was the first country toward which
investigation was turned, Pope Paul IV. issuing a bull against those
confessors who solicited women, provoking them to dissolute action. When
this bull of investigation first appeared in Spain, it was accompanied
by an edict commanding all those who knew of monks or priests that had
thus abused the confessional to make it known within thirty days under
grievous penalty. The terrible power of the church intimidated those who
otherwise for very shame would surely have buried the guilt of their
priests in oblivion, and so great was the number of women who thronged
the palace of the Inquisition in the city of Seville alone, that twenty
secretaries with as many Inquisitors were not sufficient to take the
deposition of the witnesses. A second, a third and a fourth thirty days
were appointed for investigation, so great were the number of women
making complaint.<span id="fr_92"></span>[92](#fn_92) So large a number
of priests were implicated that after a four months' examination, the
Holy Tribunal of the Inquisition put a stop to the proceedings,
commanding that all those immoralities and crimes against womanhood only
rendered possible in the name of religion, and which has been proven by
legal evidence, should be buried I n eternal oblivion. The deposition of
thousands of women seduced by their confessors, was not deemed
sufficient evidence for removal of the guilty priests from their holy
offices.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

Occasionally a single priest was suspended for a short time but in a few
months restored again to his priestly position.<span
id="fr_93"></span>[93](#fn_93)

It was not uncommon for women to be openly carried off by priests, their
husbands and fathers threatened with vengeance in cases of their
attempted recovery.<span id="fr_94"></span>[94](#fn_94) During the
height of the Inquisitorial power it was not rare for a family to be
aroused in the night by an ominous knock and the cry "The Holy Fathers,
open the door!"

    To this dread mandate there could be but one reply, as both temporal
and spiritual power lay in their hands. A husband, father or son might
thus be seized by veiled figures; or as frequently a loved wife or young
daughter was dragged from her bed, her fate ever to remain a mystery.
When young and beautiful these women were taken to replenish the
Inquisitional harem; the "dry pan," "boiling in oil," and similar
methods of torture, threatened, in order to produce compliance upon part
of wretched victims. No Turkish seraglio with bow-string and sack ever
exhibited as great an amount of diabolical wickedness as the
prison-harems of the Inquisition. As late as the seventeenth century
Pope Gregory XV. commanded strict enforcement of the bull against
priestly lechery not alone in Spain, but in all other parts of the
Christian world. In England after the reformation, the

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

same condition was found to exist.<span id="fr_95"></span>[95](#fn_95)
But edicts against lasciviousness were vainly issued by a church whose
foundation is a belief in the supremacy of one sex over the other, and
that woman brought sin into the world through having seduced man into
the marriage relation. Despite the advance of knowledge and civilization
the effects of such teachings are the same now as during the middle
ages, as fully proven at time of separation between the temporal and
spiritual power in Italy;<span id="fr_96"></span>[96](#fn_96) and these
proofs are taken from Catholic sources. In 1849 when the Roman people
opened the palace of the Inquisition there was found in the library a
department entitled "Summary of Solicitations," being a record of cases
in which women had been solicited to acts of criminality by their
confessors in the pontifical state.<span id="fr_97"></span>[97](#fn_97)
The testimony of Luther as to the moral degradation of the church at
time of the Reformation has never been invalidated,<span
id="fr_98"></span>[98](#fn_98) and is entirely in accord with its
character throughout history.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

    That the same iniquities are connected with the confessional to day,
we learn from the testimony of those priests who have withdrawn from the
communion of the Catholic Church; Father Hyacinthe publicly declaring
that ninety-nine out of one hundred priests live in sin with the women
they have destroyed. Another priest following the example of Father
Hyacinthe in marrying, asserted that he took this step in order to get
out of the ultramontane slough and remain an honest man.<span
id="fr_99"></span>[99](#fn_99) That the Catholic Church of the present
day bears the same general character it did during the middle ages is
proven from much testimony. Among the latest and most important
witnesses, for minuteness and fullness of detail, is Rev. Charles
Chiniquy in his works "The Priest, The Woman and the Confessional;"
"Fifty Years of Rome," etc. Now over eighty years of age, Rev. Mr.
Chiniquy was for more than fifty years a Catholic priest of influence
and high reputation, known in Canada, where thousands of drunkards
reformed under his teaching, as the "Apostle of Temperance." Becoming
convinced of the immorality of the Romish Church, he left it in 1856,
taking with him five thousand French Canadians, with whom he settled at
St. Anne, Kankakee County, Illinois. Having united with a branch of the
Protestant church, he was invited to Scotland to take part in the
Tercentenary of the Reformation, and later to England, where he lectured
on invitation of ministers of every evangelical denomination. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[100](#fn_100) His "Fifty Years

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

of Rome" indissolubly links his name with that of Abraham Lincoln,
through the information there made known regarding the Catholic plot for
President Lincoln's assassination.

    It is as fully a law of moral as of material nature that from the
same causes the same effects follow. In his work upon the
confessional<span id="fr_101"></span>[101](#fn_101) Rev. Mr. Chiniquy
relates incidents coming under his own personal knowledge while he was
still a Catholic priest regarding its present abuses. The character of
the questions made a duty of the priest to ask during confession, are
debasing in the extreme, their whole tendency towards the undermining of
morality. Too broadly indelicate for translation these priestly
instructions are hidden in Latin, but are no less made the duty of a
priest to understand and use. In 1877, a number of prominent women of
Montreal, Canada, addressed a declaration and protest to the bishop of
that diocese against the abuses of the confessional of which their own
experience had made them cognizant.

    DECLARATION

    TO HIS LORDSHIP BOURGET, BISHOP OF MONTREAL

    Sir:--Since God in his infinite mercy has been pleased to show us
the errors of Rome, and has given us strength to abandon them to follow
Christ, we deem it our duty to say a word on the abominations of the
confessional. You well know that these abominations are of such a nature
that it is impossible for a woman to speak of them without a blush. How
is it that among civilized Christian men one has so far forgotten the
rule of common decency as to force women to reveal to unmarried men,
under the pains of eternal damnation, their most secret thoughts, their
most sinful desires and their most private actions?

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

    How unless there be a brazen mask on your priest's face dare they go
out into the world having heard the tales of misery which cannot but
defile the hearing, and which the women cannot relate without having
laid aside modesty and all sense of shame. The harm would not be so
great should the Church allow no one but the woman to accuse herself.
But what shall we say of the abominable questions that are put to them
and which they must answer?

    Here, the laws of common decency strictly forbid us to enter into
details. Suffice it to say, were husbands cognizant of one-tenth of what
is going on between the confessor and their wives, they would rather see
them dead than degraded to such a degree.

    As for us, daughters and wives from Montreal who have known by
experience the filth of the confessional, we cannot sufficiently bless
God for having shown us the error of our ways in teaching us that it was
not at the feet of a man as weak and as sinful as ourselves, but at the
feet of Christ alone that we must seek salvation, Julia Herbert, Marie
Rogers, J. Rocham, Louise Picard, Francoise Dirringer, Eugenie Martin,
and forty-three others.<span id="fr_102"></span>[102](#fn_102)

    In reply to a letter of inquiry addressed by myself to Rev. Mr.
Chiniquy, the following answer was received.

    "St. Anne, Kankakee County, Illinois.        

    January 4., 1887.

    "MRS. MATILDA JOSLYN GAGE,

    MADAM;--

    "In answer to your honored letter of the 29th Dec. I hasten to say:
*First*. The women of Montreal signed the declaration you see in 'The
Priest, the Woman and the Confessional,' in the fall of 1877. I do not
remember the day. *Second*. As it is ten years since I left Montreal to
come to my Missionary field of Illinois, I could not say if these women
are still in Montreal or not. Great, supreme efforts were secretly made
by the Bishop of Montreal to show that these

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

names were forged in order to answer and confound me, but the poor
Bishop found that the document was too correct, authentic and public to
be answered and attacked, and he remained mute and confounded, for many
of these woman were well known in the city.

    "*Third*. You will find the answer to your other questions, in the
volume 'Fifty Years in the Church of Rome,' which I addressed you by
to-day's mail.

    "Respectfully yours in Christ,        

    "C. Chiniquy."

    The same assertion of priestly infallibility is made to-day as it
was centuries ago, the same declaration of change of nature through
priestly celibacy. Upon this question Mr. Chiniquy says:

    If any one wants to hear an eloquent oration let him go where the
Roman Catholic priest is preaching on the divine institution of
auricular confession. They make the people believe that the vow of
perpetual chastity changes their nature, turns them into angels and puts
them above the common faults of the fallen children of Adam. With a
brazen face when they are interrogated on that subject, they say that
they have special graces to remain pure and undefiled in the midst of
the greatest dangers; that the Virgin Mary to whom they are consecrated
is their powerful advocate to obtain from her son that superhuman virtue
of Chastity; that what would be a cause of sin and perdition to common
men is without peril and danger for a true son of Mary.<span
id="fr_103"></span>[103](#fn_103)

    A work entitled "Mysteries of the Neapolitan Convents," its author
Henrietta Carracciola, a woman of the purest blood of the princes of
Italy, daughter of the Marshal Carracciola, Governor of the Province of
Pasi in Italy, is quoted from, by Rev. Mr. Chiniquy, in confirmation of
his statements as to the continued Impurity of the confessional.

    Finally another priest, the most annoying of all for his obstinate
assiduity, sought to secure my affections

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

at all cost. There was not an image profane poetry could afford him, nor
a sophism he could borrow from rhetoric, no wily interpretation he could
give to the word of God, which he did not employ to convert me to his
wishes. Here is an example of his logic:--

    "Dear daughter," said he to me one day, "knowest thou who thy God
truly is?"

    "He is the Creator of the Universe," I answered dryly.

    "No-no-no-no! that is not enough" he replied laughing at my
ignorance; "God is Love, but love in the abstract which receives its
incarnation in the mutual affection of two hearts which idolize each
other. You must then not only love God in the abstract existence, but
must also love him in his incarnation, that is, in the exclusive love of
a man who adores you. *Quod Deus est amor nec colitus nisi amando*."

    "Then," I replied, "a woman who adores her own lover would adore
Divinity itself?" "Assuredly," reiterated the priest over and over
again, taking courage from my remark and chuckling with what seemed to
him the effect of his catechism.

    "In that case," said I hastily, "I should select for my lover rather
a man of the world than a priest."

    "God preserve you, my daughter! God preserve you from that sin. To
love a man of the world, a sinner, a wretch, an unbeliever, an infidel!
Why, you would go immediately to hell. The love of a priest is a sacred
love, while that of a profane man is infamy. The priest purifies his
affections daily in communion with the Holy Spirit . . . If you cannot
love me because I am your confessor, I will find means to assist you to
get rid of your scruples. We will place the name of Jesus Christ before
all our affectionate demonstrations and thus our love will be a grateful
offering to the Lord and will ascend fragrant with perfume to Heaven
like the smoke of the incense of the Sanctuary. Say to me for example 'I
love you in Jesus Christ, last night I dreamed of you in Jesus Christ;
and you will, have tranquil conscience, because in doing

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

this God will sanctify every transport of your love." Rev. Mr. Chiniquy
who in his fifty years of Romish priesthood possessed every opportunity
for knowing the truth, does not hesitate to affirm that the popes are
today of the same general immoral character they were in the earlier
centuries of the Church. He says:

    Let not my readers be deceived by the idea that the popes of Rome in
our days are much better than those of the ninth, tenth, eleventh and
twelfth centuries. They are absolutely the same--the only difference is
that to-day they take a little more care to conceal their secret orgies.
Go to Italy and there the Roman Catholics themselves will show you the
two beautiful daughters whom the late Pope Plus IX. had from two of his
mistresses. Inquire from those who have personally known Pope Gregory
XVI. the predecessor of after they will have given you the history Plus
IX, of his mistresses, one of whom was the wife of his barber, they will
tell you that be was one of the greatest drunkards in Italy.<span
id="fr_104"></span>[104](#fn_104)

    The views of the Catholic Church in regard to marriage of the
priesthood was recently demonstrated in the United States, 1885, by the
persecution of a priest of the Uniate Greek Church sent as a missionary
from Austria to Pennsylvania. The Greek Church, it must be remembered,
permits a single marriage to a priest. The Uniate while in this respect
following the discipline of the Greek Church, yet admits the supremacy
of the Pope which the regular Greek Church does not. The Uniate Greek
Church accepts, as binding, all the decisions of Rome subsequent to the
division between the eastern and the western parts of Christendom.
Endowed with authority from both branches, Father Wolonski came to this
country accompanied by his wife, in full expectation of fellowship With
his Catholic brethren. His first contrary experience occurred in
Philadelphia when Archbishop Ryan

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

of the Cathedral refused all intercourse with him because of his
marriage. Reaching Shenandoah where commissioned by his own Austrian
Bishop, he discovered himself still under ban; the resident priest of
the Catholic church having warned his congregation under pain of
excommunication to shun both himself and his church, upon the ground
that the Roman Church under no circumstances tolerated a married priest.
Eventually the subject grew to such proportions that Father Wolonski was
recalled, and an unmarried priest sent in his stead.<span
id="fr_105"></span>[105](#fn_105)

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

    From the experience of Father Wolonski less than a decade since,
with the bitter hostility shown by the church towards Father Hyacinthe,
we find that a belief in the special holiness of celibacy is as dominant
in the Catholic church to-day as at any period of its history;
concurrent testimony teaching us that its greatest evils remain the same
as of old. It is less than twenty years since the whole Christian world
was interested in a suit brought against the heirs of the deceased
Cardinal Antonelli in order to secure recognition of his daughter's
claim to inheritance. This girl was everywhere spoken of by the Catholic
Church as "a sacrilegious child," that is, a being who had violated
sacred things by coming into existence. The destruction of her mother's
life, her own illegitimacy, the wrong done to her mother's family and to
society were held as of no moment beside the fact that her claims, if
allowed, would take property from the church. The love of the Great
Cardinal for this girl's mother was fully proven, but the church having
established celibacy in order that it might control the property of its
priests, was not inclined to permit any portion to be diverted from that
source. Honesty, justice, and the ties of natural affection, now as of
yore are not part of the Church system. In consequence, this suit of the
illegitimate child of the Great Cardinal Secretary, filled not alone
Italy, but the whole Catholic world with disgrace.

    Among the countries now striving to free themselves from Church
dominion is Mexico. A letter to the New York Herald, winter of 1892,
regarding the revolution there in progress, said of Diaz:

    Instead of his being assisted by the Church it has been his
bitterest and most relentless enemy and

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

opponent. The Church in Mexico is opposed to all enlightenment of the
people. The clergy, if they can be honored with that name, fight all
improvements. They want no railways or telegraphs and when he adopted a
system of compulsory education the war began in earnest. Diaz was
determined, however, and he retaliated by closing up the convents and
prohibiting the establishment of monasteries. Being further opposed in
his efforts at reform and defied by the priests he put hundreds of them
in Pueblo in jail and prohibited the ringing of Church bells in certain
localities. He forcibly impressed on them the fact that he was running
Mexico, not they. He gave them to understand that his ideas of
Christianity was, that priests should preach Christ crucified and not
revolution and infraction of the laws.

    In Mexico, priests can keep mistresses with impunity. From a church
to a gambling-table is but a step, and the priests gamble with the rest.
The rentals of houses of ill-fame, of gambling-houses, of bullpens all
go to a church which is supposed to teach religion. Because Diaz, a
catholic himself, will not tolerate such crimes under the guise of
religion he is fought by the church and is the recipient of their
anathemas.

    Take the leading church in Monterey outside of the cathedral. You
step from the church-door to a plaza owned by the church and in which
stand fifty tents in which are conducted monte, roulette and other games
of chance. Behind this stand the bull-pens and the profits and rentals
go to the Church.

    With all these lights the most plausible inference or theory is that
the clerical party, as they see all these privileges being swept away,
will cheerfully contribute the sinews of war with which to carry on a
revolution against Diaz. They have agents in Europe and the money can
come through that source without detection.

    The agent of the Clerical Party in Europe is the Church itself. As a
body, it has ever opposed advancement

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

and reform. It anathematized the printing press as an invention of the
devil and has steadily opposed education of the people. its work is best
done in the darkness of ignorance and superstition. For this cause it
has opposed all new discoveries in science, all reforms of whatever
character.<span id="fr_106"></span>[106](#fn_106) Not by the Catholic
Church alone, but under the "Reformation," as we have seen, the same
prohibition of the Bible to common people, has existed the same
resistance to education of the masses, the same opposition to
antislavery, to temperance, to woman's demand for equality of
opportunity with man. The general nature of the church does not change
with change of name. Looking backward through history we even find the
same characteristics under the patriarchate; love of power, greed for
money, and intense selfishness combined in a general disregard for the
rights of others.

    M. Renan's drama, "L'Abbesse de Jouarre," was written because he
wished to prove the worthlessness of those vows imposed on catholic
priests and nuns, as well as show the bondage under which they held the
feminine conscience, while the masculine conscience throws them aside.
It is not alone the nuns whose conscience is bound, but all feminine
members of the catholic church are more closely held in a spiritual
bondage, than the male members of that church. In 1885, a letter from
Chili to the "New York Sun" graphically pictured certain Chilian women
penitents who are known by a peculiar dress they are required

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

to wear.<span id="fr_107"></span>[107](#fn_107) Others whose sins are so
great that they cannot be purged by a penitential dress, retire for a
season to the "Convent of Penitents," where by mortification of the body
they hope to gain absolution for the soul. Still more severe than this
retreat are other convents known as "Houses of Detention," where wayward

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

daughters are sent, and young mothers without husbands are cared for.
But the whole country of Chili fails to show a similar dress, or house
of penitence, or correction for men. Shame and penance, equally with
sin, have been relegated by the church to women alone.

    The confessional is not frequented by men, and mass is but seldom
attended by them. For this laxity a double reason exists: First,
immorality in men is not looked upon as contrary to its discipline.
Second, through woman having been trained to a more sensitive conscience
than man, the confessional wrests secrets from her lips, which gives the
church knowledge of all it wishes to learn in regard to the family. No
more certain system could have been devised for the destruction of
woman's self-respect than the one requiring penance from her for sins
the church passes lightly over in man. Nor would penance of this
character be demanded from women were the offices of the church open to
her the same as to man. No greater crime against humanity has ever been
known than the division of. morality into two codes, the strict for
woman, the lax for man. Nor has woman been the sole sufferer from this
creation of Two Moral Codes within the Christian Church. Through it man
has lost fine discrimination between good and evil, and the Church
itself as the originator of this distinction in sin upon the trend of
sex, has become the creator and sustainer of injustice, falsehood and
the crimes into which its priests have most deeply sunk. Nor is this
condition of the past. As late as the fall of 1892 a number of articles
appeared in Canadian papers openly accusing the catholic priesthood of
that province of the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

grossest immorality.<span id="fr_108"></span>[108](#fn_108) That
priestly celibacy yet continues in the Romish Church is not a subject of
surprise, when we realize the immense power and wealth it has been
enabled to secure through its means; but it is one of astonishment,
carrying with it a premonition of danger, that we now see a similar
tendency in the ritualistic portion of the Episcopal Church, both in
England and the United States. The evils of monasticism, although less
potent than during the middle ages, are still great, and in finding
entrance into Protestant denominations are a fresh warning of their
dangerous tendency. The experience of the past should not appeal to us
in vain. We have noticed the perils to society arising from those
classes of persons who, under plea of religion, evade the duties of
family and social life. No crime against the world can be greater than
the deliberate divestment of responsibility by one's self, because tired
of the warfare of life, that struggle which comes to every human being;
the becoming "fascinated with the conceptions of an existence" outside
of ordinary cares; and the entrance

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

into an order in which one's own personal responsibility is largely
surrendered to others is not alone a crime against the state, but a sin
against one)s own self and against humanity. An order which thereafter
assumes the task of directing the thoughts and lives of its members into
a channel of "repose and contentment" as certain protestant orders do,
is one of the dangerous religious elements of the present day. No crime
against one's self or against society can be greater than this. In the
Ritualistic Episcopal Church are to be found monks and sisterhoods upon
the celibate plan, confessors and penance, all of them primal elements
in moral and spiritual degradation. If religion has a lesson to teach
mankind, it is that of personal responsibility; it is that of the worth
and duty of the individual; it is that each human being is alone
accountable for his or her course in life; it is the lesson of the
absolute equality of each human being with every other human being in
relation to these cardinal points. The lesson should have been learned
ere this, that ecclesiastical pretense of divinely appointed power has
ever made the priesthood arrogant, coarse and tyrannical; the male laity
dependent and dissimulating; woman, self-distrustful and timorous,
believing in the duty of humiliation and self-sacrifice; that her life
is not to be lived primarily for herself alone, but that. her very right
to existence is dependent upon the benefit thereby to accrue to some
other person. To-day, as of old, the underlying idea of monasticism, of
"brotherhoods," "sisterhoods," and their ilk even in Protestant
denominations, is the divine authority of some priestly superior, and
that the power of remitting sins inheres in some system under control of
some priest. The Ritualistic party

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

of the Episcopal Church, equally with the Roman Catholic Church, makes
frequent reference to these words of Christ--St. John XX,
XXIII--"Whatever sins you remit they are remitted unto them, and
whatsoever sins you retain are retained," thus premising the divine
power of the priesthood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Canon Law.](wcs05)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_page_49">p. 49</span>  

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1.](#fr_1)  It was a favorite doctrine of the
Christian fathers that concupiscence or the sensual passion was the
original sin of human nature. Lecky.--*Hist. European Morals*.

The tendency of the church towards the enforcement of celibacy was early
seen. At the four Synods which assembled to establish the true faith in
respect to the Holy nature of Christ's Humanity, the first one at Nice,
318, the second at Constantinople with forty bishops present; the third
at Ephesus with two hundred bishops present; the fourth at Chaledonia
with many bishops together, they forever forbade all marriage to the
minister at the altar. *Monumenta Ecclesiastica*.

P. 347. To no minister at the altar is it allowed to marry, but it is
forbidden to every one. *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2.](#fr_2)  According to Christianity woman is
the unclean one, the seducer who brought sin into the world and caused
the fall of man. Consequently all apostles and fathers of the church
have regarded marriage as an inevitable evil just as prostitution is
regarded to-day. August Bebel.--*Woman in the Past, Present and Future*.

<span id="fn_page_50">p. 50</span>  

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3.](#fr_3)  Spirit in the Hebrew, as shown in
the first chapter, answers to all genders; in the Greek to the feminine
alone. With Kabbalists the "Divine Spirit" was conceded to be the
feminine Jehovah, that is, the feminine principle of the Godhead.

<span id="fn_page_51">p. 51</span>  

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4.](#fr_4)  From Marcellina, in the second
century, a body of the church took its name. Her life was pure, and her
memory has descended to us free from calumny and reproach.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5.](#fr_5)  Lowest in the scale of being are
those invisible creatures called by Kabbalists the "elementary." \* \*
The second class is composed of the invisible antitypes of the men to be
born. *Isis Unveiled*, I, 310.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[6.](#fr_6)  Who maintained that Adam did not
think of celebrating his nuptials till he went out of Paradise.

<span id="fn_page_52">p. 52</span>  

<span id="fn_7"></span>[7.](#fr_7)  It was the effect of God's goodness
to man that suffered him to sleep when Eve was formed, as Adam being
endowed with a spirit of prophecy might foresee the evils which the
production of Eve would cause to all mankind, so that God perhaps cast
him into that sleep lest he should oppose the creation of his wife.
*Life of Adam by Loredano*. Pub. at Amsterdam, 1696. See Bayle.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[8.](#fr_8)  Lecky.--*Hist European Morals*.

<span id="fn_page_53">p. 53</span>  

<span id="fn_9"></span>[9.](#fr_9)  That marriage was evil was taught by
Jerome.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[10.](#fr_10)  So fully retaining it as to
require the circumcision of Timothy, the Gentile, before sending him as
a missionary to the Jews.

<span id="fn_page_54">p. 54</span>  

<span id="fn_11"></span>[11.](#fr_11)  The council of Tours (813)
recommended bishops to read, and if possible retain by heart, the
epistles of St. Paul.

<span id="fn_page_55">p. 55</span>  

<span id="fn_12"></span>[12.](#fr_12)  Although Paul "led about" other
"women" saluting "some with a holy kiss."

<span id="fn_13"></span>[13.](#fr_13)  964. Notion of uncleanliness
attaching to sexual relations fostered by the church. Herbert
Spencer.--*Descriptive Sociology, England*.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[14.](#fr_14)  In the third century marriage was
permitted to all orders and ranks of the clergy. Those, however, who
continued in a state of celibacy, obtained by this abstinence a higher
reputation of sanctity and virtue than others. This was owing to an
almost general persuasion that they who took wives were of all others
the most subject to the influence of malignant demons.--*Mosheim*.

<span id="fn_page_56">p. 56</span>  

<span id="fn_15"></span>[15.](#fr_15)  Old (Christian) theologians for a
long time disputed upon the nature of females; a numerous party classed
them among the brutes having neither soul nor reason. They called a
council to arrest the progress of this heresy. it was contended that the
women of Peru and other countries of America were without soul and
reason. The first Christians made a distinction between men and women.
Catholics would not permit them to sing in Church. *Dictionaire Féodal*,
Paris, 1819.

<span id="fn_page_57">p. 57</span>  

<span id="fn_16"></span>[16.](#fr_16)  By a decree of the Council of
Auxerre (A. D. 578), women on account of their impurity were forbidden
to receive the sacrament into their naked hands.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[17.](#fr_17)  Catherine reproached the
Protestants with this impious license as with a great crime. "Les femmes
chantant aux *orgies* des huguenots, dit Georges l'apotre; apprenez
donc, prédicans, que saint Paul a dit; *Mulieres in* ecclesiaétaccant;
et que dans le chapitre de l'apocolypse l'evoque de Thyathire est menacé
de la damnation pour avoir permis á une femme de parles a l'église. See
*Redavances Seigneur*.

<span id="fn_page_58">p. 58</span>  

<span id="fn_18"></span>[18.](#fr_18)  When part singing was first
introduced into the United States, great objection was made to women
taking the soprano or leading part, which by virtue of his superiority
it was declared belonged to man. Therefore woman was relegated to the
bass or tenor but nature proved too powerful, and man was eventually
compelled to take bass or tenor as his part, while woman carried the
soprano, says the *History of Music*.

<span id="fn_page_59">p. 59</span>  

<span id="fn_19"></span>[19.](#fr_19)  *Leviticus 12:15*.

Dr. Smith characterizes a sin-offering as a sacrifice made with the idea
of propitiation and atonement; its central idea, that of expiation,
representing a broken covenant between God and the offender; that while
death was deserved, the substitute was accepted in lieu of the
criminal,--Dictionary of the Bible.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[20.](#fr_20)  *The Talmud* (Mishna), declared
three cleansings were necessary for leprosy and three for children, thus
placing the bringing of an immortal being into life upon the same plane
of defilement with the most hideous plague of antiquity.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[21.](#fr_21)  The mean term of life for these
wretched girls under religious confinement in a nunnery was about ten
years. From the fifteenth century a sickness was common, known as
Disease of the Cloisters. It was described by Carmen.

Jewish contempt of the feminine was not alone exhibited in prohibiting
her entrance into the holy places of the temple, and in the ceremonies
of her purification, but also in the especial holiness of male animals
which alone were used for sacrifice. Under Jewish law the sons alone
inherited, the elder receiving a double portion as the beginning of his
father's strength. See Deut 21-15. If perchance the mother also
possessed an inheritance that was also divided among the sons to the
exclusion of daughters. The modern English law of primogeniture is
traceable to Judaism.

Even the commandments were made subservient to masculine ideas, the
tenth classing a man's wife with his cattle and slaves, while the
penalties of the seventh were usually visited upon her alone.

<span id="fn_page_60">p. 60</span>  

<span id="fn_22"></span>[22.](#fr_22)  The reign of Constantine marks
the epoch of the transformation of Christianity from a religious into a
political system. Draper.--*Conflict of Religion and Science*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[23.](#fr_23)  "The woman that cometh to give
thanks must offer accustomed offering in this kingdom; it is the law of
the kingdom in such cases."

<span id="fn_page_61">p. 61</span>  

<span id="fn_24"></span>[24.](#fr_24)  In the year 1867 the Right Rev.
Bishop Coxe, of the Western Diocese of New York, refused the sacrament
to those women patients of Dr. Foster's Sanitarium at Clifton Springs,
N. Y., whose heads were uncovered, although the rite was performed in
the domestic chapel of that institution and under the same roof as the
patient's own rooms.

During the famous See trial at Newark. N. J., 1876, the prosecutor, Rev,
Dr. Craven, declared that every woman before him wore her head covered
in token of her subordination.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[25.](#fr_25)  The Catholic Congress of July,
x892, telegraphing the pope it would strive to obtain for the Holy See
the recovery of its inalienable prerogative and territorial
independence, was convened at Fulda.

<span id="fn_page_62">p. 62</span>  

<span id="fn_26"></span>[26.](#fr_26)  "In the old days, no woman was
allowed to put her foot within the walls of the monastery at San
Augustin, Mexico. A noble lady of Spain, wife of the reigning Viceroy,
was bent on visiting it. Nothing could stop her, and in she came. But
she found only empty cloisters, for each virtuous monk locked himself
securely in his cell, and afterward every stone in the floor which her
sacrilegious feet had touched was carefully replaced by a new one fresh
from the mountain top. Times are sadly changed. The house has now been
turned into a hotel."

<span id="fn_27"></span>[27.](#fr_27)  *Sacerdotal Celibacy*.--Lea.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[28.](#fr_28)  *Studies in Church
History*.--Lea.

<span id="fn_page_64">p. 64</span>  

<span id="fn_29"></span>[29.](#fr_29)  *History of Materialism*.

<span id="fn_page_65">p. 65</span>  

<span id="fn_30"></span>[30.](#fr_30)  Seals upon legal papers owe their
origin to the custom of the uneducated noble warrior stamping the
imprint of his clenched or mailed hand upon wax as his signature.

<span id="fn_page_66">p. 66</span>  

<span id="fn_31"></span>[31.](#fr_31)  *St. Theresa* founded the
Barefoot Carmelites, and it is but a few years since thousands of its
members assembled to do honor to her name.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[32.](#fr_32)  The annals of the Church of Rome
give us the history of that celebrated prostitute Marozia of the tenth
century, who lived in public concubinage with Pope Sergius III., whom
she had raised to the papal throne. Afterwards she and her sister
Theodosia placed another of their lovers, under name of Anastatius III,
and after him John X., in the same position. Still later this same
powerful Marozia placed the tiara upon the head of her son by Pope
Sergius under name of John XI., and this before he was sixteen years of
age. The celebrated Countess Matilda exerted no less power over popedom,
while within this century the maid of Kent has issued orders to the pope
himself.

<span id="fn_page_67">p. 67</span>  

<span id="fn_33"></span>[33.](#fr_33)  The first abbess, PetrouvilIe,
becoming involved in a dispute with the Powerful bishop of Angers,
summoned him before the council of Chateraroux and Poicters, where she
pleaded the cause of her order and won her case. In 1349 the abbess
Théophegénie denied the right of the seneschal of Poiton to judge the
monks of Fontervault, and gained it for herself. In 1500, Mary of
Brittany, in concert with the pope's deputies, drew up with an
unfaltering hand the new statutes of the order. Legouvè.--*Moral History
of Women*.

<span id="fn_page_68">p. 68</span>  

<span id="fn_34"></span>[34.](#fr_34)  No community was richer or more
influential, yet during six hundred years and under thirty-two abbesses,
every one of its privileges were attacked by masculine pride or
violence, and every one maintained by the vigor of the women.--*Sketches
of Fontervault*.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[35.](#fr_35)  What is more remarkable the monks
of this convent were under control of the abbess and nuns, receiving
their food as alms.--*Ibid*.

<span id="fn_page_70">p. 70</span>  

<span id="fn_36"></span>[36.](#fr_36)  "The Lord's Prayer," taught his
disciples by Jesus, recognizes the loss, and demands restoration of the
feminine in "Hallowed (whole) be Thy Name."

<span id="fn_37"></span>[37.](#fr_37)  Woman should always be clothed in
mourning and rags, that the eye may perceive in her only a penitent,
drowned in tears, and so doing for the sin of having ruined the whole
human race. Woman is the gateway of satan, who broke the seal of the
forbidden tree and who first violated the divine law.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[38.](#fr_38)  Gildas, in the first half of the
sixth century, declared the clergy were utterly corrupt. Lea.--*Studies
in Church History*.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[39.](#fr_39)  In the third century marriage was
permitted to all ranks and orders of the clergy. Those, however, who
continued in a slate of celibacy, obtained by this abstinence a higher
reputation of sanctity and virtue than others. This was owing to the
almost general persuasion that they who took wives were of all others
the most subject to the influence of malignant demons.--*Mosheim*.

As early as the third century, says *Bayle*, were several maidens who
resolved never to marry.

<span id="fn_page_71">p. 71</span>  

<span id="fn_40"></span>[40.](#fr_40)  The priests of the Greek Church
are still forbidden a second marriage. In the beginning of the reign of
Edward I, when men in orders were prohibited from marriage in England, a
statute was framed under which lay felons were deprived of the clergy in
case they had committed bigamy in addition to their other offenses;
bigamy in the clerical sense meaning marriage with a widow or with two
maidens in succession.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[41.](#fr_41)  Pelagius II., sixty-fifth pope in
censuring those priests, who after the death of their wives have become
fathers by their servants, recommended that the culpable females should
be immured in convents to perform perpetual penance for the fault of the
priest. Cormenin.--*History of the Popes*, p. 84.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[42.](#fr_42)  A priest's wife is nothing but a
snare of the devil, and he who is ensnared thereby on to his end will be
seized fast by the devil, and he must afterwards Pass into the hands of
fiends and totally perish.-Institutes of Polity, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, pp. 438-42. Canons of Ælfric and Ælfric's Pastoral
Epistles. p. 458.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[43.](#fr_43)  *Monumenta Ecclesiastica.
Institutes of Polity, Civil and Ecclesiastical*.

<span id="fn_page_72">p. 72</span>  

<span id="fn_44"></span>[44.](#fr_44)  In order to understand the morals
of the clergy of this period, it is important that we should make
mention of a law which was passed by the emperors Valentinian, Valerius
and Gratian toward the end of the year 370. It prohibited ecclesiastics
and monks from entering the houses of widows and single women living
alone or who had lost their parents. Dr. Cormenin.--*History of the
Popes*, p. 62.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[45.](#fr_45)  *Lecky* finds evidence of the
most hideous immorality in these restrictions, which forbade the
presence even of a mother or sister in a priest's house.

Lea says it is somewhat significant that when in France the rule of
celibacy was completely enforced churchmen should find it necessary to
revive the hideously suggestive restriction which denied the priest the
society of his mother and sister.--*Sacerdotal Celibacy*, p. 344.

<span id="fn_page_73">p. 73</span>  

<span id="fn_46"></span>[46.](#fr_46)  He declared it to be the highest
degree of wickedness to rise from a woman's side to make the body of
Christ. He was discovered the same night with a woman to the great
indignation of the people, and obliged to flee the country to escape
condign punishment.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[47.](#fr_47)  It is not difficult to conceive
the order of ideas that produced that passionate error of the fair sex
which is such a striking characteristic of old Catholic theology.
Celibacy was universally conceded as tire highest form of virtue, and in
order to make it acceptable theologians exhausted all the resources of
their eloquence in describing the iniquity of those whose charms had
rendered it so rare. Hence the long and fiery disquisitions on the
unparalleled malignity, the inconceivable subtlety, the frivolity, the
unfaithfulness, the unconquerable evil propensities of woman.
Lecky.--*Hist. European Morals*.

<span id="fn_page_74">p. 74</span>  

<span id="fn_48"></span>[48.](#fr_48)  The Fathers of the Church for the
most part, vie with each other in their depreciation of woman and
denouncing her with every vile epithet, held it a degradation for a
saint to touch even his aged mother with his hand in order to sustain
her feeble steps. \* \* \* For it declared woman unworthy through
inherent impurity even to set foot within the sanctuaries of its
temples; suffered her to exercise the function of wife and mother only
under the spell of a triple exorcism, and denied her when dead burial
within its more sacred precincts even though she was an abbess of
undoubted sanctity. Anna Kingsford.--*The Perfect Way*, p . 286.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[49.](#fr_49)  *Disease of the Cloisters*.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[50.](#fr_50)  When the sailors of Columbus
returned from the new world they brought with them a disease of an
unknown character, which speedily found its way into every part of
Europe. None were exempt; the king on his throne, the beggar in his
hovel, noble and peasant, priest and layman alike succumbed to the dire
influence which made Christendom one vast charnel house.

Of it, *Montesquieu* said: "It is now two centuries since a disease
unknown to our ancestors was first transplanted from the new world to
ours, and came to attack human nature in the very source of life and
pleasure. Most of the powerful families of the South of Europe were seen
to perish by a distemper that was grown too common to be ignominious,
and was considered in no other light than that of being fatal. *Works*,
I, 265.

<span id="fn_page_75">p. 75</span>  

<span id="fn_51"></span>[51.](#fr_51)  St. Ambrose and others believed
not that they (women) were human creatures like other people.
Luther.--*Familiar Discourses*, p. 383.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[52.](#fr_52)  When a woman is born it is a
deficit of nature and contrary to her intentions, as is the case when a
person is born blind or lame or with any natural defect, and as we
frequently see happens in fruit trees which never ripen. In like manner
a woman may be called a fortuitous animal and produced by accident.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[53.](#fr_53)  Cajetan, living from 1496 to
1534, became General of the Dominican Order and **afterwards** Cardinal.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[54.](#fr_54)  "The Father alone is creator."

<span id="fn_55"></span>[55.](#fr_55)  By decree of the Council of
Lyons, 1042, barons were allowed to enslave the children of married
clergy.--*Younge*.

<span id="fn_page_76">p. 76</span>  

<span id="fn_56"></span>[56.](#fr_56)  In 1108 priests were again
ordered to put away their wives. Such as kept them and presumptuously
celebrated mass were to be excommunicated. Even the company of their
wives was to be avoided, Monks and priests who for love of their wives
left their orders suffering excommunication, were again admitted after
forty days penance if afterwards forsaking them.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[57.](#fr_57)  Dulaure.--*Histoire de Paris*, I,
387, note.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[58.](#fr_58)  The abbot elect of St. Augustine,
at Canterbury, in 1171, was found on investigation to have seventeen
illegitimate children in a single village. An abbot of St. Pelayo, in
Spain, in 1130, was proved to have kept no less than seventy
mistresses.--*Hist. European Morals*, p. 350.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[59.](#fr_59)  A tax called "cullagium," which
was a license to clergymen to keep concubines, was during several years
systematically levied by princes.--*Ibid.* 2, 349.

<span id="fn_page_77">p. 77</span>  

<span id="fn_60"></span>[60.](#fr_60)  *Supplement to Lumires, 50th
question, Art. III*.

<span id="fn_page_78">p. 78</span>  

<span id="fn_61"></span>[61.](#fr_61)  St. Anselm, although very strict
in the enforcement of the canons favoring celibacy, found recalcitrant
priests in his own diocese whose course he characterized as "bestial
insanity."

<span id="fn_page_79">p. 79</span>  

<span id="fn_62"></span>[62.](#fr_62)  So says Bayle, author of the
*Historical and Critical Dictionary*, a magnificent work in many
volumes. Bayle was a man of whom it has justly been said his "profound
and varied knowledge not only did much to enlighten the age in which he
lived by pointing out the errors and supplying the deficiencies of
contemporaneous writers of the seventeenth century, but down to the
present time his work has preserved a repository of facts from which
scholars continually draw."

<span id="fn_63"></span>[63.](#fr_63)  Those who support celibacy would
perhaps choose rather to allow crimes than marriage, because they derive
considerable revenue by giving license to keep concubines. A certain
prelate boasted openly at his table that he had in his diocese 1,000
priests who kept concubines, and who paid him, each of them, a crown a
year for their license.--*Cornelius Aggrippa*.

<span id="fn_page_80">p. 80</span>  

<span id="fn_64"></span>[64.](#fr_64)  For years in Germany the word
Pufferkind signified "priest's bastard." *Montesquieu* declared celibacy
to be libertinism.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[65.](#fr_65)  *Amelot* (Abraham Nicholas), born
in Orleans 1134. declared the celibacy of the clergy to have been
established a law in order to prevent the alienation of the church
estate.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[66.](#fr_66)  Pope Pelaogius was unwilling to
establish the Bishop of Sagola in his see because he had a wife and
family, and only upon condition that wife and children should inherit
nothing at his death except what he then possessed, was he finally
confirmed. All else was to go into the coffers of the church.

<span id="fn_page_82">p. 82</span>  

<span id="fn_67"></span>[67.](#fr_67)  Cardinal Otto decreed that wives
and children of priests should have no benefit from the estate of the
husband and father; such estates should be vested in the church.

<span id="fn_page_83">p. 83</span>  

<span id="fn_68"></span>[68.](#fr_68)  In 1396 Charles VI. forbade that
the testimony of women should be received in any of the courts of his
kingdom.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[69.](#fr_69)  The council of Tivoli, in the
Soisonnais, 909, in which twelve bishops took part, promulgated a Canon
requiring the oath of seven witnesses to convict a priest with having
lived with a woman; if these failed of clearing him he could do so by
his own oath.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[70.](#fr_70)  Though the clergy now and then
made use both of the Justinian and Theodosian Codes, the former body of
law, as such, was notwithstanding from the reign of the Emperor
Justinian, or about the year of our Lord 560, till the beginning of the
12th century, or the year of Christ, 1230 or thereabouts, of no force in
the west in matter of government. Seldon.--*Dissertation on Fleta*, p.
112.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[71.](#fr_71)  The codification of the laws
under Justinian were largely due to his wife, the Empress Theodosia, who
having risen from the lowest condition in the empire, that of a circus
performer, to the throne of the East, proved herself capable in every
way of adorning that high position.

<span id="fn_page_84">p. 84</span>  

<span id="fn_72"></span>[72.](#fr_72)  By the Code Napoleon, all
research into paternity is forbidden. The Christian Church was swamped
by hysteria from the third to the sixteenth century. Canon Charles
Kingsley.--*Life and Letters*.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[73.](#fr_73)  Although under law the entire
property of the wife became that of the husband upon marriage.

<span id="fn_page_85">p. 85</span>  

<span id="fn_74"></span>[74.](#fr_74)  A treatise on Chastity,
attributed to Pope Sixtus III., barely admits that married people can
secure eternal life, though stating that the glory of heaven is not for
them.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[75.](#fr_75)  The Romish religion teaches that
if you omit to name anything in confession, however repugnant or
revolting to purity which you even doubt having committed, your
subsequent confessions are thus rendered null and sacrilegious.
Chiniquy.--*The Priest, the Woman and the Confessional*, p. 202. Study
the pages of the past history of England, France, Italy, Spain, etc.,
and you will see that the gravest and most reliable historians have
everywhere found instances of iniquity in the confessional box which
their order refused to trace. *Ibid*, p. 175.

It is a public fact which no learned Roman Catholic has ever denied that
auricular confession became a dogma and obligatory practice of the
church only at the Lateran Council, in the year 1215, under Pope
Innocent III. Not a single trace of auricular confession as a dogma can
be found before that year, *Ibid*, p. 239.

Auricular confession originated with the early heretics, especially with
Marcius. Bellarmin speaks of it as something to be practiced. But let us
hear what the contemporary writers have to say on this question:
"Certain women were in the habit of going to the heretic Marcius to
confess their sins to him. But as he was smitten with-their beauty, and
they loved him also, they abandoned themselves to sin with
him."--*Ibid*, p. 234.

<span id="fn_page_86">p. 86</span>  

<span id="fn_76"></span>[76.](#fr_76)  Disraeli, who is most excellent
authority, declared the early English edition of the Bible contained
6,000 errors, which were constantly introduced and passages interpolated
for sectarian purposes or to sustain new creeds; sometimes, indeed, they
were added for the purpose of destroying all scriptural authority by the
use of texts.

The revisers of the New Testament found 150,000 errors, interpolations,
additions and false translations in the King James or common version.

<span id="fn_page_87">p. 87</span>  

<span id="fn_78"></span>[78.](#fr_78)  The legal wife of a priest was
termed "An Unhallowed Thing," while mistresses and concubines were known
as "The Hallowed Ones," "The Honored Ones." In parts of France,
especially in Paris, the latter epithet was common as applied to a
priest's mistress.--*Michelet*.

<span id="fn_page_88">p. 88</span>  

<span id="fn_79"></span>[79.](#fr_79)  Heloise sacrificed herself on
account of the impediments the church threw in the way of the married
clergy's career of advancement. As his wife he would lose the ascending
ladder of ecclesiastical honors, priory, abbacy, bishopric,
metropolitane, cardinalate, and even that which was above and beyond
all. Milman,--*Latin Christianity*.

<span id="fn_page_90">p. 90</span>  

<span id="fn_80"></span>[80.](#fr_80)  In 1558 one Walter Mill was
indicted, one article of his accusation being his assertion of the
lawfulness of sacerdotal marriage. He was condemned to the stake and
burned. Taine,--*English Literature*.

<span id="fn_page_91">p. 91</span>  

<span id="fn_81"></span>[81.](#fr_81)  An old doctrine which often turns
up again in the middle ages. In the seventeenth century it prevailed
among the convents of France and Spain. Michelet.--*La Sorcerie*, p.
258.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[82.](#fr_82)  They made the vilest use of the
doctrine that Christ was born of a Virgin, using this as an example for
woman to be followed.--*Ibid*, p. 259.

<span id="fn_page_92">p. 92</span>  

<span id="fn_83"></span>[83.](#fr_83)  They must kill sin by being more
humble and lost to all sense of pride through sin. This was the Quietist
doctrine introduced by a Spanish priest, Molino, who claimed it as the
result of an inner light or illumination. He declared that "Only by dint
of sinning can sin be quelled."

<span id="fn_84"></span>[84.](#fr_84)  "Let not this surprise you,"
replied the abbot. "My sanctity is not the less on this account because
that abides in the soul, and what I now ask of you is only a sin of the
body. Do not refuse the grace heaven sends you."
Boccaccio.--*Decameron*.

<span id="fn_page_93">p. 93</span>  

<span id="fn_85"></span>[85.](#fr_85)  Taine.--*Eng. Lit.* I, 363.

<span id="fn_page_94">p. 94</span>  

<span id="fn_86"></span>[86.](#fr_86)  The unmarried state of the clergy
was in itself one of the chief causes of sexual excess. The enormously
numerous clergy became a perilous plague for female morality in town and
village. The peasants endeavored to preserve their wives and daughters
from clerical seduction by accepting no pastor who did not bind himself
to take a concubine. In all towns there were brothels belonging to the
municipality, to the sovereign, to the church, the proceeds of which
flowed into the treasury of proprietors.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[87.](#fr_87)  Draper.--*Intellectual
Development of Europe*, 498.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[88.](#fr_88)  Men in orders are sometimes
deceived by the devil that they marry unrighteously and foredo
themselves by the adulteries in which they continue. *Institutes of
Polity, Civil and Ecclesiastical*, 437.

There is ground for the assumption that the Canon which bound all the
active members of the church to perpetual celibacy, and thus created an
impenetrable barrier between them and the outer world, was one of the
efficient methods in creating and sustaining both the temporal and
spiritual power on the Romish Church. Taine.--*English Literature*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[89.](#fr_89)  All steps are necessary to make
up the ladder. The vices of men become steps in the ladder one by one as
they are remounted. The virtues of man are steps indeed, necessary not
by any means to be dispensed with, yet though they create a fair
atmosphere and a happy future, they are useless if they stand alone. The
whole nature of man must be used wisely by the one who desires to enter
the way. Seek it by plunging into the mysterious and glorious depth of
your inmost being. Seek it by testing all experience, by utilizing the
senses in order to understand the growth of meaning of individuality and
the beauty and obscurity of those other divine fragments which are
struggling side by side with you and from the race to which you
belong.--*Light on the Path*, Rule XX.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[90.](#fr_90)  "What in the world makes you look
so sullen?" asked the young man as he took his arm and they walked
towards the palace. "I am tormented with wicked thoughts," answered
Eugene gloomily. "What kind? They can easily be cured." "How?" "By
yielding to them." *Dialogue in Balsac's Pére Goriot*.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[91.](#fr_91)  *1st Corinthians* VII, 36.

<span id="fn_page_95">p. 95</span>  

<span id="fn_91"></span>[91.](#fr_91)  Lirabrock.--*History of the
Inquisition*.

<span id="fn_page_96">p. 96</span>  

<span id="fn_93"></span>[93.](#fr_93)  Carema reported that the parish
priest of Naples was not convicted though several women deposed that he
had seduced them. He was, however, tortured and suspended for a year
when he again entered his duties.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[94.](#fr_94)  Lea.--*Sacerdotal Celibacy*, p.
422.

The secrecy with which the Inquisition worked may be conjectured from
the fact. that during the whole time its officers were busy gathering
evidence upon which to condemn Galileo, his friends in Rome, none of
whom occupied high position in the church, not only did not suspect his
danger, but constantly wrote him in the most encouraging terms.

<span id="fn_page_97">p. 97</span>  

<span id="fn_95"></span>[95.](#fr_95)  The acts of the Metropolital
Visitation of the Archbishops of Wareham states that in the Diocese of
Bangor and St. Davids, in time of Henry VIII., more than eighty priests
were actually presented for incontinence.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[96.](#fr_96)  Against this separation the
bitter animosity of Pope Leo XIII. was seen in his refusal of the gifts
tendered him by the royal family of Italy at the time of his jubilee.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[97.](#fr_97)  And the summary was not brief.
Dwight.--*Roman Republic* in 1849, p. 115. Pope John XIII., having
appeared before the council to give an account of his conduct he was
proved by thirty-seven witnesses, the greater part of whom were bishop's
and priests, of having been guilty of fornication, adultery, incest,
sodomy, theft and murder. It was also proved by a legion of witnesses
that he had seduced and violated 300 nuns.--*The Priest, Woman and
Confessional*, p. 268. Henry III., bishop of Liege, was deposed in 1274
for having sixty-five illegitimate children. Lecky.--*Hist. European
Morals*, p. 350. This same bishop boasted at a public banquet that in
twenty two months fourteen children had been born to him. Ibid, Vol. 2,
p. 349. It was openly asserted that 100,000 women in England were made
dissolute by the clergy. Draper.--*Intellectual Development of Europe*.
p. 498.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[98.](#fr_98)  *Familiar Discourses* and other
works. In Rome are born such a multitude bastards that they are
constrained to build particular monasteries, where they are brought up
and the pope is named their father. When any great processions are held
in Rome, then the said bastards go all before, the pope.--*Familiar
Discourses*, 383.

After Pope Gregory confirmed celibacy he found 6,000 heads of infants in
a fish pond, which caused him to again favor the marriage of
priests.--*Ibid*. Bishop Metz, to my knowledge, hath lost the annual
revenue of 500 crowns, which he was wont to receive from the county for
pardoning of whoring and adultery. *Ibid*, 260.

<span id="fn_page_98">p. 98</span>  

<span id="fn_99"></span>[99.](#fr_99)  In 1874, an old Catholic priest
of Switzerland, about to follow Père Hyacinthe's example in abandoning
celibacy, announced his betrothal in the following manner: "I marry
because I wish to remain an honorable man. In the seventeenth century it
was a proverbial expression, 'As corrupt as a priest,' and this might be
said to-day. I marry, therefore, because I wish to get out of the
Ultramontane slough."--*Galignani's Messenger*, September 19, 1874.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[100.](#fr_100)  See *Biographical Sketch*.
\[Died January 16, 1899.\]

<span id="fn_page_99">p. 99</span>  

<span id="fn_101"></span>[101.](#fr_101)  pp. 86 to 140.

<span id="fn_page_100">p. 100</span>  

<span id="fn_102"></span>[102.](#fr_102)  To be found in *The Priest,
the Woman and the Confessional*.

<span id="fn_page_101">p. 101</span>  

<span id="fn_103"></span>[103.](#fr_103)  *Ibid*, p. 77-8.

<span id="fn_page_103">p. 103</span>  

<span id="fn_104"></span>[104.](#fr_104)  *Ibid*, p. 287

<span id="fn_page_104">p. 104</span>  

<span id="fn_105"></span>[105.](#fr_105)  A Shenandoah correspondent of
the Pittsburgh Commercial Advertiser, June 5. 1885, wrote:

SHENANDOAH, PA., June 5.--Father Wolonski, of this place, the only
priest of the Uniate Greek Church in this country, has been recalled to
Europe.

The Uniate Greek Church, it will be remembered, comprehends those
Christians who, while they follow the Greek rite, observe the general
discipline of the Greek Church and make use of the Greek liturgy, are
yet united with the Church of Rome, admitting the double procession of
the Spirit and the supremacy of the Roman Pontiff, and accepting all the
doctrinal decisions subsequent to the Greek schism which have force as
articles of faith in the Roman Church. The usage of the Church as to the
law of celibacy is, with the consent of the Roman Pontiff, the same as
among the other Greeks, and Father Wolonski brought a wife with him to
Shenandoah when he came here last December. This fact has made both the
priest and his religion, subjects of great importance here, and the
attention they have received has resulted in his recall to Limberg,
Austria, the see of the diocese from which he was transferred here.

FATHER WOLONSKI AND THE ARCHBISHOP.

When Father Wolonski arrived in Philadelphia he visited the Cathedral
and sought an interview with Archbishop Ryan, but when that gentleman
discovered that he was married he refused to treat with him. The priest
then came to Shenandoah, as directed by Bishop Sembratowicz, of Limberg,
who sent him on his mission. Father O'Reilly, of the Irish Catholic
Church, warned his congregation, under pain of excommunication, to shun
the church and priest, at the same time tacitly denying that the Roman
Church recognized the right of any priest to marry. The matter led to
great controversy, during which Father Wolonski established his
congregation, and arrangements have been made for the erection of a
church. To avoid further trouble, however, the Bishop of Limberg has
selected and sent an unmarried priest to succeed him, and Father
Wolonski will return to Austria. Father Wolonski is an intelligent and
highly-educated gentleman, and has made a large number of friends during
the few months he has been here. He speaks several languages, and during
his stay here acquired a remarkable knowledge of English. He has worked
incessantly since his arrival here for the temporal as well as the
spiritual comfort of his people, and has made a large circle of
acquaintances, who will regret his departure from the town.

<span id="fn_page_107">p. 107</span>  

<span id="fn_106"></span>[106.](#fr_106)  And yet the world "does move,"
and the experience of the church is much that of the big elephant jumbo,
who in opposing his vast form to a train of cars met his death at the
engine.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[107.](#fr_107)  The Chili mantas and skirts of
white flannel are worn by penitentes, or women who have committed some
heinous sin and thus advertise their penitence; or those who have taken
some holy vow to get a measure nearer heaven, and go about the street
with downcast eyes, looking at nothing and recognizing no one. They
hover about the churches, and sit for hours crouched before some saint
or crucifix, saying prayers and atoning for their sin. In the great
Cathedral at Santiago, and in the smaller churches everywhere, these
penitentes, in their snow-white garments, are always to be seen, on
their knees, or posing in other uncomfortable postures, and looking for
all the world like statues carved in marble. In the Santiago Cathedral
they cluster in large groups around the confessionals, waiting to
receive absolution from some fat and burly father, that they may rid
their bodies of the mark of penitence they carry and their souls of sin.
Some of them make vows, or are sentenced by their confessors to wear
their white shrouds for a certain time, while others assume them
voluntarily until they have assurance from their priest that their sin
is atoned for. Ladies of the highest social position and great wealth
are commonly found among the penitentes, as well as young girls of
beauty and winning grace. Even the wives of merchants and bankers wander
about the streets with all but their eyes covered with this white
mantle, which gives notice to the world that they have sinned. The women
of Chili are as pious as the men are proud, and this method of securing
absolution is quite fashionable.

Those souls that cannot be purged by this penitential dress retire to a
convent in the outskirts of the city called the Convent of the
Penitents, where they scourge themselves with whips, mortify the flesh
with sackcloth, sleep in ashes and upon stone floors, and feed
themselves on mouldy crusts, Some stay longer and some a less time in
these houses of correction, until the priests by whose advice they go
there, give them absolution; but it is seldom that the inmates are men.
They are usually women who have been unfaithful to their marriage vows,
or girls who have yielded to temptation. After the society season, after
the carnival, at the end of the summer when people return from the
fashionable resorts, and at the beginning of lent these places are full,
and throngs of carriages surround them, waiting to bear back to their
homes the belles who are sent here and can find no room to remain.

For those whose sins have been too great to be washed out by this
process, for those whose shame has been published to the world and are
unfitted under social laws to associate with the pure, other convents
are open, established purposely all a refuge or House of Detention.
Young mothers without husbands are here cared for, and their babes are
taken to an orphan asylum in the neighborhood to be reared by the nuns
for the priesthood and other religious orders. it is the practice for
parents to send wayward daughters to these homes, while society is given
to understand that they are elsewhere visiting friends or finishing
their education, After a time they return to their families and no
questions are asked.

<span id="fn_page_110">p. 110</span>  

<span id="fn_108"></span>[108.](#fr_108)  Too long have the people out
of respect for the church, maintained silence in the presence of gross
abuses, while their families have been ruined. I am a husband and a
father, and I do not wish the honor of my name and my family to be at
the mercy of a wolf who may introduce himself with the viaticum in his
hands, I am a father, and I do not wish that the sacred candor of my
child should be exposed to the lecherous attempts of a wretch in a
soutane. The religious authorities are on the eve of witnessing honest
men follow their wives, their daughters, and even their little boys to
the confessional, to assure themselves if the hand that holds there the
balance of divine justice is the hand of a respectable man or the hand
of a blackguard who should receive the lash in public with his neck in
the pillory.--*Letter from a gentleman*.

A recent article in the Canada "Review" asks if after giving to the
clergy riches, respect and the highest positions, it is too much to ask
that they should leave to the people their wives? Our wives and
daughters whom they steal from us by the aid of religion, and more
especially of the confessional. An immediate, firm and vigorous reform
is needed. Our wives and daughters must be left alone. Let the clergy
keep away from the women, and religion and the Catholics will be better
off. This must be done and at once.--*Montreal Correspondence of the
Toronto Mail*, September 15, 1897.
