[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wcs08)  [Next](wcs10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

# CHAPTER VII.

### POLYGAMY.

    It is of indisputed historic record that both the Christian Church
and the Christian State in different centuries and under a number of
differing circumstances gave their influence in favor of polygamy. The
Roman emperor, Valentinian I., in the fourth century, authorized
christians to take two wives; in the eighth century the great
Charlemagne holding power over both church and state, in his own person
practiced polygamy, having six, or according to some authorities, nine
wives. With the Reformation this system entered Protestantism. As the
first synod in North America was called for the purpose of trying a
woman for heresy, so the first synod of the reformation was assembled
for the purpose of sustaining polygamy, thus farther debasing woman in
the marital relation. The great German reformer, Luther, although
perhaps himself free from the lasciviousness of the old priesthood was
not strictly monogamic in principle. When applied to by Philip,
Landgrave of Hesse Cassel, for permission to marry a second wife while
his first wife, Margaret of Savoy, was still living, he called together
a synod of six of the principal reformers--Melancthon and Bucer among
them--who in joint consultation decided "that as the Bible nowhere
condemns polygamy, and as it has been invariably practiced by the
highest dignitaries of the church," such marriage was

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

legitimate, and the required permission was given. Luther himself with
both the Old and the New Testaments in hand, saying, "I confess for my
part that if a man wishes to marry two or more wives, I cannot forbid
him, nor is his conduct ant to the Holy Scriptures." Thus we have the
degrading proof that the doctrine of polygamy was brought into
reformation by its earliest promoters under assertion that it was not
inconsistent with the Bible or the principles of the Gospel. The whole
course of Luther during the reformation proved his disbelief in the
equality of women with man; when he left the Catholic church he took
with him the old theory of her created subordination. It was his maxim
that "No gown or garment worse becomes a woman than that she will be
wise," thus giving the weight of his influence against woman's
intellectual freedom and independent thought. Although he opposed
monastic life, the home for woman under the reformation was governed by
many of its rules.

    First: She was to be under obedience to man as head of the house.

    Second: She was to be constantly employed for his benefit.

    Third: Her society was strictly chosen for her by this master and
head.

    Fourth: This "head" was a general-father confessor, to whom she was
held accountable in word and deed.

    Fifth: Neither genius nor talent could free her from his control
without his consent.

    Luther's views regarding polygamy have been endorsed and sanctioned
since that period by men eminent in church and state. Lord Seldon known
as "The Light of England" in the seventeenth century, published a work
under title of "Uxor Hæbraica" for the

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

purpose of proving that polygamy was permitted to the Hebrews. His
arguments were accepted by the church as indisputable. Bishop Burnet,
who while holding the great Protestant Episcopal See of Salisbury, so
successfully opposed the plan inaugurated by Queen Anne for the
**establishment** of a woman's college in England, added to his infamy
by writing a tract entitled "Is a Plurality of Wives in any case Lawful
under the Gospel?" This question he answered in the affirmative
sustaining the rightfulness of polygamy under the Christian
dispensation. Quoting the words of Christ upon divorce, he said:

    We must not by a consequence condemn a plurality of wives since it
seems not to have fallen within the scope of what our Lord does there
disapprove. Therefore I see nothing so strong against a plurality of
wives as to balance the great and visible imminent hazards that hang
over so many thousands if it be not allowed.

    The famous Puritan Poet of England, John Milton, known in the
University as "The Lady of Christ College," writing upon "The Special
Government of Man," says:

    I have not said the marriage of one man with one woman lest I should
by implication charge the holy patriarchs and pillars of our faith,
Abraham and others who had more than one wife, at the same time, with
habitual sin; and lest I should be forced to exclude from the sanctuary
of God as spurious, the whole offspring which sprang from them, yea, the
whole of the sons of Israel, for whom the sanctuary itself was made. For
it is said in Deuteronomy (xxii. 2,) "A bastard shall not enter into the
congregation of Jehovah even to the tenth generation." Either, therefore
polygamy is a true marriage, or all children born in that state are
spurious, which would include the whole race of Jacob, the twelve tribes
chosen by God. But as such an assertion would be absurd in the extreme,

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

not to say impious, and as it is the height of injustice as well as an
example of the most dangerous tendency in religion, to account as sins
what is not such in reality it appears to me that so far from the
question respecting the lawfulness of **polygamy** being trivial, it is
of the highest importance that it should be decided. Not a trace appears
of the interdiction of polygamy throughout the whole law, not even in
any of the prophets.

    The Paradise Lost of Milton is responsible among English speaking
people for many existing views that are inimical to woman, and while his
essays upon liberty have been of general beneficial influence upon the
world, his particular teachings in regard to woman have seriously
injured civilization. This man of polygamous beliefs, this tyrant over
his own household who could not gain the love of either wives--of whom
he had three--or of daughters, did much to popularize the idea of
woman's subordination to man. "He for God; she for God in him" as
expressed by the lips of Eve and so often quoted as proclaiming the true
relationship between husband and wife in the line, "God thy law; thou
mine." While the record of Milton's life shows him to have been an
intolerable domestic tyrant, yet for the wife who could not live with
him, the daughters whom social conditions and lack of education deprived
of the necessary means for their support, thus compelling them to remain
his victims looking forward to his death as their only means of release,
the world has as yet exhibited but little sympathy. His genius,
undisputed as its record must be in many directions, has made his views
of overpowering influence upon the world since his day. But above all,
more than all that created and sustained this influence were his views
as to the polygamous rights of

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

man, his depictment of Eve as looking upward to Adam as her God, and his
general maintenance of the teaching of the church in regard to woman.
Although it has been affirmed that after his blindness he dictated his
great epic to his daughter and a Scotch artist has painted a scene (a
picture owned by the Lenox Library), yet this is one of the myths men
call history and amuse themselves in believing. Voltaire declared
history to be only a parcel of tricks we play with the dead; and this
tale of blind Milton dictating Paradise Lost to his daughters is a trick
designed to play upon our sympathies. Old Dr. Johnson is authority for
the statement that Milton would not allow his daughters to learn to
write and it is quite certain that he did not permit them a knowledge of
any language except the English, saying "one tongue is enough for a
woman." Between Milton. and his family it is known there was tyranny
upon one side, hatred upon the other.<span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md)

    The number of eminent Protestants both lay and clerical who have
sanctioned polygamy has not been

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

small. In the sixteenth century a former Capuchin monk, a general of
that order who had been converted to the Protestant faith, published a
work entitled "Dialogues in favor of Polygamy." In the latter part of
the seventeenth century, John Lyser, another divine of the reformed
church strongly defended it in a work entitled "Polygamia Triumphatrix"
or the triumphant defense of polygamy. Rev. Dr. Madden, still another
Protestant divine, in a treatise called "Thalypthora," maintained that
Paul's injunction that bishops should be the husbands of one wife,
signified that laymen were permitted to marry more than one. The
scholarly William Ellery Channing could find no prohibition of polygamy
in the New Testament. In his "Remarks on the Character and Writings of
John Milton" he says, "We believe it to be an indisputable fact that
although Christianity was first preached in Asia which had been from the
earliest days the seat of polygamy, the apostles never denounced it as a
crime and never required their converts to put away all wives but one.
No express prohibition of polygamy is found in the New Testament." That
eminent American divine, Henry Ward Beecher, the influence of whose
opinions over all classes was for many years so great as to constitute
him a veritable Protestant pope in the United States, a few years before
his death was selected to reply at a New England dinner to a toast upon
the Mormon question, the subject of polygamy then being under discussion
by Congress. He not only deprecated the use of force in its suppression,
but quoted Milton in seeming approval. We can therefore consistently
rank Mr. Beecher as among the number of Protestant divines who believed
there was scriptural warrant for this degradation of woman.

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

    But it is not alone to the action of Christian monarchs or the
opinion of jurists and ministers that we must solely look, but also to
the action of the church as a body during different periods of its
history. In the year 1846, the question of polygamy came up before the
American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions in the United
States. Through a committee, of which the eminent Chancellor Walworth,
of New York, was chairman, this body reported against instructing
missionaries to exclude polygamists from the church. This report was.
adopted without a dissenting voice.<span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md)
This discussion brought out some interesting facts having especial
bearing upon the views of those churches which numbered polygamists
among their communicants. It was shown that the secretaries of the board
appeared to consider the existence of polygamy in the churches as so
entirely a frivolous question that even after it was especially brought
to their notice they forbore to make inquiries, and even when
polygamists had actually been admitted into the Mission churches, no
taint of disapproval had been made by the Prudential Committee.<span
id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3.md) The whole subject was left to the decision
of the missionaries themselves, one of whom published his views in the
"Boston Recorder." After prevising that the Bible was their rule of
faith, he asks:

    Is it not evident from Paul's instruction respecting the
qualifications of a bishop, viz., that he "should be the husband of one
wife" that polygamy was permitted in the primitive church under the
apostles, and that too in circumstances precisely similar to those in
which churches are gathered among the heathen at the present day. If so,
why should a different standard be set up than that set up by the
apostles?"

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

    That polygamy is not regarded as contrary to the principles of
Christianity was again most forcibly shown in its endorsement by
missionaries located in those countries where this custom prevails. One
of the most notable instances of recent church action in recognizing
polygamy as sustained by Christianity, occurred a few years since in
Calcutta during a Conference upon the question. This body was convened
by the missionaries of England and America located in India. Its
immediate cause was the application of Indian converts, the husbands of
several wives, for admission to the church. A missionary conference of
the several Christian denominations was therefore called for the purpose
of deciding upon this grave request. It included representatives of the
Episcopal, Baptist, Presbyterian and Congregationalist churches. Taking
the Bible as authority full consideration was given to the subject.
Quotations from that "holy book" proved to the satisfaction of the
conference that not alone did the Bible favor polygamy, but that God
himself endorsed, regulated and sustained the institution. In addition
it was declared that these converted polygamists "had given credible
evidence of their personal piety." The conference therefore unanimously
rendered favorable decision for retention of the polygamous members
within the respective churches to which they belonged, upon the ground
that as both the Jews and the early Christians had practiced polygamy,
it was allowable to the new converts.

    If a convert before becoming a Christian, has married more wives
than one, in accordance with the practice of the Jewish and primitive
Christian churches, he shall be permitted to keep them all.

    Yet apparently as a concession to the somewhat altruistic
civilization of the present age, which outside

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

of the church does not look upon polygamous marriages with favor, such
persons were declared ineligible to any office in the church. Rev. David
O. Allen, D. D., missionary of the American Board in India for
twenty-five years and from whose report of the action of the missionary
conference the above facts were gained, said:

    If polygamy was unlawful, then Leah was the only wife of Jacob and
none but her children were legitimate. Rachel as well as Bilhah and
Zilpah were merely mistresses and their children, six in number, were
bastards, the offspring of adulterous connection. And yet there is no
intimation of any such views and feelings in Laban's family, or in
Jacob's family or in Jewish history. Bilhah and Zilpah are called
Jacob's wives (Genesis xxxvii: 2.). God honored the sons of Rachael,
Bilhah and Zilpah equally with the sons of Leah, made them patriarchs of
seven of the tribes of the nation and gave them equal inheritances in
Canaan.

    Thus the endorsement of polygamy as not contrary to the Bible, or to
Christianity, is shown by action of Christian churches both in the
United States and India within the present century; and we can readily
understand why a gentleman from the New England states traveling in Utah
said: "Mormonism seems a very devout sect of the Christian church,
differing but little from the great body of Christian people.<span
id="fr_4"></span>[4](#fn_4.md)" Nor is this judgment at all strange as we
find polygamy endorsed by the majority of Christian sects. Nor can we be
surprised that the Mormons of Utah and the adjoining states should look
upon the opposition of the United States to their practice of polygamy,
as an unjust interference with an established custom of the Christian

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

church, recognized and indorsed through the ages, as not alone part of
the Jewish and early christian practice, but permitted as allowable at
the present day. President Eliot, of Harvard, speaking in Salt Lake
City, compared the Mormons to the Puritans, thus throwing the weight of
his statement as to the harmony between Mormonism and other christian
sects.

    The Rochester, N. Y., "Herald," in forgetfulness of early puritan
history, says "It would be interesting to know from what point of view
President Eliot took his observation," and refers to "Mormon Contempt
and debasement of Womanhood; Mormon discouragement of intelligence and
education among its dupes and victims," etc. The "Herald" has apparently
forgotten the trial of women for heresy by the Puritans; their
imprisonment, heavily ironed in airless jails, for the crime of
religious free thought; the flogging of naked women on Boston Common by
the Puritans for free speech and their being executed as witches, in the
Puritan colony of Massachusetts. The "Herald" has apparently forgotten
that although the first money given for the foundation of Harvard itself
was by a woman, her sex, "dupe and victim," is still denied the full
advantage of education in that institution. It forgets that although the
first plot of ground for a free school in the Puritan colony of
Massachusetts was given by a woman, girls were denied education even in
common schools until it became necessary to permit their attendance
during the summer months while the boys were engaged in fishing, in
order to retain possession of school moneys. The "Herald" seems unaware
of the vigorous letter of Mrs. Hannah Adams, wife of the second
president of the United States, to her husband,

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

    John Adams, when he was a member of the first Congress, in reference
to the need of education for women. Should the "Herald" pursue its
investigations still farther, it will find the Puritans connected with
the most serious "crimes" against humanity; it will discover priestly
and governmental "usurpation," Puritan "fanaticism and bigotry;" even
Puritan "disloyalty." When President Eliott favorably compared the
Christian Puritans and the Christian Mormons, he spoke both as a close
reader of Puritan history and a close observer of Mormon history; his
declaration of their similarity to each other cannot be denied by the
candid historian. Building upon the: same common foundation,
acknowledging the same common origin, the doctrines of the two systems
necessarily bear close resemblance to each other.<span
id="fr_5"></span>[5](#fn_5.md) Under the Christian theory regarding woman,
her origin and her duties, it should not be regarded as at all strange
that polygamy should find defenders in the christian world. Nor is it to
be looked upon as at all as surprising that the Mormons, the most recent
Protestant sect, should teach polygamy as a divinely organized
institution, nor that their arguments in its favor should be drawn from
the Bible and not from the book of Mormon. That polygamy was not an
original Mormon tenet is well known; it was derived from a professed
revelation to Joseph Smith, sustained by biblical authority. The
polygamous Mahommedans regard Christ as a prophet, the same as the
Mormons respect the authority of the Bible. The Mormon marriage formula

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

directs the man to look to God, but enjoins the woman to look toward her
husband as God, rendering him the same unquestioning obedience that has
been demanded from all Christian wives through the ages; the priest, as
customary with the hierarchal class, declaring himself endowed with an
authority from on high to bind or to loose on earth, seals the union of
the pair for time and eternity. Although the marriage ceremony of the
Mormon church is more complex, in many respects it parallels that of the
Presbyterians of Scotland during the early day of the Reformation,
authority for woman's degradation in each case being derived from the
Bible, the language in each instance being unfit for publication.<span
id="fr_6"></span>[6](#fn_6.md)

    An epistle of the First Presidency to the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter Day Saints, in General Conference, said:

    "The Gospel of the Son of God, brings life and immortality to
light." We believe in Jerusalems, such as the one which John saw when
banished as a slave to the Isle of Patmos because of his religion, where
promises made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are to be fulfilled; "which
had a wall great and high, and had twelve gates. and at the gates twelve
angels"--and the twelve gates were twelve pearls; every several gate was
one pearl." Its walls were of jasper, its streets and the city were pure
gold. The foundations of the wall were garnished with all manner of
precious stones, and the glory of God did lighten it, "and the Lamb is
the light thereof." Its pearly gates had written upon them the names of
the twelve tribes of the children of Israel and the foundations of its
walls, "the names of the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb."

    "The throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it, and His servants
shall serve Him; and they shall see

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

His face; and His name shall be in their foreheads. The porters of its
gates were angels and its light the glory of God." What was written on
those pearly gates? The names of the twelve tribes of Israel. Who was
Israel? Jacob. From whom did the twelve tribes descend? From Jacob. What
were their names? The names of the sons of Jacob, which he had by four
wives. Jacob, then, was a polygamist? Yes; he was one of those
barbarians of which the judge of the Third judicial District says:
"These practices might have been proper in a barbarous and primitive
time--in crude times--but they won't do now. Civilization has thrown
them away. It won't do to gather up these old customs and practices out
of the by-gone barbarism and by-gone ages, and attempt to palm them upon
a free and intelligent and civilized people in these days."

How free the people are in Utah to-day needs no discussion. If the judge
cannot stand these things it would seem God and the Lamb can, for He is
the light of the city, on the gates of which are written the names of
twelve men, the sons of one man by four women--a polygamist. Had Jacob
lived now, the judges would have sent spies, spotters and deputy
marshals after him, and if caught would have sent him to the
penitentiary.

    This epistle boldly challenges christian belief in the New Jerusalem
as based upon polygamy; upon its gates the names of twelve polygamous
children are inscribed, sons of one man, children of four mothers, two
wives and two concubines. Of Solomon, this epistle could likewise have
spoken, whom the Bible represents as the wisest man that lived; his
wives numbering three hundred, his concubines seven hundred. Nor are
Jacob and Solomon two isolated **instance** of Jewish polygamy; Mormons,
in common with the lay and clerical authorities previously referred to,
find abundant proof for their sanction of

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

polygamy both in the revelations of the Old and the New Testaments. But
each human being entering the world is a revelation to himself, to
herself, and the revelation inherently abiding in all women, declares
against such degradation of herself and her sex.

    Brigham Young, the first Mormon president, husband of nineteen
wives, father of forty-two children, possessed great natural
fascination; was a man of wonderful magnetism. Of him a daughter said:
"his slightest touch was a caress." His seventh wife, an elegant and
fashionable woman, was said by her daughter to worship the ground that
he walked upon and never to have been herself since his death. From this
favorite daughter of Young who after his death apostatized from the
Mormon religion, much has been learned in regard to the real feeling of
these polygamous wives toward each other, which she characterized as "an
outward semblance of good will, but in reality a condition of deadly
hatred." Such outward semblance of good will, such real condition of
deadly hatred is the result of all forms of religion which subjugate the
many to the caprice of the few, even though done under assumption of
divine authority. That envy, jealousy and hatred should be among the
dire results of woman's religious degradation, cannot be a subject of
surprise to the student of human nature; and it is supreme proof of the
bondage of the human will under fancied authority from God, that such
minds as those of Luther, Milton, Seldon, Beecher, Walworth and others
like them should uphold a system so degrading in character alike to the
men and the women who practice it. Young's daughter Dora with five of
her sister's, was expelled a few years since from the Mormon church for
having gone to law with

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

certain of the Mormon brethren who attempted to rob them of their
patrimony. The elders realizing the injury these women might do for the
church, sent a couple of teachers to interview Dora, invoking her
father's name to influence her dropping the suit<span
id="fr_7"></span>[7](#fn_7.md) and return to the church. Dora had been
aroused by a sense of the iniquity of the church, through hearing its
elders declare upon oath that they knew nothing of polygamous marriage
ceremonies being performed, while the same day of this denial no less
than fourteen such marriages had taken place at the Endowment House.
Referring to the conscientious belief held by many women of the
necessity of polygamous marriage in order to secure the sanctification
requisite for their salvation, Dora said:

    Since my eyes have been opened I sometimes ask myself how I could
ever possibly have regarded the horrible and licentious practices of
which I was aware, and the terrible things I have witnessed with
anything but horror? And yet I was brought up to consider these things
right and I thought nothing about them-just as I suppose children
brought up where human sacrifices are offered, learn to regard such
sacrifice as right and to look upon them with indifference.

    Experience taught Dora that the natural character of the human mind
soon accommodates itself to circumstances, becomes in accord with its
environment, and

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

regards as right whatever law or custom teaches is right. This, called
the conservative tendency of the human mind, is merely the result of
habitude of thought induced by authoritative teaching. Both church and
state have availed themselves of the influence of authoritative custom
for the perpetuation of power In this way despotism has gained its chief
victories. The beliefs to which persons have been habituated from
childhood, are, without investigation, deemed truths by the majority of
the world. No step so great in its far-reaching results as that of
independent thought; none so greatly feared by priestly and civil power;
and among women during the Christian ages, none has met with such swift
rebuke, no sin has been characterized as its equal in malignancy.
Therefore while the world has possessed full knowledge of man's opinions
regarding polygamy, not until the present century and in the United
States have the views of women been attainable. Until the present age
there has been no escape from bondage for the polygamous wife, no
opportunity for learning its effects upon her own inner self. From the
daughter of its chief prophet, the man whose fame in connection with
polygamy has gone throughout the world, we have learned something of its
evils as seen and felt by woman. Yet other and still stronger testimony
is not lacking. A private letter written in Salt Lake City a few years
since, published in the "Boston Transcript" under head of "The Silent
Woes of Mormonism" depicts one phase in its influence upon the unborn.

    "A few years ago an educated young journalist came to Salt Lake City
from Europe with his young wife. Both became sincere believers in
Mormonism. Then strong pressure was brought to bear by the priesthood
upon the husband to force him into polygamy. The

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

wife finding opposition in vain, at last gave her nominal consent. A
second bride was brought into the house. In a short time the first wife
became a mother, but the infant never cried aloud. It came voiceless
into the world. But it wept in secret all the time. Sleeping or waking
the tears flowed from its closed eyes, and in a few weeks it died. The
mother said that it died of a broken heart. Every day of its life it
shed the tears that its mother had repressed before its birth."

    The experience of Caroline Owens, whose suit for bigamy against, her
polygamous **husband**, John D. Miles, appealed from the Supreme Court
of Utah to the Supreme Court of the United States-a suit implicating
Delegate Cannon, of the Congress of the United States, in its tale of
wrong, presents another phase. Miss Owens was an English girl acquainted
with Miles from her childhood. He had emigrated to Utah, but in England
on a visit he urged her to return with him, **promising** her marriage
when they reached Salt Lake City. She questioned him as to polygamy. He
replied that a few old men were allowed more than one wife, but that
young men like himself had but one, although he spoke of one Emily
Spencer who had expressed affection for him but whom he had no intention
of marrying. Upon reaching Salt Lake City, Miss Owens staid at the house
of United States Delegate George Q. Cannon, where but one wife resided.
When the day of the wedding arrived she went through the ceremonies of
the Endowment House, lasting from ten o'clock in the morning until three
in the afternoon, and had been wedded to John D. Miles. She says:

    "I can never tell the horrors of the next few hours. Before that day
was over my love had turned to burning hatred. When we started to go
home, Miles told

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

me that he had invited Emily Spencer to our wedding reception. I said if
she came to the house I should leave. He replied he was now master. I
went to my room and dressed for the reception, which took place at
Cannon's other house, where he kept his three wives. When I went down
there was a crowd there, among the rest a plain looking girl in a calico
dress, to whom I was introduced. It was Emily Spencer. I did not speak
to her. After a while they wanted to dance, and asked me to play. Emily
Spencer sat on a piano stool. I told her to get up. Miles came forward
and said, 'Sit still, Emily Spencer, my wife.' I felt as though I had
been shot. I said, 'Your wife! then what am I?' He said, 'You are both
my wives.' All at once my shame flashed over me. Here I was dishonored,
the polygamous wife of a Mormon. I ran out of the house, bent only on
escape, I did not think where; I could not do it, though, for Miles and
young Cannon, a son of the delegate, ran after me and dragged me back.
We had been intending to stay in that house all night, but I stole away
and returned to the other house, where I had been living the three weeks
since my arrival from England. I noticed there was no key in the lock,
but shot a little bolt and piled up chairs against the door. I cried
myself to sleep. The next thing I knew I don't know what time it was,
Miles stood in the room and was locking the door on the inside. I
screamed, because Mrs. Cannon and Miles' step-mother had been living in
the house with me. Miles said I need not take on, for brother Cannon had
anticipated that I would make trouble and had had the house cleared of
every one else. I found out that it was so. He told me that I might as
well submit; there was no law here to control the saints; there was no
power on earth that would save me."

    She was subjected to great brutality, again and again beaten and
exhorted to bear her condition patiently as a sister to be exalted;
because of her rebellious spirit she was hectored and threatened,
stoned, jeered at and abused in many ways, all under pretense

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

of religion, until after three weeks of such matrimonial life she
escaped and among the "Gentiles" found rest and help. She speaks of
polygamous wives as half-clad, poorly fed, toiling like serfs without
hope under the chains of a religious despotism.<span
id="fr_8"></span>[8](#fn_8.md) Mormon polygamy possesses the peculiar
feature of tracing the system of plural marriage to the gods; a father
and mother god and goddess; a grandfather a grandmother god and goddess,
and thus in constantly ascending scale; from these they claim the origin
of their own polygamous system. Every Mormon man, however depraved, is
taught that if he lives up to the plural marriage system, upon his death
he will become a god holding power and procreating children to all
eternity. But should any Mormon, however pure his life, die unmarried,
he has forever lost his opportunity of becoming a god, but remains
simply an angel, a servant of the polygamous gods.<span
id="fr_9"></span>[9](#fn_9.md) The belief is inculcated in woman, that to
her marriage is even more necessary than to man. Without marriage there
is no resurrection for her, and thus believing polygamy a requisite for
eternal salvation, thousands silently endure the woes of this condition.
This latest christian sect, this final outgrowth of centuries of
barbarous teaching, is the most determined effort against the integrity
of womanhood since the days of the Jewish

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

patriarchs. The duty of giving birth to numerous children in order to
save waiting spirits and to swell the glory of the polygamous father in
his after death godship, is as thoroughly taught as when in mediæval
days monk and priest preached woman's duty to constantly add numbers to
the church. The late Helen H. Jackson who had thoroughly investigated
the Mormon question, writing of polygamy in the "Century," said:

    "The doctrine, to be completely studied, must be considered both
from the man's point of view and the woman's, the two being, for many
reasons, not identical. But it is the woman's view of it, her belief and
position in regard to it, which are most misrepresented and
misunderstood by the world. If the truth were known, there would be few
persons in whose minds would be any sentiment except profound pity for
the Mormon woman--pity, moreover, intensified by admiration. There has
never been a class or sect of women since the world began who have
endured for religion's sake a tithe of what has been, and is, and
forever must be, endured by the women of the Mormon church. It has
become customary to hold them as disreputable women, light and loose,
unfit to associate with the virtuous, undeserving of any esteem. Never
was greater injustice committed.

    "The two doctrines which most help the Mormon woman to endure the
suffering of living in plural marriage are the doctrines of
pre-existence and of the eternal cont nuance of the patriarchal order.
The mere revelation from Joseph Smith, to the effect that polygamy was
to be permitted and was praiseworthy and desirable, would never, alone,
have brought the Mormon women to hearty acceptance of the institution.

    "They are taught and most unquestioningly believe that the universe
is full of spirits waiting, and waiting impatiently, to he born on this
earth These spirits have already passed through one stage of discipline

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

and probation and are to enter upon a second one here. The Rev. Edward
Beecher once published a book setting forth a similar doctrine. The
Mormon doctrine goes farther than Dr. Beecher's, inasmuch as it teaches
that these spirits may select of their own free will where and how they
will be born into their earthly probation; and that they are, one and
all, anxious to be born in the Mormon church, as the one true Zion,
where alone are to be found safety and salvation. They also believe that
the time is limited during which these spirits can avail themselves of
this privilege of being born into Zion. They look for the return of
Jesus Christ to the earth before long and for the establishment then of
the millennial dispensation, after which no more of the spirits can be
reborn and reclaimed. Hence the obligation resting upon every faithful
Mormon woman to bring into the world, in the course of her life, as many
children as possible. Not only does she thus contribute to the building
up and strengthening of the true church but she rescues souls already
existing and in danger of eternal death. It is easy to sneer at this
doctrine as inconceivable rubbish; and, in truth, it must be admitted
that it is hard to conceive of an educated mind receiving it; but it is
no more absurd or unprovable than hundreds of kindred speculations and
notions which have been devised, preached and passionately believed in
times past. Neither has the absurdity or non-absurdity, falsity or truth
of the belief, anything to do with our judgment of its believers."

    In furtherance of its plan for temporal power, the astuteness of the
Mormon theocracy is shown in this doctrine of pre-existent spirits<span
id="fr_10"></span>[10](#fn_10.md) continually waiting birth upon the earth.
This together with its other theory of the superior power and godhood in
a future life, of the father of numerous children, imposes the condition
of continual motherhood upon Mormon wives.

    But during the Christian ages this theory of woman's

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

duty to constantly bear children in order to the upholding of the church
has ever been taught. Even Philip Melancthon, the great associate of
Luther in the Reformation, saying: "If a woman becomes weary of bearing
children, that matters not. Let her only die from bearing, she is there
to do it." So little does the church yet understand the right of woman
to an existence for herself alone that not five years have passed since
a minister of the Methodist church in the state of New York publicly
declared he saw no reason for woman's creation but the bearing of
children. In a lecture upon Mormonism in Boston, Prof. Conyear, of the
Salt Lake City Collegiate Institute, speaking of the sufferings endured
by Mormon women in order thus to secure personal salvation, said:

    "Hate the system as you hate Satan, but have mercy on the people who
are there in such a bondage--a bondage worse than that in which the
negro in the South was ever held."

    But these doctrines accepted as truth by devout Mormon women are not
more degrading to them, not more injurious to civilization, than is the
belief of orthodox christian women in regard to the frailty and primal
sin of her sex and the curse of her Creator upon her in consequence. To
this belief she has been trained from her childhood as her mother before
her and her feminine relatives for innumerable centuries, and without
investigation she has accepted these doctrines of the church as true.
Yet all these theories so degrading to woman are of purely human
masculine origin, their object, power for man, and the subordination of
woman to him in every relation of life. The eternal continuance of the
patriarchal order, a doctrine of the Mormons, is paralleled among
orthodox christians by the teaching of an eternal continuance of the
male

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

priestly order, woman forever excluded. The Mormon woman no more fully
places herself in position of servant to her husband, whom at the
Endowment House marriage ceremony she promises to "obey," than has the
orthodox christian woman through the ages, when she has promised
obedience to her husband at the marriage altar. Nor is the general
religious training of the two very different. The Mormon woman is taught
that her salvation depends upon polygamous marriage and her subjection
to her husband in all things; the **orthodox** christian woman is taught
that her salvation depends upon her belief that woman brought sin into
the world, in punishment whereof God placed her in subjection to man;
and during the ages her promise of obedience to man has been held as an
integral part of the marriage ceremony. Nor did a change begin to take
place until after the inauguration of the woman suffrage reform. Not
until woman herself rebelled against such annihilation of her own
conscience and responsibility, did a few sects in some instances omit
this promise from their forms of marriage, although it still remains a
portion of the Greek, Catholic and Anglican ceremony as well as of other
Protestant sects. The shock of finding educated women of New England
birth, members of the Mormon church as polygamous wives, is lessened
upon a careful analysis of the Mormon doctrine in comparison with those
of orthodox Christianity regarding women: all alike rest upon the same
foundation; all teach that sin entered the world through woman; all
alike darken the understanding through such false teaching. The women of
the Mormon church received their training under orthodox Christianity,
which laid the foundation of their self contempt.<span
id="fr_11"></span>[11](#fn_11.md) With the

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

professed revelation of the Book of Mormon, a class of priests arose who
no less positively and authoritatively asserted its doctrines to be of
God than the priesthood of other divisions of christianity assert the
Bible to be of God; and alike each declare themselves and their
followers to be his chosen people. "By authority of the priesthood of
God," has carried weight in all ages, and no greater weight among the
Mormons of the present day than among Christians of all ages. Under the
christian theory regarding the origin and duties of woman it is not
surprising that polygamy should ever have found defenders in the
christian world, nor is it at all singular that Mormonism as "the latest
founded christian sect" should teach polygamy as a divinely organized
institution, drawing its arguments from the Bible. Bishop Lunt of that
church, defending polygamy as of divine origin, said:

    God revealed to Joseph Smith the polygamous system. It is quite true
that his widow declared that no such revelation was ever made, but that
was because she had lost the spirit. God commanded the human race to
multiply and replenish the earth. Abraham had two wives, and the
Almighty honored the second one by a direct communication. Jacob had
Leah and Zilpah. David had a plurality of wives, and was a man after
God's own heart. God gave him Saul's two wives, and only condemned his
adulteries. Moses, Gideon and Joshua had each a plurality of wives.
Solomon had wives and concubines by hundreds, though we do not believe
in the concubine system. We leave that to the Gentiles. Virtue and
chastity wither beneath the monogamic institution, which was borrowed
from the pagan nations by the early

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

    Christians. It was prophesied that in the latter days seven women
would lay hold of one man and demand to bear his name, that, they might
not be held in dishonor. The Protestants and Catholics assail us with
very poor grace when it is remembered that the first pillars of the
religion they claim to profess were men like the saints of
Utah--polygamists. The fact cannot be denied. Polygamy is virtually
encouraged and taught by example by the Old Testament. It may appear
shocking and blasphemous to Gentiles for us to say so, but we hold that
Jesus Christ himself was a polygamist. He was surrounded by women
constantly, as the Scriptures attest, and those women were his
polygamous wives. The vast disparity between the sexes in all settled
communities is another argument in favor of polygamy, to say nothing of
the disinclination among young male Gentiles to marrying. The monogamic
system condemns millions of women to celibacy. A large proportion of
them stray from the path of right, and these unfortunates induce
millions of men to forego marriage. As I have said, virtue and chastity
wither under the monogamic system.

    There are no illegitimate children in Utah; there are no libertines;
there are no brothels, excepting where the presence of Gentiles creates
the demand for them. Even then our people do what they can to root out
such places. There is a positive advantage in having more than one wife.
It is impossible to find a Gentile home, where comforts and plenty
prevail, in which there is only one woman. No one woman can manage a
household. She must have assistance. Hence we claim that when a man
marries a second wife, he actually benefits the first one, and
contributes to her ease, and relieves her of a large burden of care. The
duties of the houeshold are divided between the two women, and
everything moves on harmoniously and peacefully. The whole thing is a
matter of education. A girl reared under the monogamic system may look
with abhorrence on ours; our young women do not do so They expect, when
they marry a man, that he will some day take another wife, and

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

they consider it quite natural that he should do so. In wealthy Gentile
communities the concubine system largely takes the place of the
polygamous system. Any man of intelligence, observation and travel,
knows that such is the case. The fact is ignored by general consent, and
little is said about it and nothing is written about it. It is not
regarded as a proper subject of conversation or of publication. How much
better to give lonely women a home while they are uncontaminated, and
honor them with your name, and perpetually provide for them, and before
the world recognize your own offspring! The polygamous system is the
only natural one, and the time rapidly approaches when it will be the
most conspicuous and beneficent of American institutions. It will be the
grand characteristic feature of American society. Our women are
contented with it--more, they are the most ardent defenders of it to be
found in Utah. If the question were put to a vote to-morrow, nine-tenths
of the women of Utah would vote to perpetuate polygamy.

    In line with other Christian sects Mormons claim that polygamy is
countenanced by the New Testament as well as by the Old. They interpret
Paul's teaching in regard to bishops, while commanding them to marry one
wife, as also not prohibiting them from marrying more than one; their
interpretation of this passage but slightly varying from that of Rev.
Mr. Madan. Rev. C. p. Lyford, of the Methodist church, long a resident
of Utah, does not fail to see the degradation of the people as in
proportion to the despotism of the hierarchy. He says.

    It took the Methodist church forty years to get a membership of
38,000. Mormonism in forty-four years counted 250,000. It seems
incredible, nevertheless it is a fact. In this brief space of time it
has also been able to nullify our laws, oppose our institutions, openly
perpetrate crimes, be represented in Congress, boast of the helplessness
of the nation to prevent these

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

things, and give the church supremacy over the state and the people.
Bills introduced in Congress adequate to their overthrow have been year
after year allowed to fall to the ground without action upon them.

    Our public men can only pronounce against the crime of polygamy; the
press can see only polygamy in Utah; the public mind is impressed with
only the heinousness of polygamy. Back of **polygamy** is the tree that
produces it and many kindred evils more dear to the Mormon rulers. They
do not care for all the sentiment or law against this one fruit of the
tree, if the tree itself is left to stand. The tree--the prolific cause
of so many and so great evils in Utah, the greatest curse of the
territory, the strength of Mormonism, and its impregnable wall of
defense against Christianity and civilization, is that arbitrary,
despotic, and absolute hierarchy known as the Mormon Priesthood.

    Mr. Lyford has partial insight into the truth when be says "back of
polygamy is the tree that produces it and many kindred evils;" but in
defining that tree as the hierarchy--the priesthood--he has not reached
the entire truth. He does not touch the ground which supports the tree.
Polygamy is but one development of the doctrine of woman's created
inferiority, the constant tendency of which is to make her a mere slave
under every form of religion extant, and of which the complex marriage
of the Christian sect of Perfectionists at Oneida Community was but
another logical result.

    When woman interprets the Bible for herself, it will be in the
interest of a higher morality, a purer home. Monogamy is woman's
doctrine, as polygamy is man's. Backofen, the Swiss jurist, says that
the regulation of marriage by which, in primitive times, it became
possible for a woman to belong only to one man, came about by a
religious reformation, wherein the women in armed conflict, obtained a
victory over men.

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

    While the greatest number of converts to the Mormon church are from
among the ignorant peasantry of foreign countries, still no less than in
orthodox christianity do we find people of culture and education
upholding its doctrines, an irrefragable proof that the power of
religious despotism lies in two conditions; First, ignorance; Second,
fear. To fear must ever be attributed the great victories of religious
despotism. Fear of punishment after death from which obedience to
priestly teaching is believed to free. Such slavery of the human mind
has ever been the greatest obstacle to advancing civilization. Men and
women of the Christian church not daring to use their own free thought
upon such questions, are no less bound than the savage, who makes a
hideous noise in order to frighten away the monster he thinks trying to
swallow the sun during an eclipse.

    The strength of the church has ever lain in its power of producing
fear and impelling belief in its assertion that the priesthood alone can
define the will of God, and that as His chosen servants they but voice
His will in every word they utter. Unhesitating belief in this assertion
has been required through the Christian ages as evidence of a true son
or daughter of the church, while the cry of heresy, so frightful in its
significance, so terrible in its punishment under the priesthood, has
most effectively prevented investigation and quenched the fire of
rebellious thought.

    The Mormon priesthood look toward the establishment of a temporal
kingdom in connection with their religion. They maintain that the civil
power inherently belongs to the theocracy and should supersede all other
forms of government. Like the priesthood of other sects they claim
divine guidance in the promulgation

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

of their laws as proceeding from above while those of the state emanate
from man himself and consequently are not binding upon the conscience,
the church as a body ever claiming to hold the keys of heaven and of
hell; and the implicit belief given to such assertion by tens and
hundreds of thousands, has ever been a most powerful method for subduing
the reason. Its anathemas, its excommunications, its denial of church
rites in marriage, in burial, its control of both temporal and spiritual
power, have ever made its weapons of the most formidable character. Fear
of what may be met in a future life over which the church assumes such
knowledge and control, subjugation of the reason, the fostering of
ignorance, the denial of education and the constant teaching that
thought outside! of the line formulated by the church is deepest sin,
has held the christian world in bondage during its centuries. Inasmuch
as it is impossible for the candid thinker not to perceive that all
forms of christianity are based upon the statement that woman having
brought sin into the world rendered the sacrifice of a Saviour
necessary, the reason of such persistent effort upon the part of the
church for woman's entire subjugation becomes apparent. It is assumed by
all theocracies that the church is a temporal kingdom, with supreme
right to the control of all civil affairs. Every theocracy is therefore
a political system seeking control of the civil government and however
greatly suppressed in action, every theocracy proposes such control as
its ulterior design. Early in 1890, an encyclical letter by the pope
declared the' supremacy of the church over the state, commanding
resistance to the. authority of the state in case of its conflicting
with the pretensions of the Supreme Pontiff

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

of the Catholic church. The Mormon theocracy and the Catholic here show
their affinity. Nor are Protestants without similar pretensions as is
proven by the action of the "National Reform Association" of the United
States; whose aim is the union of church and state through an amendment
to the Federal constitution, its ultimate purpose being that of
theocratic control over the civil government of this country. These
various bodies are parts of the "Christian Party in Politics;" nor is
this party of recent origin; as early as 1827-8 when composed almost
entirely of Protestants, its designs upon the life of the republic were
noted by the eloquent Scotch reformer, Frances Wright, during her
travels, lectures and residence in this country. Mormonism and
Catholicism do not more greatly threaten the civil and religious
integrity of this republic than does the "National Reform Association,"
the theocracy of the Protestant church equally with that of the Catholic
church constantly striving to incite congressional action in favor of
obligatory religious teaching and seeking control of the common schools.
Yet the history of the world proves that wherever tried, ecclesiastical
schools have lowered the standard of education. To-day the schools under
control of the Mormon church in no respect equal those of adjacent
territories. Under the plea of religious freedom the greatest dangers
arise. While the Mormons affirm, in reference to polygamy that their
church laws concern Mormons alone, no less do other theocracies
inculcate doctrines contrary to civil law; the catholic church, its
spirit to-day<span id="fr_12"></span>[12](#fn_12.md) the same as during
past ages,

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

making civil marriage and the public school system its present objective
points of opposition to the state; while the general body of protestant
churches more openly than the catholic churches proclaim their intention
not alone to control secular education, marriage and divorce, but to
unite church and state through a change in the fundamental law of the
United States. A somewhat wide-spread fear exists in regard to the
encroachment of Catholicism upon civil liberty. The most potent danger
lies elsewhere, the most potent because the least perceived; the most
potent because arising from a body whom the masses of native Americans,
through heredity and training, look upon as supporters and defenders of
both civil and religious liberty--the priesthood of the orthodox
Protestant churches. Mormonism does not so fully threaten civil and
religious liberty; catholicism is not making greater encroachments upon
them than are the great body of the protestant clergy, under the name
and the work of the "National Reform Association."

    The people of the United States with careless security in the power
of the principles of freedom upon which the government is based, fail to
note the theocratic encroachment everywhere threatened.<span
id="fr_14"></span>[14](#fn_14.md) The

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

very nature of sacerdotalism, professing as it every where does, to hold
authority of a supernatural character, unfailingly creates a claim of
supremacy over civil government. President John Taylor, of the Mormon
church, a few years since openly asserted these claims, saying: "We are
independent of newspapers, independent of kings, independent of
governments." But it is not the Mormon priesthood alone that declares
its independence of secular governments. This is the same spirit that
seen through the ages of christianity has been so plainly shown by
Catholicism since the temporal power in Italy has fallen into the hands
of a secular monarch, and that is now so fully a part of Protestant
effort. Under the overwhelming amount of biblical proof quoted in its
favor by the most eminent legal and clerical minds of the christian
church we must admit the doctrine of polygamy to be a component part of
christianity. Although like the fagot and the stake, under the light of
advancing civilization it has somewhat fallen into disrepute with the
majority of men and women, yet its renewal as an underlying principle of
a new christian sect need not be a subject of astonishment. The pulpit,
the bar, and legislative halls are still under the control of man and
these institutions still express the form of civilization that is due to
his teachings. But as neither moral nor intellectual education is of
value unless founded upon a material basis, the world now beginning to
see that Wall Street, and the Bourse, with their fingers upon the
business of the world, are fast

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

becoming of greater importance in determining the future character of
civilization than St. Peters, the Kremlin, or Westminster Abbey. Wendell
Phillips once declared that the advance of civilization was not
dependent upon either the pulpit or the press but upon commerce, and a
careful study of the inventions and industries of the age, confirm this
statement. Material needs, underlying all others, direct the tenor of
modern civilization. But commerce of itself is not alone responsible.
Within the past thirty years a new element has widely entered into the
business of the world, and even the most careless observer can but in
many ways note the changing customs and habits of business life, and
that under this change, a new form of civilization is dawning upon the
world. Woman once so carefully excluded is now everywhere seen. At the
counter, behind the cashier's desk, as buyer, as business manager, and
in many instances as employer, conducting business for herself. Every
kind of industry is opening to her, from that of government employee at
Washington with the financial interests of the nation in her grasp, to
that of electrical business, woman is everywhere found. The commerce of
the world is rapidly changing hands and the next quarter of a century
will find woman in its full control. But few persons foresee the
ultimate result of this change. With a new class at the helm, commerce
will give new ideas to the world. If christianity survive the shock of
coming events, it will present a different aspect within the next fifty
years and its teachings in regard to woman will be totally unlike those
of past ages. As woman comes into new relations with the great
institutions of the world, she will cease to believe herself inferior
and subordinate

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

to man. Polygamy and all kindred degradations of her sex will become
things of the past, and taking her rightful place in church and state
she will open a new civilization to the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Woman And Work.](wcs10.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_page_402">p. 402</span>  

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1.](#fr_1.md)  Milton's oriental views of the
function of women led him not only to neglect but to prevent the
education of his daughters. They were sent to no school at all, but were
handed over to a school mistress in the house. He would not allow them
to learn any language, saying with a sneer that "for a woman one tongue
is enough." The miseries however that follow the selfish sacrifice of
others is so sure to strike, that there needs no future world of
punishment to adjust the balance. The time came when Milton would have
given worlds that his daughters had learned the tongues. He was blind
and could only get at his precious book--could only give expression to
his precious verses through the eyes and hands of others. Whose hands
and whose eyes so proper for this as his daughters? He proceeded to
train them to read to him, parrot-like, in five or six languages which
he (the schoolmaster) could at one time have easily taught them; but of
which they now could not understand a word. He turned his daughters into
reading machines. It is appalling to think of such a task. That Mary
should revolt and at last after repeated contests with her taskmaster,
learn to hate her father--that she should, when some one spoke in her
presence of her father's approaching marriage, make the dreadful speech
that it was no news to hear of his wedding, but if she could hear of his
death, that was something-is unutterably painful, but not
surprising.--*The Athenaeum*.

<span id="fn_page_404">p. 404</span>  

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2.](#fr_2.md)  *The Church as It Is*.--Parker
Pillsbury, pp. 32-3-4-5-6.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3.](#fr_3.md)  Report of the Proceedings of the
Missionary Conference.--Mr. Perkins' speech.

<span id="fn_page_406">p. 406</span>  

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4.](#fr_4.md)  The same hymns are sung, the same
doctrine preached, the same necessity for salvation emphasized, and
justification by faith is made the corner stone of redemption.

<span id="fn_page_408">p. 408</span>  

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5.](#fr_5.md)  Historians have declared that
"Nowhere did the spirit of Puritanism in its evil as well as its good,
more thoroughly express itself than in Massachusetts and Rhode Island."
Boston, for its atrocities was known as "The Bloody Town." "The
Emancipation of Massachusetts" by Brooks Adams, gives a very correct
account of the retarding influence of Puritan bigotry in the development
of intellectual truth in the New England States.

<span id="fn_page_409">p. 409</span>  

<span id="fn_6"></span>[6.](#fr_6.md)  The true character of Presbyterian
Pastors in Scotland in Time of Charles II.

<span id="fn_page_412">p. 412</span>  

<span id="fn_7"></span>[7.](#fr_7.md)  When her father's name was
mentioned, Dora said, "Don't speak to me of my father, Mr. Morris, you
and the whole church know that my father, prophet though you call him,
broke many a woman's heart. If it is required of me to break as many
hearts and ruin as many women as my father did, I should go to perdition
before I would go back into the church again. and--"

"Oh, sister Dora! exclaimed the teacher in consternation at her
clearness of vision.

"It is a fact and you know it," she continued, 'You know that many of
his wives died of broken hearts and how did he leave the rest? Look at
my mother and look at all the rest of them! A religion that breaks
women's hearts and ruins them is of the devil. That's what Mormonism
does. Don't talk to me of my father."--*Reported in the Chicago Inter
Ocean*.

<span id="fn_page_416">p. 416</span>  

<span id="fn_8"></span>[8.](#fr_8.md)  A correspondent writing for an
eastern paper from Salt Lake City, a few years since, said: "Of all the
ill-conditioned, God-forsaken, hopeless looking people I ever saw, the
women here beat them all. Yesterday was supply day for the Mormons
living outside the city. They bring their wives into town in dead-axle
wagons, and fill the vacant room with children who look fully as bad as
their mothers, if not worse. Many of them are lean and hump-backed and
all look sickly and ill-clad. Two out of three women on the streets
yesterday, had nursing infants in their arms. One of the saints had
thirteen wives and ninety-four children; another had nine wives and five
nursling babies, which he exhibited with all the pride I should take in
a lot of fine horses. 1 never realized the infernal nature of the
institution nor its effect upon society as I do now."

<span id="fn_9"></span>[9.](#fr_9.md)  *Key to Theology*, by Parley Pratt.

<span id="fn_page_418">p. 418</span>  

<span id="fn_10"></span>[10.](#fr_10.md)  *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_page_420">p. 420</span>  

<span id="fn_11"></span>[11.](#fr_11.md)  The following conversation took
place between a mistress and an Irish servant <span id="fn_page_421">p.
421</span> girl: "Bridget, why are not women ever priests?" "Oh! they
couldn't be; they're too wicked." "You don't believe such nonsense, do
you--you don't believe women are more wicked than men?" "Yes ma'am,"
replied Bridget with emphasis; "they're a dale more wicked; they can't
iver be prastes, for they brought sin into the world. Eve was the very
first sinner; I learned it all in the catechism."

<span id="fn_page_427">p. 427</span>  

<span id="fn_12"></span>[12.](#fr_12.md)  In a recent Catholic Allocution,
emanating from the dignitaries of that church on the Pacific Coast, it
was said: "The church, like Christ, is the same yesterday, to-day and
forever; it is the same here as in other parts of the world;--its sacred
laws, enacted under the guidance of the divine spirit, are as binding
there as in any other place."

<span id="fn_page_428">p. 428</span>  

<span id="fn_13"></span>[13.](#fr_13.md)  We do not, indeed, prize as
highly as some of our countrymen appear to do the ability to read, write
and cipher. Some men are born to be leaders, and the rest are born to be
led. The best ordered and administered state is that in which the few
are well educated and lead, and the many are trained to
obedience.--"*Catholic Review*."

<span id="fn_14"></span>[14.](#fr_14.md)  The Mormon faith belts Idaho,
Montana, Arizona, New Mexico, Nevada; Utah and Wyoming, a portion of the
country that is wealthier than any other portion in its natural
products. It is not simply in Utah that this power of Mormonism is
found, but it is spreading in every territory. Every railroad in that
section is partially built by Mormon laborers. They are spreading all
over that country. They control, in three or four states there, the
balance of power. They control every election that is held in Utah, and
every man is dictated to in relation to his vote. They also control the
ballot-box in Idaho and Wyoming, and are thus liable in time to come,
should the two Mormon territories become states, to <span
id="fn_page_429">p. 429</span> throw sixteen Senators into our Congress.
They openly boast of their intention to take their plural system to your
watering places here in the east, Saratoga, Newport and other resorts. I
realize the struggle of the past when the manhood of our nation was put
to the test, and I know there is another contest approaching. The
leaders say they intend to fight this contest until Mormonism
prevails--*Mormonism and treason to the United States Government*.
