[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wcs07)  [Next](wcs09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

# CHAPTER VI.

### WIVES.

    Under Roman law before Christianity had gained control of the
empire, a form of marriage existed known as "Usus," which secured much
freedom to wives. It was entered into without the terrifying religious
ceremonies which made "Confarraetio," practically indissoluble and the
wife the veritable slave of the husband, who held power even over her
life. Neither did it possess the civil formality of "Coemptio" under
which the bride purchased entrance into the marriage duties and her
husband's household by the payment of three pieces of copper.<span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) "Coemptio" like "Confarreatio" gave the
husband entire power over the person and property of the wife, while
"Usus," a form of simple consent, left the wife practically free,
keeping her own name and property. The real origin of this form of
marriage is not fully known. Maine declared it to be as old as or even
older than the Twelve Tables, under which woman possessed the right to
repudiation in marriage. These laws, a compilation of still older ones,
were afterwards incorporated into statutes by a woman of Athens, and
were received by the Romans as extremely pure natural laws.<span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2) Plato

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

refers to an early Athens entirely ruled by women, its laws of
pre-eminently just character. Tradition, whose basis is half forgotten,
half remembered history, attributes the origin of Athens to the ancient
Atlantians. The former existence of this submerged continent is daily
becoming more fully recognized. The explorations of the "Challenger,"
the "Dolphin," the "Gazelle," and the discoveries of Le Plongeon in
Yucatan, at later date, confirming olden tradition. Maine thus ascribes
a much older origin to "Usus" than Gibbon, who attributes it to the
effect of the Punic triumphs.<span id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3) In
reality "Usus" seems to have been a reminiscence of the Matriarchate,
incorporated into the law of the Twelve Tables, and accepted by Rome as
a more just form of the marriage relation for women than the religious
"Confarraetio" or the civil form of "Coemptio." But as Rome increased in
wealth and luxurious modes of living, the influence of the Patriarchate
correspondingly extended, the perception of justice at the same time
diminishing. Pomp and ceremony were associated with the marriage rite
among patricians, while "Usus" was regarded as a plebeian form
especially suited to the populace. But at later

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

date when Rome rebelling against the tyranny of her rulers, tended
towards a republican form of government, "Usus" again became general. It
was impossible for patrician women not to see the greater freedom of
plebeian wives under "Usus," a form that while equally binding in the
essentials of the union did not make the wife a marital slave,<span
id="fr_4"></span>[4](#fn_4) and "Usus" eventually became the basis of
Roman legal conception of marriage, against which Christianity from the
first waged a warfare of ever increasing fierceness,<span
id="fr_5"></span>[5](#fn_5) the very foundation of that religion being
the subordination of woman in every relation of life. Under "Usus" the
mere fact of two persons living together as husband and wife was
regarded as a marriage. If during each year the wife remained away from
the home for three days, she kept herself from under her husband's
power. She remained a part of her father's family; her husband could not
mortgage or in any way alienate her property. This was absolutely
contrary to the laws of the Christian form of marriage, under which the
wife surrendered her person, her property, and her conscience, into the
indisputable control of the husband. Under "Usus" a large proportion of
Roman property fell into woman's hands. She became the real estate
holder of the Eternal City and its provinces, and in consequence was
treated with great respect; the holding of property, especially of real
estate

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

conducing to that end. Under "Usus" the cruelties sanctioned by
"Confarraetio" were rended impossible; a wife could no longer be put to
death, as was formerly the custom, for having tasted wine, a treacherous
kiss from her husband upon his return home, betraying her, nor could her
infant daughter be exposed or murdered at the pleasure of her husband
who as inexorable master was frequently wont to refuse her pleadings for
the life of her babe, calling her prayers naught but the scruples of a
foolish woman.<span id="fr_6"></span>[6](#fn_6)

    Thus under "Usus" human life became more sacred, and woman endowed
with a greater sense of personal security. It affected an entire change
for the better, in the moral sentiments of the Roman empire.<span
id="fr_7"></span>[7](#fn_7) A complete revolution had thus passed over
the constitution of the family. This must have been the period, says
Maine, when a juriconsulist of the empire defined marriage as a life
long fellowship of all divine and human rights.

    Not alone Maine, but also Reeves, failed not to see that the
disruption of the Roman Empire was very unfavorable to the personal and
proprietory rights of woman.<span id="fr_8"></span>[8](#fn_8) The
practical effect of the common Roman form of marriage being the absolute
legal independence of the wife, under which a large proportion of Roman
property fell into the hands of women, the

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

wife retaining her family name and family inheritance. All this was
changed as soon as Christianity obtained the rule. Under Christian forms
of marriage a wife was taken from her own family and transferred into
that of her husband the same as a piece of property. She assumed his
name, the same as the slave took that of the new master to whom he was
transferred. That this idea of the wife as a slave did not belong alone
to the earlier christian period, but is a part of christian doctrine of
to-day is clearly shown by the continued custom of a woman's dropping
her family name upon marriage and assuming that of the husband-master.

    For this middle Roman period carried its blessings to wives no
longer than until the empire became christianized, when the tyranny of
ecclesiastical marriage again fell to womans' lot. While under the
influence of "Usus," Roman jurists of the middle period had declared the
ownership of property by married women to be a principle of equity this
drew forth opposing legislation from the christians, and under christian
law, the husband again became master of his wife's person, and property,
her children also falling under his entire control, the mother
possessing no authority over them. From that period down to the
twentieth century of christianity, under all changing civil laws, woman
has ever felt the oppressions of ecclesiasticism in this relation.<span
id="fr_9"></span>[9](#fn_9)

    Guizot strangely declares that woman's present, and what he terms,
superior, position in the household to-day, is due to feudalism.<span
id="fr_10"></span>[10](#fn_10) The isolation and

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

strife under which the nobility lived during the feudal period, warring
against each other when not engaged in foreign aggression, compelled to
certain forms of social life within each castle, thus creating the
modern family, or the family under its present social form. At that
period the feudal wife with her retinue of household serfs and a vast
number of her husband's retainers in charge, held a more responsible
position than that of woman under primitive christian habits of life.
But the knights and lords of these feudal castles were lecherous
robbers, rather than men of kindly regard for womankind. Their
inclination was not towards justice or family life, but the despoiling
of all beneath them, and even of their equals with whom they were not
upon terms of amity. The ruins of such castles, like the nest of the
eagle, perched upon some inaccessible rock, add to-day an element of
picturesque beauty to the Rhine and other rivers of Europe, but owe
their elevated and isolated positions to the evil character of their
owners, the banditti of the middle ages.<span
id="fr_11"></span>[11](#fn_11) When not engaged with their king in
warfare, they made the despoiling of serfs and the betrayal of wives and
daughters their chief diversion, the robbery of burghers and travelers
their business; churchmen equally with laymen living by the same means.

    During the year 1268, Rudolph of Germany, destroyed

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

sixty-six castles of these christian robber nobility in Thuringia alone,
and hung twenty-nine of these "family builders" at one time in Erfurt.
He compared Rome to the lion's den in fable; the footsteps of many
animals to be found going thither, but none coming back. At this period
the soldiers of Christian Europe found pleasure in torture for its own
sake, chiefly selecting women as their victims. In mediæval England the
condition of woman was one of deep degradation. Wives were bought and
daughters sold for many hundred years after the introduction of
Christianity.<span id="fr_12"></span>[12](#fn_12) Although England was
christianized in the fourth century, it was not until the tenth that the
christian wife of a christian husband acquired the right of eating at
table with him, nor until the same century did a daughter gain the right
of rejecting the husband her father might have selected for her. While
the sale of daughters was practiced in England for seven hundred years
after the introduction of Christianity, we note that by the ancient law
of India, a father was forbidden to sell his daughter in marriage, or
receive the smallest present therefor. In mediæval England the daughter
was held as a portion of the father's property to be sold to the highest
bidder. The Mundium" recognized the father's right to sell his daughter
to the husband he might select for her, usually the highest bidder in
point of wealth or political influence. While Marquette pertained to
kings, feudal lords, and men of no family relationship to the victim,
Mundium inhered in the father himself.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

Through it he sacrificed his own daughter for money or power.

The practice of buying wives with cattle or money was regulated both in
the laws of King Æthelbert and King Ine. In event of the woman who had
been thus bought, becoming a widow, half of the sum paid for her seems
to have been set aside for her support, provided her husband had not
died without issue. The other half remained absolutely the property of
her father, brother, or guardian by whom she had been sold. At a
somewhat later period the church doctrine of celibacy influenced all
ranks of men, while at the same time an unmarried woman because of her
maidenhood was regarded as disreputable. A bachelor held honorable
place, even though all celibate men were looked upon as libertines of
especially impure life. Warnings against matrimony were the ordinary
topics of conversation, while virtue in women was held so little sacred
that no nearness of relationship was security for either a married or a
single woman.<span id="fr_14"></span>[14](#fn_14) Husbands trafficked in
the honor of their wives, fathers sold their daughters,<span
id="fr_15"></span>[15](#fn_15) yet if under temptation, a woman

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

fell, outside of such sale, her punishment was most severe. To a husband
was accorded the power of life and death over his household, and either
personally or by means of a hired assassin he not unfrequently assigned
his wife to death or to a punishment more atrocious and barbarous.<span
id="fr_16"></span>[16](#fn_16) Disraeli says:

    If in these ages of romance and romances the fair sex were scarcely
approached without the devotion of idolatry, whenever "the course of
true love" altered; when the frail spirit loved too late, and should not
have loved, the punishment became more criminal than the crime, for
there was more selfish revenge and terrific malignity than of justice
when autocratical man became the executioner of his own decree.

    The English christian husband of that age is paralleled by certain
North American Indians of the present day.<span
id="fr_17"></span>[17](#fn_17) The horizon of woman's life was bounded
by the wishes of her father or husband. Single, she was regarded as a
more or less valuable piece of property<span
id="fr_18"></span>[18](#fn_18) for whose sale the owner was entitled to
make as good a bargain as possible. It was as a bride that the greatest
sum was secured.<span id="fr_19"></span>[19](#fn_19) Prominent among

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

the laws of the first Christian king of Kent, were provisions for the
transfer of money or cattle in exchange for the bride.<span
id="fr_20"></span>[20](#fn_20) The theory of woman's ownership by man
was everywhere carried into practice, and with great severity in case
the wife proved unfaithful to her enforced vows. The facts that her
consent to the marriage had not been asked, that mayhap the man she was
forced to wed was utterly repugnant to her, that her affections might
already have been bestowed, that she was transferred like a piece of
goods with no voice upon the question, were not taken into
consideration, and did the husband not choose to kill his derelict
spouse, the question still remained one of property,<span
id="fr_21"></span>[21](#fn_21) and a new bride was demanded of the lover
in place of the wife whose love he had gained.

    A husband, attracted by a new face, more wealth, greater political
influence, or for any reason desiring to be rid of his wife, was
regarded as justifiable in hiring an assassin to strangle her, or if
walking by a river-brink, of himself pushing her into the water where
her cries for help were disregarded. Those in whose hearts pity rose,
were prevented from giving aid, by such remarks as, "It is nothing, only
a woman being drowned."<span id="fr_22"></span>[22](#fn_22) A horse or
other domestic animal

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

received more consideration than the women of a household.
Notwithstanding this period, the early part of the fourteenth century,
before the days of printing or rapid intercourse between nations, yet
the evil fame of christendom reached distant lands. Its hypocrisy and
baseness were known by those very Saracens from whom the Crusaders
attempted to wrest the Holy Sepulchre. To Sir John Mandeville the Sultan
of Egypt mercilessly criticised the Christianity of England<span
id="fr_23"></span>[23](#fn_23) and the christian method of serving God;
the total disregard of chastity, the sale of daughters, sisters and
wives. We cannot agree with Disraeli in his doubts if there was a single
christian in all christendom at this period. To the contrary, it may be
regarded as an epoch when the doctrines of Christianity were most fully
sustained, the church at that time carrying out the principles of both
the Old and the New Testament regarding women. From Moses to Paul, the
Bible everywhere speaks of her as a being made for man, secondary to
man, and under his authority by direct command of the Almighty; the
state, as coadjutor and servant of the church, basing her codes of
law<span id="fr_24"></span>[24](#fn_24) upon its teachings. Under these
codes woman has not only been looked upon as naturally unchaste, but
also regarded as a liar, the state demanding the testimony of two or
three, and in some instances of seven women to invalidate that

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

of one man; the man even then in extreme cases clearing himself by his
single oath. Condemned as having brought evil into the world, woman's
every step was looked upon with suspicion, and the most brutal treatment
as far short of her just deserts. To speak well of her was to cause
misgivings of one's self. The system of defamation inaugurated by the
church in reference to women, was later recognized by the Jesuits as a
most effective plan for the personal subjugation of men. Busenbaum, an
influential writer of this order, directing:

    Whenever you would ruin a person you must begin by spreading
calumnies to defame them. Repetition and perseverance will at length
give the consistency of probability, and the calumnies will stick to a
distant day.

    The astute Jesuits learned their lesson from church treatment of
women. Its practical results were ever before their eyes in the contempt
with which woman was regarded, and her own consequent loss of
self-respect. Under early and mediæval christian law, as in most states
to-day, the father alone had right to the disposal of his children. He
possessed the sole power of giving away his daughter in marriage; if he
died, this right devolved upon the eldest son; only in case there were
no sons was the right of the mother in any way recognized. If neither
father or brother were living, the mother gave her daughter away in
marriage, and this was the only instance in which one woman possessed
control over another woman, the law allowing the mother no voice in the
marriage of her daughter unless she was a widow without sons. So greatly
enslaved were daughters, that non-consent of the victim in no way
impaired the validity of the

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

marriage.<span id="fr_35"></span>[35](#fn_35) A girl was simply a piece
of family property to be disposed of as the family thought best.
Although wives were simply the slaves of husbands, yet the condition of
an unmarried woman was even more deplorable. Deprived of the society of
young persons of her own sex, not allowed speech with any man outside of
her own family, she was fortunate if she escaped personal<span
id="fr_36"></span>[36](#fn_36) ill-treatment in her father's house. Not
permitted to sit in the presence of either her father or her mother,
continually found fault with, the laws constraining her to marry while
giving her no preference as to a husband, and marriage still more fully
taking from her the control of her own person, yet it was anxiously
looked forward to as at least a change of masters, and the constant hope
that in the husband she might find a lover who for dear love's sake
would treat her with common humanity.

    Such was the condition of women during eighteen hundred years of
christianity. Legislated for as slaves, imprisoned for crimes that if
committed by a man were only punished by branding the band; buried alive
for other crimes that committed by men were atoned for by the payment of
a fine; denied a share in the government of the family or the church,
their very sex deemed a curse, the twentieth century is now about to
open showing no truly enlightened nation

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

upon the face of the earth. From the barbarism of inhumanity the world
is slowly awakening to the fact that every human being stands upon the
plane of equal natural rights. The Church has not taught the world this
great truth, the State has not conceded it; its acknowledgment thus far,
has been due to the teachings of individual men and women, that
self-constituted authority over others is a crime against humanity.
Under christian teaching regarding woman, the daughter was looked upon
as a more remote relative and heir than the son, and this upon the
ground of her inferiority. Blackstone, although admitting that such
views did not pertain in Rome, yet speaks of males as "the worthier of
blood." Such views were not held by pre-christian Britain. Under common
law, before that country accepted christianity, property was equally
divided between sisters, and only by special custom, between
brothers.<span id="fr_31"></span>[31](#fn_31) But as early as Henry II,
it was the general rule that a woman could not share an inheritance with
a man. An exception sometimes existed in a particular city where such
custom had long prevailed.

    Until quite recently, English women have not been permitted to
express an opinion upon political questions, although the Primrose
League and other similar organizations have effected a great change
within a few years. Yet it is but little more than two hundred years, in
1664, at Henley-upon-Thames, a woman having spoken against the taxation
imposed by Parliament, was condemned for this freedom of political
criticism, to have her tongue nailed to the body of a tree at the
highway side upon a market day, and a paper fastened to her back
detailing the heinousness

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

of her offense. It was thus the state deterred similar
politically-minded women from the expression of their views, and in line
with the church used its most stringent measures to retain woman in the
"sphere" to which both church and state assigned her. Many savage tribes
of Africa exhibit the same grade of civilization that was extant in
christian England from the fourth to the eighteenth centuries.

    A father will sell his daughter among Unyamwazi, Africa, for one up
to ten cows. A Lomali asks of a poor wooer from ten to twenty horses, of
a wealthy one from 100 upward, together with fifty camels and 300 sheep.
On the other hand, in Uganda, four oxen are sufficient to buy the most
perfectly formed village belle, provided six needles and a box of
cartridges are thrown in.

    The sale is the same, the payment alone of different character. An
African girl in case of a wealthy wooer, bringing even more than was
ordinarily received during the middle ages for an English christian
maiden. The patriarchal spirit wherever cropping out exhibiting the same
characteristics, whether among Jews, Christians, or African savages.
This is the more not-able as among civilized or savage races yet
governed of the principles of the Matriarchate, the position of woman is
very high. In Samoa, no woman is compelled to work, all labor of
whatever character being performed by the men. The celebrated traveler,
Prof. Carl Lumholz, in his work "Among the Cannibals," makes some
interesting statements in regard to the course adopted by the natives of
Georgia River, Australia, to save women from giving birth to undesired
children, and to prevent the needless suffering and infant mortality so
common in christian lands.

    Among the methods adopted in christian countries

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

for a continuance of the crimes common in the marriage relation, have
been more or less stringent laws against divorce, ever falling with
heaviest force upon her whom christian marriage laws have made a slave.
The "Christian Union" declares as a significant act of evil import, that
"in Wyoming, where the power of woman in affairs of government is
greatest, one divorce takes place in every six marriages, the proportion
being greater than in any other state." But if this assertion of the
"Christian Union" is true, it is proof that a share in making the laws
which govern her is wisely used by the women of that state; and it marks
a new era in civilization, when woman holding political power in her own
hands, refuses longer to degrade herself by living in a relation that
has lost the binding power of love. The laws of church and of state
during the christian ages originated with man, and it is a promising
sign of woman's growth in self-reliance, independent thought, and purity
of character, that she thus protests against the bondage of a relation
which virtually holds the wife as slave of the husband; for despite the
changes of the last four and a half decades, we still find the general
tone of legislation in line with the church teaching of woman's created
inferiority to man. We still find belief in the wife's duty of obedience
to the husband; we still discover the church, the state, the world, all
regarding the exercise of her own judgment even upon the questions most
closely related to herself as woman's greatest sin. As free as woman is
called to-day, she has not yet as daughter secured perfect liberty of
choice in marriage, the power of the family too often compelling her
into a hated relation. Money still leads parents to prefer one suitor
above another, even in

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

the United States; while in many European countries, marriages are
arranged by friends, or through a broker, entirely without the girl's
consent, who is frequently taken from a convent or school to be thus
sold to some wealthy and perhaps octogenarian wooer, who covets the
youth or beauty of the victim.<span id="fr_28"></span>[28](#fn_28)

    The burning of twenty missionaries in a portion of savage Africa, a
few years since, filled the civilized world with horror. But for several
hundred years after the introduction of christianity into Great Britain,
the penalty for simple theft by a woman slave was burning alive, and all
the other women slaves were compelled to assist at her *auto-de-fé*.
Upon such an occasion mentioned by Pike, eighty other women each brought
a log of wood for the burning.<span id="fr_29"></span>[29](#fn_29) By
the old Roman Code, burning alive as a punishment was forbidden because
of its barbarity, but christianity reintroduced it, and for long
centuries after the destruction of the Roman Empire, that other land
aspiring to control of the sea, which proudly boasts that the sun never
sets on her possessions., kept it in her criminal code for the
punishment of helpless women.<span id="fr_30"></span>[30](#fn_30) So

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

rigorous was woman's slavery that the friendships of women with each
other, or with men, were strictly prohibited; yet the deep affection of
one man for another to whom he consecrated his life and fortune, and of
whom he spoke with that deep tenderness, was highly commended.<span
id="fr_31"></span>[31](#fn_31) The despotic, irresponsible power of
husbands in christian England at this period is shown by the diverse
manner in which the murder of a wife by a husband, or a husband by a
wife, was regarded. For a husband to murder a wife either by his own
hands or those of a hired assassin, was of frequent occurrence, but as
she was his slave over whom he had power of life and death, this was
looked upon as a trivial affair. But under the laws of both church and
state, the murder of a husband by a wife was regarded as petty treason,
to be punished with the utmost severity, burning alive being a not
uncommon form.<span id="fr_32"></span>[32](#fn_32)

    Under christian legislation not alone the wife's person but her
property so fully became her husband's that her use of any portion of it
thereafter without his consent was regarded as theft; and such is still
the law in the majority of christian countries; it is less than sixty
years since a change in this respect took place in any part of the
christian world. While a wife may steal from her husband it is still the
law that a husband cannot steal from his wife. If she allows him to
transact business for her, or in any way

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

obtain possession of her property even for a moment, he has acquired its
legal ownership. Since the passage of the Married Woman's Property Act,
the courts of England have decided that a husband cannot steal from his
wife while she is living with him. A case before Baron Huddleston, 1888,
commented upon by the "Pall Mall Gazette," under head of "Stealing from
a Wife," called attention to the superior position of the mistress in
respect to property rights over that of the wife.

    Can a husband rob his wife? Baron Huddleston yesterday answered this
by saying he can not rob her at all under the common law, which regards
all the wife's property as the husband's; and, theft is only robbery
under the Married Women's Property Act, when the wife is living apart
from her husband, or when he is preparing to desert her. It is really
quite amazing how many advantages a mistress has over a wife in all
matters relating to property and to person. It almost seems as if the
object of the law was to inflict such disabilities on wives in order to
induce the fair sex to prefer concubinage to matrimony.

    The separate moral codes for man and woman in all christian lands,
show their evil aspect in many ways. Adultery, in all christian
countries is held to be less sinful for men than for women. In England,
while the husband can easily obtain a divorce from the wife upon the
ground of adultery, it is almost impossible for the wife to obtain a
divorce from the husband upon the same ground. Nothing short of the
husband's bringing another woman into the house to sustain wifely
relations to him, at all justifies her in proceedings for a separation;
and even then, the husband retains a right to all the wife's property of
which he was in possession, or which may have fallen into

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

his hands. Less than a dozen years since, an English husband willed his
wife's property to his mistress and her children of whom he was the
father. The wife, (in what is known as "The Birchall Case"), contested
the will, but the courts not only decided in its favor, but added insult
to that legal robbery, by telling the wife that a part of her money was
enough for her, and that she ought to be willing that her husband's
mistress and illegitimate children should share it with her.

    Woman's disobedience to man is regarded by both the church and the
state as disobedience to God. As late as the first half of the present
century it was held as constructive treason, in England, punishable by
the state, for a wife to refuse obedience to her husband's commands or
in any way to question his authority. She was required to be under
submission to him as the direct representative of the deity. For the
woman who protested against this annihilation of her individuality, a
flogging was the customary form of punishment and so common was the use
of the whip that its size was regulated by law.<span
id="fr_33"></span>[33](#fn_33) The punishment of petit treason<span
id="fr_34"></span>[34](#fn_34) was more severe for woman than for man
because her crime was regarded as of a more heinous character. She was
dragged on the ground or pavement to the place of execution then burned
alive; a man was drawn and hanged. It was long after the conquest before
even a man convicted

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

of treason secured the right of being carried to execution on a sledge
or hurdle. Blackstone comments upon the extreme torment of being dragged
on the ground or pavement. In case of a woman the wounds and lacerations
thus received must have greatly added to her intensity of suffering, yet
so blinded was he through those laws, that he calls her punishment of
burning, a tribute to the 'decency due to the sex.'<span
id="fr_35"></span>[35](#fn_35)

    During a portion of the christian era the wife has not been looked
upon as related to her husband. The residuum of this disbelief in the
relationship of husband and wife, occasionally shows itself to the
present day.<span id="fr_36"></span>[36](#fn_36) She was his slave under
both religious and civil law, holding the same relations to him as the
subject did to the king, and liable to punishments similar to those
inflicted upon unruly slaves, or disloyal subjects. Rebellion against
the husband's authority was treason punishable by law, similarly as
treason to the king. The difference was but in name. Down to the end of
the eighteenth century in England, the wife who had murdered her husband
was burned alive; if the husband murdered his wife he suffered simple
decapitation, "the same as if he had murdered any other stranger." For
the wife's crime of petit treason the penalty was that of the slave who
had killed her master. It is scarcely a hundred years since the
punishment

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

of burning the wife alive for the murder of her husband, or the female
slave for the murder of her master, as petit treason, passed out of the
English penal code; the last instance occurring in 1784, eight years
after our declaration of independence. This same code was operative in
the colonies; the last woman thus punished in this country, being a
slave in 1755, who had murdered her master, America having twenty-nine
years precedence in the abolition of this penalty.<span
id="fr_37"></span>[37](#fn_37)

    A cablegram from Europe, September 1892, proves the continued
existence in this last decade of the nineteenth century of the crime of
petit treason, and also the barbarous punishment still inflicted under
christian law, upon the wife who murders her husband. This case,
occurring in Finland, was carried up to the Court of Appeals, which not
only affirmed the decision of the lower court but decreed additional
punishment. Because the wife had also forged her husband's name for
small sums of money, having, under law, first been robbed by him of her
earnings. the judgment of having her right hand cut off, was added to
the original sentence. She was then decapitated, her body fastened to a
stake, covered with inflammable material and burned to ashes. Although
this wife was not burned alive, the barbarity of her punishment was most
atrocious, and took place under the christian laws of the church and the
state, in a Protestant country in the "year of our Lord," 1802. That the
punishment was infinitely more severe than would have been inflicted
upon the husband in case

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

he had murdered his wife, was due to christian teaching of woman's
inferiority and subordination to man; thus making the wife's crime that
of petit treason, under law only a trifle less heinous than murdering a
king, or attempting destruction of the government. Had the husband
murdered the wife it would have been, according to legal prevision, the
same as if he had killed "*any other stranger*." The marriage ceremony
robbed her of her property and earnings, but in equity the money she was
accused of stealing from him belonged to her. Under the laws of most
christian states, a woman is robbed of herself and all of her
possessions by the simple fact of her marriage. Under christian law, the
services of the wife in the marital relation are all due to the
husband,<span id="fr_38"></span>[38](#fn_38) her earnings all belong to
him; she is a slave owning nothing and with no rights in the property
her husband calls his own. This wife's crime was provoked by
pre-existing criminal legislation of the christian church and state.
Possessing no legal right to the control of her own person, property or
conscience, the wife was held to have sinned against a divinely
appointed master to whom she owed more than human allegiance: she was a
criminal so great that the punishment of severing her hand and head were
deemed entirely inadequate, and her body fastened to a stake was covered
with inflammable material and burned to ashes.<span
id="fr_39"></span>[39](#fn_39)

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

    While the external government of Finland, as declarations of war,
peace, treaties, etc., is under control of the Czar, or Grand Duke, yet
in the internal ad. ministration of affairs this country is an
Independent State, under a Constitution dating 1772, and confirmed by
three successive czars. It became Christianized in the twelfth century
but is not under the Greek church; its established religion is
Evangelical and Lutheran, under control of the arch-bishop of Abo, and
the bishops of Bogia and Knopo; an ecclesiastical assembly meeting every
ten years; and the Diet, composed of representatives of the clergy,
nobility, citizens and peasants, every five years. Without consent of
these bodies no laws are enacted or repealed; but woman possesses no
representation either in ecclesiastical or civil affairs.

    The old law of marriage instituted by the church, which held the
wife as belonging body and soul to the husband who not alone possessed
control over her actions but decided her religion, is still extant. In
but few countries do we see a tendency towards its abolition, even those
that have somewhat favorably legislated upon the question, still
retaining the general principle of a wife's subserviency to her husband.
A few years since an English lady desirous of uniting with the Catholic
church was refused consent by her husband, "a staunch churchman."
Unknown to him she was received into that body, which proved occasion of
an animated controversy between the husband and the late Cardinal
Manning, the former basing

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

his opposition and his letter of remonstrance to the cardinal upon the
ground of the admitted legal right of a husband, under English law, to
ordain the form of his wife's religion.<span
id="fr_40"></span>[40](#fn_40) Nor do we find material difference in the
United States. In Virginia, in the winter of 1891, a wife, despite the
opposition of her husband, caused her infant to be baptized by an
Episcopal clergyman into that church, the husband openly expressing his
disapproval while the ceremony was in progress, and afterwards suing the
clergyman for an interference with his vested rights over wife and
child. This supreme authority of the husband in Christian countries is
shown in many strange ways. Among the Hindoos the naming of the child
belongs to the mother. If the father expresses desire for a different
name, each one is written upon a paper over which lighted lamps are set,
the one burning the longest deciding the choice of name. But in Rhode
Island as late as 1892, a controversy between the parents as to the
naming of a child was settled by law. The father and mother each filed a
certificate with the registrar; the father employing a lawyer who to the
satisfaction of the city solicitor proved his client's prior right, and
an order was issued to the registrar in favor of the father's choice of
name.<span id="fr_41"></span>[41](#fn_41) The claim of the Christian
husband in each of these instances was that of his supreme and prior
right, on the church theory incorporated into law, that both wife and
child belong to the husband. The celebrated Agar-Ellis case in England
during the latter part of the seventies, was brought by a wife to compel
the keeping by a husband of his pledges in regard to the religious
education of his children. The decision was against

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

the wife, upon the general ground that a wife had no rights in law as
against a husband. A man's pledged word broken at the gaming table
renders him infamous and subjects him to dishonor through life. But a
husband's pledged word broken to his wife, under ruling of the highest
court and the profoundest legal talent of England, the Court of Appeals,
and the Vice-Chancellor, is just, implying no dishonor, but rather
entitling him to respect as a man who in a befitting manner has
maintained his marital rights and authority. The judge instructed the
wife that she had no right to teach her children what her husband did
not believe, even though she herself most fully believed what she
taught. He impressed upon her that she was not rearing her children for
herself, bout as her husband's property, over which she possessed no
control only in so far as the husband made her his agent. In affirming
the order of the Vice-Chancellor, the court of appeals declared that the
father had the legal right to bring up the children in his own faith,
and in pledging his word to the contrary he had in no way forfeited or
abandoned his authority. This decision of the English Court of Appeals,
is in accord with the laws of the United States. The Albany N. Y. "Law
Journal" in commenting upon this case under the head of "Curious
Question," declared the decision to be in harmony with the general rule
as to religious education; the child is to be educated in the religion
of the father.

    The "English Women's Suffrage journal" in its comments, declared
English law to be based upon the Koran, quoting, in proof, from a writer
in the "Contemporary Review":

    The East has long been noted for the subordination

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

of its women, and this subjection is not only preached by Mussulmans and
Buddhists but even by Christian churches. Woman is not regarded as a
person but as a field, cultivable or not, as the possessor desires. As a
field can neither have faith, nor intellect, nor a will of its own, it
would be absurd for a man to occupy himself about what a woman believes,
thinks, or wishes. She is absolutely nothing but her husband's domain.
He cultivates it and reaps the harvest, for the harvest belongs to the
proprietor.

    According to the "Women's Suffrage journal," this condition
accurately depicted the spirit of the injunction laid upon Mrs.
Agar-Ellis, by Lord Justice James.

    To the wife and mother he declared that she had no right to teach
her children what she believed, but must, to the contrary, teach them
what her husband believed, whether she believed it or not; the law not
concerning itself with what a woman believes, or wishes, as she is in
law absolutely nothing but her husband's domain.

    The mistake of the "Journal" lies in ascribing this law to the
teachings of the Koran, instead of the teachings of the Bible, which in
general tone, and through particular instruction, places woman upon the
same level as a man's "flocks and herds, oxen and cattle." We do not
find the personal rights of women in the United States differing from
those of the women of England. A famous suit was tried in Ohio, 1879,
known as the "Lucy Walker Case," a former wife sueing the present wife
for alienating her husband's affections. Great attention was called to
this suit from the high position of the parties; Judge Seney, former
husband of one, and present husband<span id="fr_42"></span>[42](#fn_42)
of

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

the other wife, being widely known as author of a "Civil Code," bearing
his name. The suit gained still greater notoriety from the principle
enunciated in his decision rendered against the plaintiff, by Judge
Dodge, before whom the case came to trial; he dismissed it upon the
ground that a wife had no rights as against her husband. All testimony
upon part of the injured first wife was excluded upon the same ground.
He decided:

    First: That the husband has a property interest in his wife which
the wife does not possess in the husband.

    Second: That the law protects him in this right of property in her.

    Third; Upon the ground that he holds her and dares the world to
meddle with him in the holding.

    Fourth; But on the contrary the wife looks alone to the husband, the
law compelling her to do so,

    Thus less than fifteen years since, the legal decision was rendered
in the United States, that a wife is a husband's property; that the
husband has a pecuniary interest in the wife, the law protecting his
right of property in her, while the wife possesses no reciprocal right
of property in the husband.

    The "Toledo Bee" gave the full text of judge Dodge's decision:

    The question submitted is this: Has a wife such a property in her
husband, has she such a legal pecuniary interest in him, that she can
bring an action at law against one who injures him, against one who

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

imprisons him, and, finally, can a wife recover damages at law against a
woman who has carnal intercourse with her husband without her consent?
It will be at once admitted that the question is a novel one. Our courts
adjudicate primarily upon property interests. A husband has a pecuniary,
a property interest in his wife. The law protects this right of
property.

    A father can recover damages against a man who seduces his daughter,
but a mother can not recover for the seduction of a daughter. Why not?
Is she not as dear to the mother as the father? Nay, dearer, by as much
as a mother's love exceeds a father's. But she has not property in her,
is not entitled to her wages; neither is a mother bound to support her
children. The father is the head of the family, not the mother. He, by
virtue of his headship, is legally entitled to the services of his
family. The husband is head of the wife; not the wife of the husband.

    But can a husband sue his wife if she refuses to support him out of
her property, to give him her earnings, or keep her marriage contract?
Not at all. Can a father sue his minor child that refuses him obedience
and service? Not at all. And why is this? For the same reason that he
cannot sue his flocks or his herds, his oxen and his cattle--they are
his. His to command. He is responsible for and to them. He cannot sue
his own. He can sue any one who takes them away; any one who keeps or
harbors them; any one who injures them; because they are his own. But
the wife does not own her husband; the child does not own the father,
and, therefore, I hold that the child cannot sue for an injury to the
father, nor the wife for an injury to the husband. There is in her no
property right upon which to found the action. 'My conviction is that
the wife looks to her husband alone for the fulfillment of his marriage
vows. If he refuses her the support, protection and love which he
pledged her, she applies to a court to enforce the claim against him.
Every dollar he has, every penny of his earnings, all his arm can gain
or his intellect can attain are subject to her right. But she looks to
her husband

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

alone, the law compels her to do so. The husband enforces his claim to
his wife by striking down every one who interferes with his right to
her. He holds her and dares the world to meddle with her. The law
protects him in holding. The law gives courage to his heart, strength to
his arm in defending his position. But the wife looks to the husband.
She relies upon his pledge and his promise, which the law will enforce,
and she looks to that alone. The law does not permit her to go forth to
smite the seducer of her husband, nor the man or woman who entices him
away.

    But as showing the rapid growth of public opinion in favor of the
wife's equality of right with the husband, through the persistent
rebellion of woman against established laws and usages of Church and
States, thus forcing an advancing civilization upon the world, was a
decision rendered 1891, twelve years later, in the state of Indiana. The
case was that, of Leah Haynes, plaintiff, against Flora Knowles,
defendant; a suit similar in character to the "Lucy Walker Case." Judge
Elliot in Supreme Court of that State, on appeal from the decision of
the Circuit Court of Dearborn County, reversed the finding of the lower
court, deciding in favor of the right of a wife to sue for the
alienation of her husband's affections. This decision, so contrary to
common law, and to ordinary christian legislation for woman, is proof of
an advancing civilization which does not look to the church for
approval. Court decisions of this character establishing a precedent,
are of far greater value in demonstrating the growth of a purer public
sentiment, than are simple legislative victories upon school or
municipal questions. They speak even more clearly than do the host of
newly opened industries, freer opportunities for education, married
woman's property

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

laws and similar legislation, of a growing recognition of woman's
personal rights, and of a civilization founded upon the common rights of
humanity, and no longer upon church authority.

    The general spirit and letter of the christian laws of husband and
wife was most fully carried out by a husband of the state of Missouri a
few years since. Mrs. Olive Davenport of St. Louis, suing for a divorce,
upon the ground that her husband required her to obey him in all things.
"Davenport's rules for his Wife" were offered in evidence.

    RULES FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF MY WIFE'S CONDUCT WHILE AWAY FROM ME,
June 1, 1879:

    First: Not to speak to any person or allow any person to speak to
her on the car except the conductor and porter in the discharge of their
duty.

    Second: Go directly from depot in New York, to Mrs. Haight's house,
and occupy room with mother and sleep only in room.

    Third: Speak kindly and politely to "Mrs. Haight, but not in a
friendly or familiar manner. Say to her you do not wish to meet any one
in the house. Ask for a table to yourself, with only your family or go
somewhere else.

    Fourth: Never sing in the parlor or sing in your room when any
person except your immediate family be present.

    Fifth: Never leave mother day or night for five minutes at a time
for any reason whatsoever. Do not walk, ride, or go anywhere without
her, even with your own brother.

    Sixth: Do not call on any person whatsoever, and allow no one who
may call on you to see you unless they be your brothers or their wives.
Do not speak to any person you may meet whom you have not known in the
past.

    Seventh: Write every night to me a full, truthful

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

and exact account of everything you have done, where you have been, to
whom you have spoken, and whom you have seen. This must be done every
night.

    Let nothing but sickness or death prevent your keeping these rules,
for I will excuse no breach on any account.

    Do not leave New York even for one hour without my permission,
except to Brooklyn or Harlem.

    If my wife cannot keep these rules in word and spirit, I desire
never to see her again.

    BENJAMIN R. DAVENPORT.                  

    The divorce suit showed the married pair to have been separated once
before, Mrs. Davenport, unable to bear her husband's tyranny, returning
to her mother's house. At that time her husband required her to eat only
what he directed, and to wear only those clothes he bade her wear,
selecting even the color of her ribbons. The only fault he had to find
with her was that she "talked back," which has always been deemed an
unpardonable crime in woman; one for which the Ducking Stool and Scold's
Bridle were invented. After she left him, Mr. Davenport wrote
affectionate letters to his wife, calling her the sweetest and best of
women, imploring her to return. She relented and lived with him once
more, but her husband again put his rules in force. She then sued for a
divorce, which the court granted. Mr. Davenport's treatment of his wife
is by no means exceptional. The following excerpt is from a letter in
the Terra Haute, Ind., Mail, 1884.

    An individual who considers himself a representative man in the
city, and perhaps he is, said in the presence of several persons. "I
went home at three o'clock this morning and found my wife sitting up.
She burst into tears and asked me where I had been and why I

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

treated her in that manner? I just told her if she said another word I
would leave the house; that as long as she had a comfortable home where
she could spend her evenings it was none of her business where I spent
mine. Now, if I did not provide for my family, it would be a different
thing but so long as my wife was well provided for, she has no right to
complain and I don't propose to allow it." These are the man's own
words, and there are a great many men who hold the same opinions. If
their wives protest because they drink, gamble and spend their nights
away, they say. "You have a good home and enough to eat and wear; what
more do you want?"

    A lady of Richmond, Va., anxious to know from a legal source just
what her rights as a wife were, consulted a lawyer of that city.

    "Well, Madam," he replied, head thrown back, thumbs in armholes:
"Well, Madam, you have a right to comfortable food, a fire to keep you
warm, and two calico dresses a year. These are your legal rights; all
beyond these are the gifts of your husband. Luxuries of food and
clothing, journies and books, these are not yours by law; it remains
with your husband to decide whether he will furnish them to you or not."

    And this is Christian civilization for woman at the close of the
nineteenth century of this era.

    Although married women of the State of New York have enjoyed certain
property rights since 1848, subsequent legislation in various ways
increasing that power, it was not until 1882, that the Court of Appeals
decided them to be the rightful owners of articles of personal adornment
and convenience coming from their husbands, possessing power to bequeath
them at death to their heirs. The same year the Supreme Court of that
state decided that a wife may sue her husband for damages for assault
and battery.

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

The influence of these decisions in recognizing woman's rights of
person, especially that of the Supreme Court in deciding the right of
the wife to punish the husband through the courts for brutal treatment,
can scarcely be over-estimated. It opened a new era for woman:

First: A recognition of the wife's personality.

    Second: Holding the husband responsible for his treatment of the
wife.

    Third: An acknowledgment of the wife's right to protection as
against the husband. It destroyed, in this state the old femme covert
teaching of Christianity, and recognized a wife as possessing the common
rights of a human being.

    The United States, making pretense of the greatest governmental
freedom in the world, and in reality according it to men of every color
and degree of intelligence or property, still denies such liberty to
woman. In many of the states, the old restrictions of modern common law
still prevail. There are states where the property of the wife upon
marriage falls into the control of the husband, to do with as he alone
pleases, the wife not retaining the right to its use or its management
in anyway whatsoever. There are other states where the separate property
of the husband and the wife is made communal, but in those states the
control of this communal property is in the husband's hands. In most
states the old restrictions still exist, and a woman cannot make a will;
cannot act as executrix or administratrix; can neither sue nor be sued.
In the largest proportion of the states in which the separate property
of the wife is recognized, the husband still has the advantage in
heirship. In less than one-fifth of the states has the wife the same

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

control over the children of the marriage as the husband. In the
remaining four-fifths and over, the father is assumed to be sole owner
of the children, who can be bound out, willed or given away without the
consent or even knowledge of the mother. Can barbarism go farther than
this?

    So that even in this year 1-892, within eight years of the Twentieth
Christian century, we find the largest proportion of the United States
still giving to the husband custody of the wife's person; the exclusive
control of the children of the marriage; of the wife's personal and real
estate; the absolute right to her labor and all products of her
industry. In no state does the law recognize the legal existence of the
wife, unless she relinquishes her own name, upon marriage, taking that
of her husband, thus sinking her identity in his; the old *femme
covert*,--or covered woman,-idea of the law books under state and
church. That woman is an individual with the right to her own separate
existence, has not yet permeated the thought of church, state or
society. A letter to the American press from Rev. Robert Laird Collyer,
while re-visiting his native country a few years since, gives the
unbiased views of a native-born English clergyman, as to woman's
position in that land of christian civilization, the husband being
represented as king of the household, the wife as his dutiful subject.
The letter was headed:

    MARRIAGE CUSTOMS IN ENGLAND.

--------------

    THE MAN KING OF THE HOUSE, THE WOMAN HIS DUTIFUL SUBJECT.

    The man is the king of the English household, and the wife is only
the prime minister. There is no confusion

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

or overlapping of authority. The will of the husband is law. He has not
only the place of honor but of ease. The arrangements of the house, the
company entertained, and the service employed, all have respect to his
wishes and to his convenience. The wife conducts the affairs of state
for the king. She has her household and, more than likely, her personal
allowance, and she renders a strict account of stewardship either weekly
or monthly.

    The wife's personal expenditures are less, much less than the
husband's. In many instances he will spend more on his dress as a man
than she does as a woman, for the rule is, the Englishman is the
best-dressed man and the English woman is the worst dressed in the
civilized world.

    "The will of the husband is law," the wife possessing no freedom,
but renders "a strict account of her stewardship, either weekly or
monthly." Kicks, blows, wounds inflicted upon the wife under the
countenance of the civil law; the will of the husband as undisputed law;
her person, her property, her children under his sole control; what is
the condition of the wife in England to day but one of degraded slavery?
That every woman does not endure all these wrongs is simply because she
has a lenient master. Like Adolph under St. Clair, in "Uncle Tom's
Cabin," she has freedom because a good master allows her to take it;
under a bad master she suffers as Adolph when falling into the hands of
Legree. Personal rights are the basis of all other rights; personal
slavery is the root of all other wrongs. Neither freedom of the
intellect or conscience can exist without freedom of person. Thus
civilization has not yet existed, that which has borne the name having
been but the thought of the few; the civilization of the present is not
enlightened it belongs to the barbarous ages; authority and not justice
is the rule. To the present time the lenient

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

sentence imposed upon the English husband who beats his wife is such as
to invite a repetition of the offense; knocking a wife down, beating and
bruising her with a poker are rights secured to the husband under
present English law.

    A man named Hefferon, at Rotherham, finding his wife had gone to
some place of which he disapproved, knocked her down and beat her
violently with a poker. She bled from both ears, her throat was
scratched, and she was badly bruised on her back and arms. Mr. justice
Day practically told the jury to acquit. He said the case ought not to
have come before them, and he suggested that the prisoner had been
merely exercising that control over his wife which was still sanctioned
by the law of England.<span id="fr_43"></span>[43](#fn_43) The jury
acquitted promptly, as directed.<span id="fr_44"></span>[44](#fn_44)

    To such extent is this abuse of woman under law as to have called
forth a vigorous article in the "Westminster Review,"<span
id="fr_45"></span>[45](#fn_45) under head of "The Law in Relation to
Woman."

    There is another cruel injustice to woman, which is so notorious as
to have become a mere truism. It is referred to almost daily, yet
familiarity has bred such contempt, that it goes on unchecked and
unabated. We refer to the monstrously lenient sentences passed upon
husbands who assault and beat their wives. In one of our criminals
courts recently, two men and a woman were sentenced to six **years**
penal servitude for stealing a watch by force, while a man who assaulted
and greviously wounded his wife and mother-in-law

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

with a reaping hook, got eighteen months' imprisonment. An instance
**occurred** the other day in a small municipal court. A man pleaded
guilty to assaulting and kicking his wife and another woman with
effusion of blood and injury to their persons. He was fined a pound for
each female. Shortly after two men were convicted of injuring public
seats belonging to the municipality, by knocking them about, etc., they
were fined two pounds each. Clearly, therefore, in the eves of this
magistrate a **municipal** seat is worth exactly twice the value of a
woman. Parallel sentences to these may be seen almost daily in the
newspapers in any part of the United Kingdom. In the police courts,
wife-beaters often get off with a few days imprisonment, sometimes with
an admonition. If it be argued that theft is such a common offense that
it is necessary that it should be punished with greater severity than
cruelty, we rejoice that the argument applies quite as forcibly to
wife-beating. which, unfortunately is as common an offence as can be
found among a certain class of society.<span
id="fr_46"></span>[46](#fn_46)

    The comparison here shown between the penalty of criminally
assaulting and wounding women, not alone the man's wife but also her
aged mother, most forcibly shows the entire disregard of Christian
England in the last half of the nineteenth century, for the personal
rights of all women. No proof is needed other than such decisions; nor
is the United States far in advance. Within ten months from the
formation of the "Protective Agency for Women and Children," organized
in Chicago, April 1886, it had investigated nearly one hundred
complaints. Although in a majority of these cases the a agency was
successful in securing redress, it yet found there was not legal remedy
where

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

the husband and father failed to provide for his family, and that in
cases of crimes against women, its efforts were crippled by the
disposition of police justices to regard such crimes as venial offenses,
either dismissing such cases upon frivolous pretexts or imposing light
sentences. Nothing could more clearly demonstrate woman's degraded
condition in the nineteenth century of christian civilization, than the
almost universal demand for laws securing better protection to women and
children. These two classes, unrecognized by church or state, are still
largely. without that pale of protection man has reared for himself.
January 23, 1886, the "Inter Ocean," gave more than six columns to an
account of the dreadful crimes committed against women and children in
Chicago alone, within the short period of the preceding four months. It
also showed the ease with which criminals of that class escaped
punishment, not alone from laxity. of protective legislation for their
victims but still more from the tendency of magistrates to more crimes
perpetrated by men against women; this condition being the natural
result of the teaching of the church in regard to woman. In the city of
Boston, 1884, the Chief of Police, testified that there were at least
fifteen cases of brutal wife-beating in that city every week, and this
is but one type of the injuries perpetrated upon women for which the
teachings of christianity are directly responsible. So common this crime
and so ineffective all efforts to stop it, that the State of Delaware
has re-established the long abolished whipping-post, for offenders of
this character, thus acknowledging christian civilization to he a
failure, and resorting to the retributive punishment common among
barbarians. But the remedy for crimes against

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

women, and for the indifference of magistrates, does not lie in the
punishment of the offenders, but in different sentiments in regard to
woman in both church and state. Their teachings are the real foundations
of the evil. Within the past ten years, the judge of an English Court
decided that the flogging of a wife in the presence of her son did not
constitute cruelty, sustaining his decision by reference to Blackstone
and other learned christian jurists. It was during that same year (1884)
that the chief of the Boston police testified to the many cases of
brutal wife beating in that "Athens of America," every week. So common
this form of assault that a bill was introduced in the Massachusetts
lower House for the punishment of wife beaters, by a public whipping of
not less than ten or more than thirty lashes.<span
id="fr_47"></span>[47](#fn_47) For those refractory wives of mediæval
christian England, whom whippings failed to subdue, other punishments
were invented; such as the "Ducking Stool," the "Scold's Bridle,"
etc.<span id="fr_48"></span>[48](#fn_48) The Scold's Bridle, also known
as the Witches Bridle and the Brank, was an extremely painful method of
torture, although not as absolutely dangerous to life as the Ducking
Stool, yet fastened in the mouth, its sharp edges pressing down upon the
tongue, if the "Brawling Woman" attempted to speak her tongue was cut
and the torture great.<span id="fr_49"></span>[49](#fn_49) An American
clergyman describing in a public lecture an "ancient machine" seen by
him in christian England,

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

"for curing a scolding wife," accompanied his description by the very
clerical intimation that it could now be made by an ordinary blacksmith.
Two curved plates of bronze conformed to the shape of the head, were
delicately hinged and provided with hooks to place in the corners of the
mouth. When adjusted, the machine was buckled back of the head.<span
id="fr_50"></span>[50](#fn_50)

The Ducking Stool<span id="fr_51"></span>[51](#fn_51) consisted of a
chair securely fastened upon a long plank balanced upon upright
standards, and so arranged that the victim could be launched sixteen or
eighteen feet into the pond or stream, while the executioner of the
sentence stood upon dry ground. The back and arms of the chair were
engraved with representations of devils torturing scolds. The culprit
securely fastened in this chair, so confined as to be entirely helpless,
was sometimes drowned; the chair being plunged once, twice, or thrice in
some muddy stream or slimy pond. The suggestive and usual place of
storing the Ducking Stool, when not in use, was the church-yard. Almost
every English town of importance possessed one; their use was continued
until the present century. The Leominster

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

Ducking Stool, still preserved, was used in 1809, by order of the
magistrates, upon a woman named Jane Corran, who received her punishment
near Kenwater, Bridge. As late as 1817 Sarah Leeke was wheeled around
town in this chair, although the lowness of the stream prevented the
ducking<span id="fr_52"></span>[52](#fn_52) she would otherwise have
received. Railing and scolding or "answering back," were deemed crimes
on the part of the wife, who, "commanded to be under obedience," was
expected silently to submit to oppression of every kind. That she did
not--that she dared revolt by words--that women in sufficient number to
cause the invention of such an instrument, were rebellious in midst of
the horrid oppression created by the church, speaks well for the womanly
nature and thrills the heart with admiration the same as when old
Margaret Pole, Countess of Salisbury, refused to lay her head on the
block at the executioner's mandate, declaring that as she was innocent,
she would not voluntarily place herself in position for death. While
England has the shame of originating the Ducking Stool, the "Pilgrim
Fathers," fleeing from religious persecution, failed not to take with
them the implements of cruelty used in the domestic oppression of woman.
The Ducking Stool, and the "Stool of Penitence" figure in the early
annals of New England. Upon the latter, the Scarlet Letter of shame
affixed upon her breast, the unmarried mother was forcibly seated
beneath the pulpit, under public gaze, while her companion in sin
protected by church and state, perchance held his place among the elders
in the jury box, or upon. the bench as the judge who had condemned her.
Old Colonial legislation makes us acquainted with the various

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

methods in use for punishing the free speech of women in this country
two hundred years since.

    "A Law to Punish Babbling Women" enacted by the General Assembly, of
Virginia, 1662.

    Whereas, many babbling women slander and scandalize their neighbors,
for which their poor husbands are often involved in chargable and
vexatious suits and cost in great damages. Be it therefore enacted by
the authority aforesaid, that in actions of slander caused by the wife,
after judgment passed for damages, the wife shall be punished by
ducking; and if the slander be so enormous as to be judged at greater
damages than 500 lbs. of tobacco, then the wife to suffer ducking for
each 500 pounds of tobacco adjudged against the husband, if he refuses
to pay the tobacco.

    As this was the state in which wives were bought in exchange for
tobacco, it is not surprising to find the penalty of her free speech to
be paid in tobacco, the wife to suffer ducking for each 500 pounds
penalty in excess of the first. Massachusetts was not long in following
the example of Virginia, and in 1672 ten years later, passed

    A LAW FOR THE PUNISHMENT OF SCOLDS IN MASSACHUSETTS.

    Whereas, there is no express punishment (by law hitherto
established) affixed to the evil practice of sundry persons by
exhorbitancy of tongue in reviling and scolding; it is therefore ordered
that all such persons convicted before any court or magistrate that hath
proper cognizance of the case, shall be gagged, set in a ducking stool
and dipped over bead and ears three times, in some convenient place of
fresh or salt water, as the court or magistrate shall judge meet.<span
id="fr_53"></span>[53](#fn_53)

    Nor must we believe that the punishment of women

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

for use of the tongue, is of past ages. Even in the United States, women
are to this day sometimes arraigned for free speaking. Laws to punish
"babbling women" enacted in colonial days are still in force. It is but
a few years since a women of St. Louis was arrested and brought before a
magistrate as a common scold.<span id="fr_54"></span>[54](#fn_54) In the
State of New Jersey, 1884, a woman was brought before the courts,
convicted, on the old grounds of being a "common scold" and fined $25,
and costs. Death not infrequently accompanied the use of the ducking
stool, the poor gagged victim, her hands securely fastened, being
utterly unable to help herself. But we do not learn that either the
magistrate or the husband was held responsible to the law for such
death. The sufferers, like those under the catholic inquisition of the
fourteenth century, were deemed outside of the pale of sympathy or human
rights, and the devils depicted upon the back of ducking stools as
laying hold of their victims, were conceded to have but taken their
rightful prey.

    Such has been part of Christian legislation for women in America,
and yet she is told to see how much Christianity has done for her. To
such extent has this church doctrine of man's superiority to

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

woman, and the right of the husband to control of the wife proceeded,
that many husbands believe they possess the right to sell their wives.
Since the reformation her sale in the market-place as an animal, held by
a halter about her waist, has been recognized by English law even as
late as the present century. Although forbidden, the practice of
wife-sale is still occasionally found both in England and in America.
But when the law takes cognizance of such a sale its penalty is visited
upon the innocent wife and not upon the guilty husband. The "English
Women's Suffrage Journal" of December 1st. 1883. reported such a case.

    November 13th. 1883, Betsy Wardle, was indicted for having on the
4th of September, 1882, married George Chusmall, her former husband
being alive. The prisoner pleaded guilty, but said her former husband
gave her no peace and sold her for a quart of beer. She imagined this
was a legal transaction, and that she could marry again. The second
husband was asked how he came to marry the prisoner. He answered "Well,
I bout her." The judge said, "You are not fool enough to suppose you can
buy another man's wife?" on which he replied, "I was."

    Mr. Swift asked his lordship not to pass a severe sentence. The
prisoner imagined that because she had been sold for sixpence there was
nothing criminal in marrying again. His lordship said it was absolutely
necessary to pass some punishment on *her* to teach her that a *man* had
no more right to sell his own wife than his neighbor's wife, or cow, or
ox, or ass, or anything that was his.

    The reason given by the judge for punishing the woman, is extremely
suggestive of woman's condition under the law. The wife who had been
sold, the innocent victim of this masculine transaction, was sentenced
to a week's imprisonment with hard labor, while the man who sold her and
the man who bought her

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

escaped without punishment or censure. The judge in quoting the tenth
commandment, graded the wife with the ox and the ass in the belongings
of a man; the decision thus ranking her with the cattle of the
stable.<span id="fr_53"></span>[53](#fn_53) To add to the infamy of this
trial, it was the occasion of much unseemly jesting and laughter. It
took place at the Liverpool Assizes before Justice Denham. His judgment
paralleled the decision of the

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

"Seney Trial" in Ohio, 1879. The selling a wife as a cow<span
id="fr_56"></span>[56](#fn_56) in the market place was by no means
uncommon during the early part of the century in England. Ashton<span
id="fr_57"></span>[57](#fn_57) gives numerous instances of such sales.

The laws of England are those of Christianity based upon the theological
teaching of man's superiority over woman; she is his servant,
subordinate to him in all things, a condition except where removed by
special statute, existing to-day.<span id="fr_58"></span>[58](#fn_58)
Returned missionaries who refer to the wife as waiting upon the husband
at table in heathen countries not eating until he is satisfied, as proof
of the different customs brought about by christianity, should inform
themselves of the condition of the Christian wife for nearly a thousand
years in what is regarded as the foremost Christian country in the
world. He will then have learned that circumstances

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

quite contradictory to ecclesiasticism finally permitted the English
wife to assume a seat at the table with her husband, a place she was not
allowed to take for many hundred years after the introduction of
christianity Into that island. In every country where christianity
exists, women now are, and during all the years of its civil power have
been, legislated for as slaves. They have been imprisoned for crimes
which if committed by a man were punished by simply branding on the
hand; they have been condemned to be buried alive for other crimes which
if committed by a man, were atoned-for by the payment of a fine. Having
first robbed woman of her property and denied her the control of her own
earnings, the Christian religion allowed her to suffer the most
agonizing form of death, a living burial, for lack of that very money of
which she had been civilly and ecclesiastically robbed. The law so far
controlled family life that for many hundred years it bound to servile
labor, all unmarried women between the ages of eleven and forty. The
father possessed absolute control over the marital destiny of his
daughter.

    Instances of wife sale are not uncommon in the United States, and
although the price is usually higher than that given for English wives,
reaching from three hundred to four thousand dollars, still. as low a
sum as five cents has been recorded. A prosperous resident of Black
Hills, Dakota, is said to have begun his business start in life through
sale of his wife. If a wife is a husband's property the same as a cow,
it is manifestly unjust that legal punishment of any kind should fall
upon her because of her master's action. She is irresponsible. The right
of sale logically goes with the right of beating, of taking the wife's
property

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

and holding her earnings, of owning her children, and she should be
exempt from punishment for her own sale. In a much larger measure we
find the same rule of punishing wives for the crimes of husbands,
enforced in the United States, in the penalty of dis-franchisement of
the women of Utah for the polygamy of the men of Utah. And this penalty
was extended not alone to the wives of polygamous husbands--themselves
possessing but one husband--victims alike of church and state, but the
non-Mormon, or "Gentile Women" of that territory, were also
disfranchised by the XLIX. Congress of the United States because of the
polygamy of a portion of the Mormon men; all women of that territory
were deprived of their vested rights, rights that had been in existence
for seventeen years, because of the crimes of men.<span
id="fr_59"></span>[59](#fn_59) Against this injustice, the Woman
Suffragists of the country protested through means of a committee in a

    MEMORIAL.

--------------

    To the President of the United States:

    The National Woman Suffrage Association, through this committee,
respectfully present to you a protest against that clause of the
anti-polygamy measure passed by congress, which, whether in the Edmunds
bill of the senate or the Tucker substitute of the house, disfranchises
the non-polygamous women of Utah.

    The clause relating to the disfranchisement of women has no bearing
on the general merits of the end sought to be attained by the measure,
since Mormon men are the majority of the voters of the territory.

    The non-polygamous women of Utah have committed no crime.
Dis-franchisement is reserved by

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

the United States government for arch traitors. Justice forbids that
such a penalty should be inflicted on innocent women.

    Non-polygamous Mormon women and the Christian women of Utah being
thus disfranchised--the former for their opinions and the latter for the
opinions of the former--a precedent is established subversive of the
fundamental principles of our government, and threatening the security
of all citizens.

    If congress deems it necessary to disfranchise citizens because of
injurious beliefs, discrimination between sexes is manifestly unjust.

    It bas been held by the foremost statesmen of the nation that the
right of suffrage once exercised, becomes a vested right which cannot be
taken away. Gratz Brown once said, in the senate of the United States,
that if the idea that suffrage could be taken away at pleasure once
crystallized in the minds of the people, it would "ring the death knell
of American liberty." Mr. Vest, of Missouri, on the 25th, day of this
month, said, on the floor of the senate: "Suffrage once given can never
be taken away. Legislatures and conventions may do everything else; they
never can do that. When any particular class or fraction of the
community is once invested with this privilege it is fixed, accomplished
and eternal."

    Thus every argument for justice, equal legislation and the safety of
our republican form of government calls for the defeat of this clause.

    We, therefore, respectfully urge you, as guardian of the rights of
all American citizens, to veto any measure coming before you which
disfranchises the women of Utah.

    LILLIE DEVEREUX BLAKE,  
MATILDA JOSLYN GAGE,  
CAROLINE GILKEY ROGERS,  
MARY SEYMOUR HOWELL,  
CLARA B. COLBY,  
SARAH MILLER, <span id="page_345">p. 345</span>  
ELIZABETH BOYNTON HARBERT,  
HARRIETTE R. SHATTUCK,  
LOUISA SOUTHWORTH,

    Committee

    This memorial, supplemented by personal argument from the committee
demonstrating the political dangers connected with such a denial of
vested rights, together with the greater injustice of punishing women
for the crimes of men, was met by reply of the President that as great
changes were frequently made in bills before their final passage, he had
as yet not given the subject much thought; promising, however to give it
his fullest attention whenever brought before him. The method taken by
the president to avoid responsibility of decision, is notable as he
neither signed nor vetoed the bill, but allowed it to become law through
such non-action. Crimes of omission being parallel with those of
commission, the women of the United States can but hold Grover Cleveland
equally guilty with the XLIX. Congress in punishing women for the crimes
of men.

    The Code of England, from which that of the United States is largely
borrowed, was the outgrowth of Christianity, based upon a belief in
man's superiority and woman's subordination to him as entering every
relation of life. All legislation was class; the line was sex. During
the early and middle ages man exhibited an antagonism towards
woman,<span id="fr_60"></span>[60](#fn_60) which if not wholly created
by religious belief was strenuously

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

fostered by the church. Man's basest, passion, love of power, was
appealed to and he was assured by what he had been trained to regard as
indisputable authority, that God had ordained his rule over woman. A
quick response met all such priestly teaching. Christianity has ever
been a religion of the emotions rather than of the reason. The former
was cultivated; the latter bitterly condemned. The church has ever found
its most powerful enemy in reason, hence the exercise of reason has ever
been a crime in her eyes.

    During the Christian ages the different code of morals for man and
woman has created infinite wrong. Open and notorious vice among both
churchmen and laymen passed unreproved, but an heiress forfeited her
possessions by unchastity, and wily plans were laid to thus gain
possession of her property, the betrayer receiving payment from the
guardian, whose tool he was, for his perfidy.<span
id="fr_61"></span>[61](#fn_61) To this moral code we trace the present
legal condition of girls, daughters having no status in the courts in
case of betrayal. The father alone, as master and owner, can sue for
loss of her services, while the injury to herself is passed by, even
upon so momentous a question as the paternity of a child born out of
wedlock.

    Many of the most flagrant wrongs perpetrated against woman can be
traced to a denial of a right of ownership, beginning with the denial of
her right to herself. Even the Salic law which in France was used to bar
the succession of woman to the throne, was not specifically or primarily
in favor of males; it was a property law growing out of the patriarchal
idea of property in woman. Under Christian form of

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

marriage, woman was transferred to another family whose name she took.
She not only became the property of her husband but all real or personal
estate which she possessed, also became his. Thus her property went to
the enrichment of another family. Her home was, no longer with her own
people, but where her husband chose to make it. Salic law derived its
name from Sala, a house. Salic land, said Montesquieu, was the land
belonging to the house.<span id="fr_62"></span>[62](#fn_62) At time of
its adoption the line of descent was male. Under it during the middle
ages when a daughter married, she received merely a chaplet of roses.
Thenceforth, her interests were elsewhere, and her children became part
of another family; she was entirely lost to the family of her birth. As
she was no longer a part of it she did not receive inheritance. "It was
not a subject of affection but gens."

    Guizot with a fine sense of irony, termed Salic law essentially a
penal code. Its application to woman was incontestibly penal. In France
its action has been most pronounced. Robertson speaks of the Salic law
as the most venerable monument of French jurisprudence, although the
real period of its birth has never yet been fully acknowledged. While
during the struggle of Phillippa de Valours, and Edward III. for the
crown of France, this law was invoked to prevent the succession of
Phillippa, yet we know that in Gaul during the time of Cæser, mothers
had sole authority over their children, even boys remaining in entire
charge of the mother until old enough for instruction in arms. Wives
also possessed property rights, upon marriage the husband adding the
same

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

amount of property he had received with his wife. This was kept as a
separate fund, the survivor taking the whole. Hallum designated the
contest between Phillippa and Edward as in every way remarkable, but
especially on account of its result in the exclusion of woman from the
succession,<span id="fr_62"></span>[62](#fn_62) then first suggested. It
was the Latin races rather than the Scandinavian or Teutonic that first
essentially degraded woman. The Riparian Franks, pre-eminent as lovers
of liberty, were the first who broke away from the rule of this law.
Both the Scandinavians and Teutons possessed prophetic women or
priestesses to whom the highest deference was shown. The Teutonic races
were early noted for the high respect in which they held women, a
respect closely bordering upon veneration. The greatest deference was
shown to their opinions even upon war, the chief business of men's
lives. Victoria received the title of "Mother of Camps," and was an
especially venerated person. Veleda by superior genius, directed the
counsels of the nation and for nine years prevented the progress of the
imperial armies of Rome. The most momentous questions of state and of
religion were submitted to woman's divine judgment.

    The relation between the wrongs of woman and her non-ownership of
property, and of herself, are very complicated. The custom of Marquette
originated from the theory of property in woman; the Suzerain or lord
possessing not only a certain property right in his male vassals, but a
double right to the woman who as a bride became the property of his
vassal. Thus Marquette

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

was the outgrowth of the husband's property right in his wife, and a
secondary result of man's assumed right of property in woman. In France,
where the Salic law possessed greatest strength we find the custom of
marquette most prevalent. Next to marquette, the law known as "Mund" or
"'Mundium" offered the greatest indignity to woman, and in some respects
may be called more vile. While the baseness of marquette took its
victims from a class beneath the lord in social standing, Mundium
entered the family, the father selling his daughter to such wooer as he
chose, or from whom he received the greatest payment, entirely
regardless of the wishes of the daughter herself. The Salic law seemed
to have been founded on the principle of the Mund, as under it a sum was
paid by the husband to the family of the bride in consideration of the
transference of the authority they possessed over her, to the husband,
and this payment was known as "Mundium" and the bride as a "Mund" bought
woman. In Denmark, to which country the custom of mundium extended, her
appellation was "mundi-keypt-krom," signifying a mund bought woman. At
that period descent was reckoned from the father, to whom alone the
children were held to be related, and his relinquishment of authority by
sale of his daughter, transferred her relationship from her father to
her husband, and she thus became a component part of another family. She
no longer belonged to the family of her birth, but to that of her
purchaser. The Franks were the first to break Salic customs and to
permit a father to settle an estate upon his daughter and her
children.<span id="fr_64"></span>[64](#fn_64) Under the law of Gavelkind
as it existed in Great Britain, daughters never inherited, although

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

the rights of even an illegitimate son was recognized as equal to those
of legitimate sons. By the laws of gavelkind, property could not descend
to women, but the County of Kent possessed more freedom than in any
other part of England. There was a custom of privilege annexed to all
lands of this kind in Kent, among them, that the wife should be endowed
with a moiety; gavelkind land was devisable by will. Ordinarily in
gavelkind, property was kept in male hands, descending from father to
son. The very name gavelkind is said to bear this signification, the
word *Kynd* in dutch signifying a male child, thus *gife eal cyn*, means
give all to the son. Its modern signification is the custom of partition
of property among males alone, or the greatest share to the oldest son.

    Lord Coke looked upon the practice of gavelkind among the Irish as a
mark of their descent from the ancient Britons. At this period wives
were not entitled to dower, thus in respect to property, all women of
the family were equally disinherited. But it was the opinion of Lord
Holt that by the Common Law, both before and after the conquest, all the
children, both male and female inherited both the real and the personal
estate, and in like proportion. But in the reign of Henry I. daughters,
in case there were sons, began to be excluded from the real estate.
These laws, so essentially Salic, it can readily be seen, originated in
the mundium. Passing as a mund woman, into another family, the
succession of property to her under this slave<span
id="fr_45"></span>[45](#fn_45) condition, was contrary to sound domestic
policy. To bestow property upon a daughter

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

was to enrich another family at the expense of the one from whom the
slave-wife was purchased, and her disinheritance was but a logical
result of her legal condition. If we admit the premises we must admit
the wisdom of her exclusion from succession.

    It is curious to note the difference in woman's position which
possession of property has ever made. This difference especially
noticeable during Feudalism in case of an heiress with fiefs, is no less
so, at the present day. It is a mark of an unripe civilization that the
rights of property have ever been regarded before those of person.
Walker<span id="fr_66"></span>[66](#fn_66) over sixty years since,
recognized the power of property in ameliorating woman's condition, then
declaring that the first step toward an acknowledgment of her equality,
must be a recognition of her rights of property; his broad knowledge of
ancient law having taught him the close connection of property rights
and personal rights. During many ages battle was done for possessions
and the protection of what a man owned. Even the war of the American
Revolution was begun for property rights rather than for those of
person. The Stamp Act and the tax on tea roused the Colonies to
resistance. A woman first spoke the words "inherent rights," and by the
time nationality was proclaimed the colonists had learned far enough to
say that governments derive their just powers from the consent of the
governed." Consent is an important consideration in all questions
affecting humanity, and is one in which woman is most deeply concerned.
At close of the civil war Frederick Douglas advised colored men to get
property. He had not failed to learn the connection between property and
personal rights. Since Mississippi, in 1839,<span
id="fr_67"></span>[67](#fn_67)

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

    Pennsylvania and New York in 1848, and Rhode Island about the same
period, secured property rights to married women, there has been a great
and rapidly increasing change in woman's position, and as she constantly
enters new industries, earning and controlling money, we find her as
constantly more free and respected. When the English "Married Women's
Property Bill," based upon that of New York, became a law a few years
since, the "London Times," with the perspicuity of our great thinker,
Walker, said:

    "It probably portends indirect social effects much greater than the
disposition of property, and it may in the end pulverize some ideas
which have been at the basis of English life. Measures which affect the
family economy are apt to be 'epoch making'; and probably when the most
talked of bills of the session are clean forgotten this obscure measure
may be bearing fruit. "

    The exception of married women in the demand for political rights by
the women of England, owes its origin to the old monkish theory that
marriage is debasement, and celibate life in either man or woman a much
higher condition. After the passage of the Emancipation Proclamation,
during the civil war, John Stuart Mill declared that married women was
the only class of slaves remaining on earth. As long as a condition of
religious or political subjection continues for her, a belief in the
sanctity of womanhood cannot exist and crimes against her will be
lightly punished. The most debased men of England and the United States,
if arrested for cruelty to wives, agree in the indignant questioning
protest: "Is she not my own that I should punish her as I please?"

    Such has been the power of the priesthood over the consciences and
lives of men, that we find whatever is, bad in the laws, either directly
or indirectly traceable to

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

their influence.<span id="fr_68"></span>[68](#fn_68) Our Anglo Saxon
forefathers were early amenable to religious authority and for a period
of many hundred years clerical influence was exceedingly powerful over
them.<span id="fr_69"></span>[69](#fn_69) The church is responsible for
the severity with which the simplest infraction, of law was visited upon
the most humble and helpless classes, and the greater penalty awarded to
those least capable of resistance. It was for the free man of low
estate, for the slave, and for woman that the greatest atrocities were
reserved. If a free woman stole she was to be thrown down a precipice or
drowned, which Pike regards as the origin of dragging witches through a
pond. If the thief was a slave and stole from any but her own master,
she was condemned to be burnt alive, and her fellow slaves were
compelled to assist at the incineration.<span
id="fr_70"></span>[70](#fn_70) None dared to speak a good word for women
in opposition to church teachings. All her instincts were held as evil.
As the law and the father robbed the daughter, so the law and the church
alike robbed the family. By ancient English law, as before noted, every
person who made a will was bound to remember his lord with the best
thing he possessed, and afterwards the church with the next best thing,
but as the church gained power it took supreme place in the
testament.<span id="fr_71"></span>[71](#fn_71) The peasant was looked
upon as but slightly above the cattle he cared for. A certain degree of
sameness in material and intellectual conditions everywhere existed. The
masses over christendom were alike under bondage of thought

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

and modes of action; social life showed no marked change for many
hundred years. Freedom was an unknown word, or if by chance spoken,
found itself under the ban of the church and the state. justice was
unthought of; the only question being, "has the church ordered it?" A
complete system of espionage existed under both church and state. As
late as the time of Alfred, in England, every nine men were under charge
of a tenth. No man could work outside of his father's employment to
which he was bound; at nine o'clock curfew bell, all fires and lights
were extinguished. A mechanic could not find work outside of his own
village; monasteries and castles contained all there was of power and
comfort. As late as the reformation we find the condition of English
society lax and immoral. Henry the VIII. was a fair type of the nation;
the court, the camp, the church were all in line moulding the sentiment
of community. Although Henry had declared the church to be an entire and
perfect body within itself, possessing authority to regulate and decide
all things without dependence upon any foreign power--meaning the
pope,--he did not fall to generally define the supremacy of the church
as united with and dependent upon the temporal government of the realm;
the king, instead of the pope, becoming its spiritual head. Many new and
restrictive canons were promulgated. Under Henry the prohibitory laws
regarding nearness of relationship in marriage exceeded those of the
Catholic Church. It is but a few decades since these prohibitions
commencing with "a man shall not marry his grand-mother;" "a woman shall
not marry her grand-father;" and extending down to remote
cousinship,--were to be found printed upon the fly leaves of every New
Testament.<span id="fr_78"></span>[78](#fn_78)

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

    For a long period after the reformation, English women were not
permitted to read the Bible, a statute of the Eighth Henry prohibiting
"women and others of low degree," from its use.<span
id="fr_73"></span>[73](#fn_73) Apparently for the purpose of preventing
conversation among women regarding the tyranny under which they were
kept, a law was passed forbidding the residence of more than one woman
in a cottage, and this after the Protestant religion had been confirmed
as that of the realm. As late as Elizabeth, 31-2. it was held a "heinous
offence" for a cottager to give a home to his own widowed mother or
homeless sister. The especial criminality of thus "harboring" one's
female relatives lay in the fact of their being "masterless." As late as
the XVI. century the law still entered houses, and magistrates bound out
to servile labor all women between eleven and forty years of age.<span
id="fr_74"></span>[74](#fn_74) The degradation of women under the
reformation was still more gross than under catholicism. The worship of
the Virgin Mary, and the canonization of many women as saints in the
Romish Calendar, threw a certain halo about womankind that is impossible
to discover in the Protestant Church, or since the reformation.

    The church of whatever name taught woman's innate depravity was so
great that forcible restraint alone prevented her from plunging into
vice. While Christian women outside the Levant were not confined in a
harem under watch and ward, yet various methods of restraint

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

have been used in christian lands within the past few centuries. Among
the most noted of these, the "Chastity Belt," three are yet known to be
in existence. One is preserved in the museum at Cluny, France, another
is in keeping of the Castle of Rosenburg, Copenhagen; the third was
exhibited in the United States, 1884, by Dr. Heidmann's traveling
museum. According to tradition the one preserved at Cluny was in use
during the XVI. Century, in reign of Francis I., who ascended the throne
January 1, 1515; the remaining two in Denmark under Christian IV. in the
seventeenth century. At this period Denmark was greatly agitated by a
religious war, which, however, did not include woman's freedom in its
demands. These belts are hideous proofs of the low estimate in which
woman's moral character was held, and equally striking evidence of man's
freedom and immorality.

    The disrespect shown by the clergy towards marriage as compared with
the celibate condition, has influenced thought in many singular
directions. England's married women under the combined influence of
church and state, deprecate the claim Of suffrage for themselves,
although asking it for single women and widows.<span
id="fr_75"></span>[75](#fn_75)

    The bill referred to in the Memorial, 49 Vic, extended Parliamentary
franchise to single women alone.

    Second Sec. For all purposes of and incidental to the voting for
members to serve in Parliament, women shall have the same rights as men,
and all enactments relating to, or concerned in such election shall be
construed accordingly. Provided that nothing in this Act contained shall
enable women under coverture to be registered or to vote at such
elections.

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

    The word "coverture" expresses a married woman's subordinate
condition, both civilly and religiously.<span
id="fr_76"></span>[76](#fn_76) It means, under the power of the husband;
controlled by the husband; possessing neither personal nor individual
rights; a being not allowed to use her own judgment unless such judgment
is ratified by the husband. Under coverture, the wife can make no
contract without the husband's consent, the law holding her incompetent.
A woman under coverture is an irresponsible being except in case of
crime. When married women refuse to seek the same freedom for themselves
they ask for single women, they practically endorse the judgment of
church and state in favor of celibacy. When married women thus ignore
their equality with single women, they practically condemn that
relation, practically affirm the superior purity of a celibate
condition.<span id="fr_77"></span>[77](#fn_77) The low estimate of women
in England as late as the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is shown
in its literature, especially that emanating from its great
universities. The betrayal of women formed the basis of story and song;
not content with portraying their own vices, these men did not hesitate
to put a plea against chastity in the mouths of mere children. Of such
character is "A Ballad" emanating from this source, but professing to
have been "composed by Miss Nelly Pentwenzle, a young lady of 15," to be
sung to the tune of "Scraps of Pudding. "

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

    A periodical entitled "The Old Woman's Magazine" printed in London,
without date, but from internal evidence shown to belong to the latter
part of the eighteenth century, forcibly protests against the
destruction of innocence, which was the chief amusement of the men of
this period. It asks:

    Why should it be less a crime to deceive an inexperienced girl whose
youth renders it impossible that she should know the world, than it
would be to lead a blind man to the brink of a precipice?

    Thus the laws and customs of family and social life, the literature
of different periods, the habits of thought, the entire civilization of
Christian centuries, has tended to the debasement of woman and the
consequent destruction of moral life. The world stands where it does
to-day upon all these great questions, biased by a non-recognition
through the ages of the sanctity of womanhood, and a disbelief in her
rights of person within the marriage relation, or without; taught, as
this lesson has been, by the church, and emphasized by the laws of the
state.

    There have ever been many severities connected with dower in
England. By old law if a widow married within a year from the death of
her husband she forfeited her dower.<span id="fr_78"></span>[78](#fn_78)
This law accounts for the

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

superstitious sentiment as to ill-luck following the woman who
ire-marries within a year and a day. Like the freedom of the Roman
"Usus" kept up by a three days' absence in each year, this extra day of
the widow's mourning seems to have been added as security for the dower;
while under the most ancient law of Christian Europe, the widow lost her
dower if she married again, the Turks recognizing the greater freedom of
a widow, pay her who re-marries, a sum for parting with her liberty.

    The general rule of dower<span id="fr_79"></span>[79](#fn_79) held
that when arranged at time of marriage, although the husband then
possessed but a small portion of freehold and afterwards made great
acquisitions, if no mention of new purchases was made at time of such
arrangement, the widow could not claim more than the third part of the
land possessed by the husband at time of marriage. In like manner if a
husband had no land and endowed his wife with chattels, money, or other
things, afterwards making great acquisitions in land, she could not
claim dower in such acquisition. Neither could a woman dispose of her
dower during her husband's life. This was quite unlike the freedom
enjoyed by a wife in ancient Wales where the dower became absolutely her
own, to dispose of as she pleased. Under English law the husband during
the lifetime of his wife could give or sell or alien her dower in any
way that it pleased him to do, and the wife in this, as in all other
things, was obliged to conform to the husband's will. The wife's dower
right in personal property can be aliened by the husband in the United

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

States. During the wife's lifetime he may give, sell, or in any way
dispose of the whole of his personal property absolutely, and the wife
has no redress; she is not held as having any right, title or interest
in it as long as her husband lives.<span id="fr_80"></span>[80](#fn_80)
The husband can also alien his real estate, subject only to his wife's
dower right in case she survive him; should she decease before him she
has no power over it. The law in England, as laid down by Glanville, was
that in case the wife withheld her consent to the sale of property she
might claim her dower after her husband's death, but this could only
have had reference to real property, and is the same in the United
States. If the wife withholds her consent to the sale of real estate, it
still can he sold away from her and she thus be deprived of a home. It
is merely subject to her dower right in the value of the property at
time of sale, and in case she survives her husband; should she die
first, she has no redress. Sales of this character are constantly made,
at a small discount, upon chance of the wife's non-survival, As dower
right in real estate does not invest the wife with its ownership in fee,
but merely the use of one-third during her natural life, it will readily
be seen how very small is the wife's protection in dower-right even in
this last half of the nineteenth century. Bracton gives two reasons why
the English husband could sell the dower assigned to the wife without
her consent:

First, Because a wife has no freehold in a dower previous to its being
assigned to her. *Second*, because she cannot gainsay her husband.

    As late as the last quarter of the present century, the learned
Professor of Jurisprudence of Cambridge University, attempted to prove
that it was no reproach

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

against woman's intellect that she was prohibited from making a contract
during marriage; altogether failing in this attempt, he clearly
succeeded in proving woman's condition of pecuniary and personal slavery
in the marriage relation. He said:

    It is not an imputation on the wife's experience or strength of
mind, but is solely grounded on her not being assumed by common law to
have sufficient command of her purse or of her future actions wherewith
to procure materials for making a contract. The legal presumption then
is, that she did not intend to make one, and therefore the allegation
that she did make a contract would imply on the face of it a fraud.<span
id="fr_81"></span>[81](#fn_81)

    The legal presumption that the wife has neither sufficient command
of her purse or of her future actions to guarantee an intent of making a
contract. needs no further assertion to prove her enslavement. The
person neither possessing control of property, or of their own actions
is a slave, regardless of or under what verbiage of law or custom that
condition is represented. Attempts are constantly made both in the
United States and England to take from woman the dower right now
accruing to them. During 1883, an Act was passed taking from English
wives all dower right, giving the husband power to bar the wife in all
cases; and scarcely a legislature convenes in the United States that has
not a similar bill introduced before it. As dower rights increase the
complication of land transfer, just as soon as the law which gave the
husband the power to bar this right became operative in England,
conveyancers began to insert a debaring clause in every deed of
conveyance, thus systematically despoiling, the wife even when the
husband might not otherwise have been so disposed.

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

    As "masterless women," widows in England have received similar
contemptuous treatment as accorded single women, to whom that country
long showed such barbarity. It is curiously noted by Alexander<span
id="fr_82"></span>[82](#fn_82) that Moses placed widows in the same rank
as harlots and profane women.<span id="fr_83"></span>[83](#fn_83) The
law of tenancy by courtesy, which gives a husband rights in the separate
property of a wife, is very unjust when compared with the dower rights
of a wife. In such case, provided she has borne a living child, even
should such child breathe but once, the husband in case of the death of
his wife, holds the entire real estate during his life, as "tenant by
courtesy." He also takes the whole of her personal property absolutely,
to dispose of as he chooses. In a few of the United States, the wife can
defeat this by will, but in the large majority of christian lands, the
full rights "of tenancy by the courtesy," still prevail. Where right of
dower still prevails, the wife.. if there are children, takes but
one-third of the personal property absolutely, one-half if there are no
children, the rest passing to collateral heirs, who may be the husband's
most distant relatives. In case no such relative can be found, the
balance escheats to the state, although in the State of New York the
widow, under such circumstances, receives $2,000 over one half. Of the
real property she has the use of but one-third, in contradistinction to
the use of the whole of her real property, which goes to the husband by
"tenancy of courtesy." In tenancy by courtesy the children are robbed of
the mother's real estate during the life of the father, and of her
personal property, forever. In enacting property laws, man, under
tenancy

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

by courtesy robs his own children. The law of inheritance in Spain, that
country distinguished among European nations as "Most Christian land,"
compels a man to leave four-fifths of his property to his children, but
does not make it obligatory upon him to endow his wife with the
remaining fifth. Neither has the wife a dower right in property owned by
her husband at time of the marriage. The suit of a Spanish widow for
dower right, in an estate of several millions left by her deceased
husband, was fully reported by the New York daily papers within the past
few years. Suddenly reduced from affluence as the wife of this man, to
the most abject poverty as his widow, this wife and mother brought suit
against the estate and her children, who receiving all the property by
the husband's will, left her absolutely beggared.

    In ancient Ireland, the condition of woman was far superior to that
of the christian women of England or Scotland. Two forms of marriage
existed. Under that of "Equal Dignity," the rights of the contracting
parties were the same, and took place when the man and woman possessed
the same amount of land, cattle, or household goods. No force or sale
accompanied it, the woman giving free consent equally with the man. This
marriage was looked upon as a contract between equals. The property of
the wife did not revert to the husband. She retained its control,
loaning it and receiving interest entirely free from the interference of
her husband.<span id="fr_84"></span>[84](#fn_84) Ancient Irish law, also
secured to the mother equal authority with the father over the children
of the marriage. There is no trace of that arbitrary control over both
wife and

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

children with which Christianity endowed the father.<span
id="fr_85"></span>[85](#fn_85) The daughter was held to be more closely
related to the father; a son to the mother, this belief contributing an
equality of right between the sexes. These laws were authoritative over
the whole of Ireland until the invasion of the Danes, in the eight
century, (A. D. 792).

    It is remarkable what effect the ownership of property by woman has
ever had in ameliorating her legal condition. Even in ancient Ireland
the wife without possessions became the slave of her husband. Although
the son was held as more nearly related to his mother, this ancient code
provided that in case his parents were poor and he had not wealth enough
to support both father and mother, he was to leave the latter to die in
the ditch, but was to carry his father back to his own home.<span
id="fr_86"></span>[86](#fn_86) Tradition ascribes this code to St.
Patrick in the fifth century. Under modern christian law, the legal
obligation of a son to support his father is greater than it is to
support his mother, quite in opposition to the old Scandinavian (pagan)
law, which provided for the support of the mother, if but one parent
could be cared for. Not the least among the wrongs inflicted upon
Ireland by English usurpation, has been the destruction of the wife's
rights of property. The right of the Irish wife to deal with her own
property as she chose, irrespective of her husband's consent, was
expressly declared

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

illegal by English judges at the beginning of the seventeenth century.

    There are traces of separate property rights for women, early among
Aryan peoples. By the old laws of Wales, a wife became legal owner of
part of her husband's effects immediately upon marrying him, and had the
sole disposal of this portion even during her husband's life. Debt owed
by a husband to a wife was as binding on him and his heirs and executors
as a debt to any other parties. After the English laws were introduced
into Wales, innumerable disputes arose upon this ground, the Welsh woman
being persistent in her determination to cling to her old rights, and
for nearly two hundred years her will upon this subject was stronger
than the will of English legislators, as proven by legal records.<span
id="fr_87"></span>[87](#fn_87) In other respects the ancient law of
Wales favored woman. A husband's fetid breath was held as good cause for
divorce on part of the wife, who in such case took with her the whole of
her property. While still living with her husband, the Welsh wife
possessed the right to three kinds of property, cowyll, gowyn, and
sarand, known as her three peculiars.<span
id="fr_88"></span>[88](#fn_88) Old Welsh law was unique in that it
forbade both satisfaction and vengeance for

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

the same wrong. Even if detecting his wife in adultery, for which he
should chastise her, the husband was forbidden any satisfaction besides
that. In case of an illegitimate birth the law provided that the man
should wholly maintain the child,<span id="fr_89"></span>[89](#fn_89) a
species of justice not found under Christianity. The laws of "Howell the
Good," enacted at a later date under the supervision of the church<span
id="fr_90"></span>[90](#fn_90) favored the man at the woman's expense.
Under these laws if a husband and wife separated, the father took
two-thirds of the children, the oldest and the youngest falling to his
share, while the middle one fell to the mother A woman was not admitted
as surety, or as a witness in matters concerning a man.<span
id="fr_91"></span>[91](#fn_91) In the division of property the daughters
received only one half the amount given to the sons.

    Under the christian laws of England, by which the property of a
married woman passed entirely into the control of her husband, the
abduction of heiresses in that country was very common for many hundred
years, no punishment following such a theft, although the most
compulsory measures were used, even to forcibly bending the bride's head
in affirmative response during the marriage ceremony. She was a woman;
the law furnished her no redress. It regarded her as the legal wife of
her abductor, to whom she thereafter under this christian law, owed
service and obedience. The sole right to her person, her property, her
children

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

then becoming legally invested in the robber husband. As noted in the
opening chapter, the abduction of a woman, or even an immodest proposal
to her, was punished in older un-christianized Scandinavia, by greater
or lesser outlawry; rape being a capital crime, placing the culprit's
life in the hands of any man. He was outside the pale of law.

    France under frequent changing names and forms of government, and
with a broader general recognition each year of human rights, is yet
very closely allied to the barbarism of the middle ages in its treatment
of woman, and its conception of her natural rights. This was shown even
during the revolution of 1787, of which Madame Roland and Charlotte
Corday were such central heroic figures. Although this revolution
established an equal succession between sons and daughters, yet it did
not tolerate the proposition of Sieyes and Condorcet that woman should
be endowed with the suffrage. One hundred years later, in 1887, a bill
was introduced during the legislative session, to secure to woman the
same political rights accorded man. This bill was lost; "Le Gaulois,"
commenting upon it, declared that in whatever manner the question was
discussed, it appeared grotesque and ridiculous. In the Legislative
Assembly of 1851, M. Chapot, proposed the prohibition of the right of
petition to women upon all subjects of a political nature. During the
same session, Athenase Coquerel, the most distinguished member of a
Protestant family of **clergymen**, presented a bill to the Chambers
excluding women from political clubs. Woman's testimony is not accepted
in regard to civil acts. They cannot attest to a birth or a death, nor
is their testimony admitted in the identification of persons. Neither
can

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

they become members of the family, council, nor are they accepted as
guardians of their own children. It is only since 1886 that their
condition has been in any way ameliorated. The re-marriage of widows is
forbidden under ten months after the husband's death, and until within
the last decade, divorces were of great rarity. The oppressed condition
of woman in the marriage relation, was notably shown by the vast number
of applications for release from the hated bond upon the passage of the
new law; a number so great,--eleven thousand,--that two years scarcely
sufficed to reach them all. No stronger argument against the evils of an
indissoluble marriage is required, and as the greater number of
applicants were women, it is farther evidence of woman's degradation
under christian marriage laws.

    According to the famous Code Napoleon, accepted by France as her
modern system of jurisprudence and declared (by man) to he nearly,
perfect in its provisions, every child born outside of wedlock is deemed
to be fatherless unless such father of his own free will formally
acknowledges his offspring. While fifty per cent of all children born in
Paris are illegitimate, statistics prove that such acknowledgment takes
place but once in fifty births. Thus forty-nine per cent of Parisian
children under the Code Napoleon, theoretically come into the world
without fathers--they are born fatherless. A still more heinous
provision of this Code, forbids all research into paternity.<span
id="fr_97"></span>[97](#fn_97) The father of an illegitimate
child--rendered illegitimate by church canons--is held as both morally
and legally irresponsible for his fatherhood. Under this Code, upon the
mother falls all the contumely associated

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

with such birth, together with the care and expense of rearing the
child. We cannot be surprised at the prevalence of infanticide, a crime
resulting from such unjust legislation, and for which the church is
directly responsible. In the whole history of French jurisprudence, not
a single case can be found where the father of an illegitimate child has
been compelled to acknowledge his offspring.<span
id="fr_91"></span>[91](#fn_91) Under French law, woman is a perpetual
minor under the guardianship of her own, or that of her husband's
family. Only in case of the birth of an illegitimate child is she
treated as a responsible being, and then only that discomfort and
punishment may fall upon her. The same legal degradation of the
unmarried mother, the same protection accorded the unmarried father, the
same enticement of the law for man to assume a fatherhood freeing him
from accountability, the same covert contempt of womanhood and of
motherhood, also exists in Italy, its penal code forbidding all research
into paternity. And this is not the legislation of the middle ages but
of the nineteenth century.

    But French disregard for the rights of woman, as already shown, far
preceded the Code Napoleon; that system but legally emphasized the low
estimate of the feminine we have traced through the Salic, Feudal, and
Witchcraft periods. Louis VII. referring to the number of girls born in
his dominions, requested his subjects to pray unto God that he should
accord them children of the better sex. Upon the birth of his first
child, Margaret, who afterwards married

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

Henry Courtmantel of England, his anger was so great that he would not
look at her; he even refused to see his wife. He afterwards accorded an
annual pension of three livres to the woman who first announced to him
the birth of a son. Although five hundred years have passed since the
graphic portrayal of woman's condition, in the ballad of the Baron of
Jauioz,, we find the Breton farmer whose wife has given birth to a
daughter, still saying, "my wife has had a miscarriage." Question an
ordinary French peasant in. regard to his family and if the father of
girls alone, he will reply, "I have no children, sir I have only
daughters."<span id="fr_94"></span>[94](#fn_94)

During the feudal period parents gave themselves up to merry-making and
rejoicing upon the marriage of the last of their daughters.<span
id="fr_95"></span>[95](#fn_95) Even yet, in some countries, the birth of
a boy is announced by a servant wearing a white apron and carrying two
bouquets in her hand; if a girl she carries but one; in some countries
the father of a boy annually received the gift of two loads of wood from
the state; but a single one if the child was a girl. Even in the United
States we yet see this contempt of the feminine variously manifested,
although the kindness and affection of girls to their parents, is
usually more notable, than that of boys.<span
id="fr_96"></span>[96](#fn_96) Family regard is usually manifested

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

in the descending, rather than the ascending line, yet Herbert Spencer
declares that full civilization is dependent upon the respect and
affection shown to parents. France is not the only christian land that
invalidates a woman's testimony, receiving the assertion of the woman
with less authority than the denial of the man. In Scotland in case of
an illegitimate birth, the accused man is allowed to clear himself upon
oath, in opposition to that of the woman. Under Scottish law the child
born outside of marriage was formerly compelled to do penance in church
for the sins, of his parents. Such has been the justice of christianity
to women and children during the ages. These methods of christianity
were in great contrast to those of heathendom. The early Anglo-Saxon
(pagan) laws contained provisions for the punishment of assaults upon
women. Crimes against her were punished by greater or less outlawry
according to the attendant circumstances. Old Scandinavia possessed many
laws for the protection of woman. It has sometimes been asserted that
these laws were a dead letter, so many instances of loose connections
are recorded in the Iceland Sagas. It is, however, a question of fact
that these illegal relations, according to the same Sagas were much more
frequent after the introduction of christianity than before.<span
id="fr_97"></span>[97](#fn_97) Roman law presumed that no woman went
astray without the seduction and arts of the other sex, upon whom alone
the punishment fell. Under old Saxon, Gothic and Scandinavian law, rape
was punished by death. Under the Conqueror,

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

its punishment was castration and loss of the eyes, which continued
English law until after Bracton wrote in time of Henry III. A lighter
punishment then superseded it, but the effects of this leniency was so
evil the old penalty was restored. While forbidding woman control of her
own property, common law, under one of those anomalous renderings which
mark the constant injustice of Church and State towards woman, held
twelve years as the age of female discretion or consent, rape after that
age not being regarded as criminal.

    Germany with sudden strides has coalesced from a number of
independent principalities through the management of him of the iron
hand, into a magnificent empire, based upon the destruction of human
life. In this empire, where war underlies all, we find woman much more
deeply degraded than during the old pagan days, when as chieftain and
prophetess her voice was heeded even upon the battle-field. Now, while
men are preparing to kill other men, the agriculture of the country and
the lowest forms of mechanical labor fall into her hands. But it is not
as responsible owner we thus find her; she cultivates the fields as a
drudge, upon whom falls all the most severe portion of work. Equally in
Germany as in other christian lands, is the wife looked upon as the
servant of the husband, to whom she bears children that are his alone,
and to whom greater deference is paid by the mother when a large number
of little ones call him father.<span id="fr_98"></span>[98](#fn_98)

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

has been the custom to reward a husband in proportion to the number of
children borne him by his wife, and it is but a year since a Parisian
journalist suggested that for each additional child borne by his wife,
the husband should be allowed half a vote. In Germany as under the
common law of England, the wife is subject to chastisement by her
husband, its severity being left to his discretion. But the height of
barbaric absurdity and wickedness is found in that provision of the
Prussian common law which decrees that a husband can determine the
length of time his wife must nurse her child. As might be expected, at
his death the wife is not regarded capable of caring for the children,
and must accept a guardian for them; the law going so far as to declare
her under age. similarly to that French law which makes woman a
perpetual minor. It matters not if the family property all came through
the wife, or was accumulated by her labor, she is still held as not of
sufficient judgment for its control. In Prussia, woman is still
forbidden to take part in political or other public meetings.<span
id="fr_99"></span>[99](#fn_99)

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

    Morganatic or left-hand marriage still continues the, custom in
Germany. Under its provisions the wife does not take the husband's rank,
nor do the children inherit the father's property, as they are not
regarded as of full legitimacy. This form of marriage is recognized by
the civil law of Germany, and is sustained by the church. The custom, at
first confined to princes, gradually extended to the higher aristocracy,
and as the moral perceptions of a nation bends itself to unison with
civil law, the inferior gentry began to contract marriages of this kind.
Under a morganatic union woman is still more debased than in the
ordinary marriage relation. Aside from the ceremony, the wife is
scarcely other than a concubine. The children of the morganatic marriage
do not bear the father's name, nor inherit from him, under the law of
the state. Neither they nor the wife have more lasting claim upon him in
these respects than had the concubines known as "the Honored Ones" upon
the priestly destroyers of the thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries.

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

    Several notable instances of morganatic marriages have occurred
within the present century. It is but a few years since the Grand Duke,
Louis IV. of Hesse-Darmstadt, son-in-law of Queen Victoria, made a
morganatic marriage with Madame de Kalamine, whose lover he was long
known to have been, and with whom he had previously lived outside of
this relation, she having borne him several children. From the high
position of the morganatic husband, and because of the previous
relationship of the parties, this marriage became the talk of all
Europe, and to some extent of the United States. Queen Victoria herself
did not escape criticism, notwithstanding the prudery for which she is
famed, because of her entertaining the Grand Duke at Windsor soon after
this marriage unaccompanied by his wife,<span
id="fr_100"></span>[100](#fn_100) for the purpose, it was intimated, of
placing him under the influence of Princess Beatrice. The very fact of
such suggestion, whether true or not, as well as the fact that Queen
Victoria universally conceded a prude in reference to infractions of the
moral law by those of her own sex, received the Grand Duke at her
especial home of Windsor soon after his morganatic marriage, is a vivid
commentary upon the two codes of morals extant in christendom and their
influence even upon woman herself. Morganatic marriage degrades the wife
of the right hand ceremony equally with her of the left hand, as it is a
recognition by the law of a christian country to-day of man's right to
become a bigamist, provided he but gives his left hand instead of his
right, to the bride during the marriage ceremony. It is a system of
legalized concubinage under protestantism, which throws the shield of
protection around man in illicit relations, and like all other forms of
woman's

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

degradation, it reaches back for authority to that religious teaching
which proclaims woman to have been created inferior and subordinate to
man. Because of woman's former superior position there, no country but
Germany can as fully show the degradation of woman under Christianity.
Not from pagan Greece can more vivid illustration of her moral
degradation be shown, while pagan Rome shines clear and bright beside
the Germanic races of to-day. While even left-handed marriages among the
higher classes are encouraged and protected, yet among the lower orders
in Germany the ordinary marriage is cumbered with so many restrictions,
as to have become almost an impossibility, and no disgrace or loss of
character falls upon the girl of this class who becomes a mother outside
of legal prevision, but such motherhood upon the contrary is looked upon
as the means of a higher position and greater wages as nurse. As *amme*
in a rich or noble family she becomes a person of arrogance, part of the
pomp and show of the house.<span id="fr_101"></span>[101](#fn_101)

    Despite these wrongs of the ages towards woman, of late so vividly
presented, we still find both Church and State opposing a free
discussion of the question. Within the last decade two northern European
countries have strangely exhibited such hostility, the opposition coming
upon ground of woman's surpassing sinfulness.<span
id="fr_102"></span>[102](#fn_102)

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

    But the most notable opposition has been against the works of two
eminent literary men. "The Doll's House"<span
id="fr_103"></span>[103](#fn_103) by Ibsen, the dramatic poet of Norway,
attacking the irresponsible position of the wife under present marriage
law, brought about the social ostracism of its author.<span
id="fr_104"></span>[104](#fn_104) Sweden's supremely great thinker of
the present century, August Strindberg, recently published a work
entitled "Giftas" (to marry), which incidentally treated of the
influence of religion upon this relation.<span
id="fr_105"></span>[105](#fn_105) The State authorities at once ordered
its confiscation.<span id="fr_106"></span>[106](#fn_106) Instead of a
Papal *Librorum Prohibitorum*, it fell under the censure and prohibition
of a Protestant State. But no more ready method for increasing its
circulation could have been devised; so rapidly was the first edition of
four thousand sold that only four hundred fell into the grasp of the
censorious government. In order to escape the farther penalty of
imprisonment that had been pronounced against him, the author was
compelled to temporarily leave the country. But his work was not without
effect upon the minds of his countrymen, and upon his return a few
months later, a great demonstration in his honor took place. Strindberg
defined the rights of woman as those which came to her by nature but of
which,

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

through a perverted social order she had been deprived. He declared that
woman's desire for deliverance was the same as man's restless desire for
deliverance. Let us, said he, therefore emancipate man from his
prejudice and then woman will certainly be freed. To that end it is
necessary to work together as friends not as enemies.

    That a work of this moderate character, should fall under the ban of
a protestant government, in the last half of the nineteenth century,
should be confiscated and its author banished, is a striking proof of
the degraded condition of woman in the marriage relation, and of the
power still exerted for the continuance of this subjection. Opposition
to discussion of this question in Sweden, is more strange in view of the
excess of women in the population, as they outnumber the men some
40,000; while of single women over fifteen, there are 259,000. Despite
the fact of this excess, impossible to provide for by marriage even were
that condition one of equity and equality, all effort towards opening
occupations to them, or the avenues of education, still meets with
resistance from the church. The only opponent of Mr. Berner's Bill,
1882, for permitting women to take the first two degrees in the
University, those of Arts and Philosophy, was from a **clergyman**. The
bill passed the Odelstling, one of the two Chambers of the Storthing,
with only his dissentent voice.<span id="fr_107"></span>[107](#fn_107)
It received the unanimous vote of the other house, the Sagthing, April
21, becoming a law June 15 of that year.

    Russia, which we are accustomed to regard as less than a half
civilized country, gives evidence of an early civilization which in the
field of morals reached

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

a high place. Samokversof, a Russian author, has made a rich collection
relating to **pre-historic** times, proving that as early as the first
centuries of this era, the Slavonians lived in large societies,
possessed fortified towns with treasures of gold and silver, silk,
embroidered tissues, iron weapons, ornaments of gold, silver, bronze and
bone; while sickles, and the grasses of wheat, oats, and barley, found
in the graves of South Russia, show this people even to have been
devoted to agriculture. The early history of Russia proves that women
then held influential positions in the family, in the church, in the
state; as was the case under the ancient common law of England, so woman
among the ancient Slavs possessed the right of inheritance and the power
of dividing such inheritance with her brothers. In the State we find
woman's wisdom at early date still continuing to shape the policy of the
Russian empire; to the wise statesmanship of the Czarina Olga is the
unchanging plan of that country for the ultimate possession of
Constantinople due. Visiting the Patriarch of the East, during the tenth
century, she at once perceived the vast importance of Constantinople to
the power desiring universal dominion; the possession of that city
giving control of the Dardanelles, of Asia Minor, and Europe itself.
Thenceforth she sought its annexation or seizure and her policy became
that of the Russian nation, which for more than eight hundred years has
made the ultimate possession of Constantinople the great object of its
ambition. Nor has Olga's statesmanship less influenced the entire
European continent, the allied powers constantly struggling to defeat
Russia's aggressive plan, through maintenance of the "sick man" upon his
throne.

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

    From the advent of christianity, forced upon the Slav peoples a
thousand years since by Vladimir, their baptism taking place by tens of
thousands as driven into the rivers and streams mid-deep, priests upon
the banks recited the baptism formula, a change was noticeable. As soon
as the thorough establishment of the Byzantine church in Russia, which
took no inconsiderable period, it being brought about by force rather
than free will, its priests, like those of the Western Church, directed
their principal efforts towards control of the marriage relation, and,
through that, of the family. Nor are we to regard this as strange
inasmuch as every form of christianity regards woman as an inferior
being, the creator of original sin, rendering the sacrifice of a God
necessary in order to re-establish the equilibrium overthrown by
her.<span id="fr_108"></span>[108](#fn_108) Edmond Noble, in tracing the
cause of the present social upheaval in that empire, says:<span
id="fr_109"></span>[109](#fn_109)

    Scarcely had the priests of the Greek Church begun their teaching of
the new faith when change began to unsettle the position of woman and
burden her relationship to the family with a sense of inferiority \* \*
\* her status falling with the natural extension of the ecclesiastical
policy. The Russian woman at last became the slave of her Christian
husband; as much his chattel as if she had been purchased at marker or
captured in war.

    An examination of history proves that in Christian Russia as in
Christian England the husband could release himself from the marriage
bond by killing his wife, over whom under christian law he had power of
life and death. Her children, as to-day in Christian England and
America, are not under her control; she

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

is to bear children but not to educate them, for, as under Catholic and
Protestant Christianity, women are looked upon as a lower order of
beings, of an unclean nature. The assertion of Agathes the Sophist that
he detected the smell of her whose hands had milked the cow, is more
than paralleled under Greek Christianity, woman not even being allowed
to kill a fowl under assertion that should she so do the meat would
become poisonous. Wife beating enjoined as a religious duty became so
common, says Noble, that love was measured by it, "The more whippings
the more love." "The Domstroii," a household guide, compiled by a
dignitary of the Greek Church in time of Ivan the Terrible, counseled
use of the rod to keep wives, children, and servants in subjection. By
it husbands were given almost unlimited power over wives, who were not
even permitted to attend church without the husband's consent. The
prominent ideas regarding woman under Byzantine Christianity have been
her uncleanliness, her sinfulness and the small value of her life.<span
id="fr_110"></span>[110](#fn_110) She is regarded as a being of lower
order than man, and as looked upon in a different light by God.

    Where marriage is wholly or partly under church control, its very
form degrades woman, her promise of obedience not yet having passed
away. In the old Covenanter period of Scotland the records give a still
more debased form, in which the man as head was declared united to an
ignoble part, represented by the woman. But in modern times, both in
Catholic and Protestant countries a more decent veil is thrown over this
sacrifice of woman than in the Greek Church,

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

where the wife is sometimes delivered to the husband under this formula,
"Here wolf, take thy lamb!" and the bride-groom is presented with a whip
by his bride giving her a few blows as part of the ceremony, and bidding
her draw off his boots as a sign of her subjection to him. With such an
entrance ceremony it may well be surmised that the marriage relation
permits the most revolting tyranny. And this condition can be directly
traced to the period since Christianity was adopted under Vladimir, a
thousand years since, as the religion of that nation. The old Slavs
recognized the equality of woman in household, political, and religious
matters, and not until Byzantine Christianity became incorporated with,
and a part of, the civil polity of its rulers, did Russia present such a
picture of domestic degradation as it shows to-day. The chastisement of
wives is directly taught as part of the husband's domestic duty. Until
recently, the wife who killed her husband while he was thus punishing
her, was buried alive, her head only being left above ground. Many
lingered for days before death reached them.

    Ivan Panim, a Russian exile, while a student at Harvard College,
1881, made the following statement at a Convention of the Massachusetts
Woman Suffrage Society:

    A short time ago the wife of a well-to-do peasant came to the
justice of one of the district courts in Russia and demanded protection
from the cruelty of her husband. She proved conclusively by the aid of
competent witnesses that he had bound her naked to a stake during the
cold weather on the street, and asked the passers-by to strike her; and
whenever they refused he struck her himself. He fastened her moreover to
the ground, put many stones and weights (m

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

her and broke one of her arms. The court declared the husband "not
guilty." "It cannot afford." it said, "to teach woman to disobey the
commands of her husband."

    Mr. Panim declared this to be by no means an extreme or isolated
case, and that few became known to the public through the courts or the
press. While the above incident illustrates the cruelty of the state
towards woman under the Greek form of christianity, others with equal
pertinence prove the cruelty of the church.

    A peasant in the village of Zelovia Baltic, having reason to doubt
the fidelity of his spouse, deliberately harnessed her to a cart in
company with a mare-a species of double harness for which the lady was
doubtless unprepared when she took the nuptial vow He then got into the
cart in company with a friend, and drove the ill-assorted team some
sixteen versts (nearly eleven English miles,), without sparing the
whip-cord. When he returned from his excursion he sheared the unlucky
woman's head, tarred and feathered her and turned her out of doors. She
naturally sought refuge and consolation from her parish priest; but he
sent her back to her lord and master, Prescribing further
flaggellations. An appeal to justice by the poor woman and her
relatives, resulted in a non-suit, and recourse to a higher court will
probably terminate in the same manner.

    Popular Russian songs allude to woman's wrongs in the marriage
relation. The wife of a son living with his father, is looked upon as an
additional animal to be urged to the utmost exertion. She is treated
almost like a slave and with less consideration than a horse or cow.
Lady Varney,<span id="fr_111"></span>[111](#fn_111) gives the chorus of
a song in the "Lament of a Young Russian Bride," which portrays the
father-in-law's part.

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

    CHORUS.

    "Thumping, scolding, never lets his daughter sleep,"  
    "Up you slattern! up you sloven sluggish slut!"  
The wife also entreats her husband for mercy.  
    "Oh husband, only for good cause beat thou thy wife  
        Not for little things."  
    "Far away is my father dear, and farther still my mother. "

    While demanding marital fidelity from wives, Russian husbands do not
bind themselves to the same purity; and aside from wife-beating, the
husband's infidelities form the general subject of songs. Peter the
Great, severely beat his Empress Catherine, but while demanding marital
fidelity from her, was notorious for his liaisons with women of low
rank.<span id="fr_112"></span>[112](#fn_112) Women were not counted in
the census of Russia until the reign of this monarch. So many "souls" no
woman named. So long continued has been this treatment of woman, that
the poet Nekrasof says:

    Ages have rolled away, the whole face of the earth has brightened;
only the somber lot of the Mowguk's {*Russian peasant--jbh*} wife God
forgets to change.

    Man's opinion of woman is shown in the proverb, "A hen is not a
bird, neither is a woman a human being." Nekrasof makes one of his
village heroines say: "God has forgotten the nook where he hid the keys
of woman's emancipation," which woman's despair has changed to the
proverb "God remembers everything but the Slavonian woman; he has
forgotten where he hid the keys of her emancipation." The

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

system of indulgence is as marked in the Greek as in the Catholic
Church, but under slightly different aspects. The worship of saints is
an important part of the Byzantine religion There are two saints, to
whom if a person prays as he goes out to commit a crime, however
heinous, he takes his pardon with him.<span
id="fr_113"></span>[113](#fn_113) The present condition of Russian
affairs is ascribed by Edmond Noble, to a long felt revolt in the minds
of the people, against the social, political and religious system of
that country. While the peasant implicitly obeys the czar, regarding his
position as divine and all his commands as just, there is an element
that recalls the former period of freedom, with intensity of desire for
its re-establishment. To this class, permeated as it must be with the
spirit of the age, the efforts for constitutional change, and what the
world knows as Nihilism, are attributable. It is in reality a mighty
protest against that christianity which in destroying **political**
freedom, instituted a monstrous spiritual and material tyranny in its
place. Nihilism is not wholly nor even chiefly a form of political
change; it has a depth and a power much beyond mere social or
governmental change; it looks to an entire overthrow of that religious
system which permeates and underlies all moral and political tyranny in
Russia.

    Class legislation of extreme character is still constantly met in
all christian lands. The English Bill of 1887, for extending
Parliamentary Franchise to woman, as shown, having as its last clause,
"Provided that nothing in this Act contained shall

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

enable women under coverture to be registered or to vote at such
elections." In this Bill, the State recognized the marital subordination
of woman, held by law as under her husband's control not possessing
freedom of thought, judgment, or action upon questions of vital
importance to herself. Walter Besant declares:

    That it is only by searching and poking among unknown pamphlets and
forgotten books that one finds out the actual depth of the English
savagery of the last century that for drunkenness, brutality and
ignorance the Englishmen of the baser kind, reached the lowest depth
ever reached by civilized men \* \* \* a drunkard, a brawler, a torturer
of dumb beasts, a wife-beater, a profligate."

    It is not necessary to search "unknown pamphlets and forgotten
books," in order to find out the depths of English or other christian
savagery of the present century. Every newspaper report, every court
decision, every Act of Parliament or Legislature, every decree of king,
or czar, or other potentate; every canon, decree or decision of the
church, proclaims the ignorance, brutality and savagery of Christendom.
Nor is it among men of the baser kind with their infliction of corporal
punishment upon wives, but in the subtler and more refined methods of
torture made use of by men of the highest position, that we most truly
find out the depths of the savagery of the nineteenth century.
Profligacy among men of the highest position never flourished more
luxuriantly than at the present time; drunkenness has by no means passed
away; wife-beating is still a common amusement; the law still fails to
extend a protecting arm around those most needing its defence; the
church yet fails to recognize a common humanity in all classes of
people. Old traditional

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

customs of thought and action still prevail, and the men of a hundred
years hence will look upon the present time with the same criticising
astonishment that the historian of to-day looks upon the last century.
Savagery instead of civilization is still the predominant power in
christendom. In comparison with the treatment many wives receive in
christian lands, that of women among the American Indians, or the most
savage races of the old world, is far more humane than shown in England,
America and other christian lands, where even maternity does not free
woman from the coarsest brutality upon the part of husbands, nor the
illness incident upon bringing a new being into the world, from writs of
"contempt," even though the death of mother or babe result. In 1890, the
Press of New York City reported the case of Mrs. R. Bassman, who was
summoned to appear before the Surrogate Court, for a funeral debt. Being
in confinement she was unable to appear. Thereupon an order for her
arrest for Contempt of Court was issued, and while still unrecovered
from her illness, she was arrested and incarcerated in Ludlow Street
jail. Her newly born babe deprived of its mother's care sickened and
died; and this is part of Christian civilization for woman, in nearly
the two thousandth year of its existence.

    Booth's "Darkest England"<span id="fr_114"></span>[114](#fn_114)
relates a somewhat parallel case, parallel in so far as it shows the
enslaved condition of the English wife under present christian laws.

    A woman who lived just opposite had been cruelly kicked and cursed
by her husband, who had finally bolted the door against her, and she had
turned to

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

    Barbie, as the only hope, Barbie took her in with her rough and
ready kindness, got her to bed and was both nurse and doctor for the
poor woman till her child was born and laid in the mother's arms. Not
daring to be absent longer she got up as best she could and crawled on
hands and knees down the little steep steps, across the street, and back
to her own door; \* \* it might have cost the woman her life to be
absent from her home more than a couple of hours.

    That brutal men exist everywhere, that women and children are in all
lands abused, that prize-fighting with its concomitants of broken jaws,
noses, heads, takes place in christian lands, are undeniable facts,
usually although in defiance of law and subjecting their perpetrators to
punishment. But the peculiarity of the cases noted and of ten thousand
others, is that they are done under the authority of the law, to a being
whom the law seems not bound to protect. No husbands in the world are
more brutal than lower-class Englishmen into whose hands the wife is
given by law, and he protected by the law in his ill-usage of her. It is
Christian law of which complaint is made; it is the effect of Christian
civilization, in its treatment of woman, to which attention is called.
"Darkest England" furnishes still fuller statements of woman's degraded
condition in that country. In the opening pages of that work it is said:

    Hard it is, no doubt, to read in Stanley's pages of the
slave-traders coldly arranging for the surprise of a village, the
capture of the inhabitants, the massacre of those who resist, and the
violation of all the women; but the stony streets of London, if they
could but speak, would tell of tragedies as awful, of ruin as complete,
of ravishments as horrible, as if we were in Central Africa; only the
ghostly devastation is covered,

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

corpse-like, with the artificialities of modern civilization.

    The lot of a negress in the Equatorial Forest is not, perhaps, a
very happy one but is it so much worse than that of many a pretty orphan
girl's in our christian capital? We talk about the brutalities of the
dark ages and we profess to shudder as we read in the books of the
shameful exactions of the rights of feudal superiors. And yet here,
beneath our very eyes, in our theaters, in our restaurants, and in many
other places unspeakable, it be enough but to name it, the same hideous
abuse flourishes unchecked. A young penniless girl, if she be pretty, is
often hunted from pillar to post by her employers, confronted always by
the alternative--starve or sin. Darkest England, like Darkest Africa,
reeks with malaria.

    It should be impressed upon the mind that the difference between
"Darkest Africa," and "Darkest England," lies in the two facts, that one
is the darkness of ignorant and savage races who are in the very night
of barbarism; while the other is the moral darkness of christian
civilization, in the very center of Christendom, after 2,000 years of
church teaching and priestly influence. A few years since, in
Massachusetts, an action for cruelty on part of a husband came before a
court, the charge being that he came home one night in February, when
the thermometer was ten degrees below zero, and turned his wife and
little child, with his wife's mother of eighty, out of the house.<span
id="fr_115"></span>[115](#fn_115) While the wife was giving testimony,
the judge interrupted, saying:

    "The husband had a right to do so, there was a quarrel between the
husband and wife, and he had a legal right to turn her out and take
possession of the house, that was not cruelty."

    From the newspapers of April, 1886, we learn that:

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

    At Salem, W. Va., Thomas True drove his wife out of doors and swore
he would kill any one who would give her shelter. Robert Miller took her
into his house, and was killed by True.

    The system of marriage recognized by the church has ever been that
of ownership and power by the husband and father, over the wife and
children, and during the Middle Ages the ban of the church fell with
equal force upon the woman, who for any cause left her husband, as upon
the witch. The two were under the same ban as the excommunicated,
denounced as one whom all others must shun, whom no one must succor or
harbor, and with whom it was unlawful to hold any species of
intercourse.

    The "boycott" is not an invention of the present century, but was in
use many hundred years since against a recalcitrant wife, under sanction
of both church and state. The advertisements of absconding wives seen at
the present day, whom the husband sets forth as having left his bed and
board and whom all persons are thereafter forbidden to trust upon his
account, are but a reminiscence of the wife-boycott of former years,
when all persons, were forbidden to "harbor her" under penalty, unless
it could be proven that her life was in danger without such aid. The
husband was held to possess vested rights in the wife, not only as
against herself, but as against the world, and it is not half a decade
since the notice below, appeared in a Kansas paper,<span
id="fr_116"></span>[116](#fn_116) accompanied by the cut of a fleeing
woman.

    A $50 CAPTURE.

    A woman who ran away from her husband at Lawrence some time ago, was
found at Fort Leavenworth

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

yesterday by a Lawrence detective and taken back to her home. The
officer received a reward of $50 for her capture.--"*Leavenworth
Standard*," Kas., Dec. 21, 1886.

    This advertisement and others of a similar character to be seen in
the daily and weekly press of the country, are undeniable proofs of the
low condition under the law, of woman in the marriage relation, and read
very much like the notices in regard to absconding slaves a few years
since. Kansas was one of the very first states which recognized the
right of a married mother to her own child, that provision having been
incorporated in its constitution at early date as an enticement for
bringing women emigrants into that state, at a period when the
anti-slavery and pro-slavery contests within its borders had made it
bloody ground. Although the married woman's property law and the spirit
of free thought has rendered such action less frequent than formerly, it
is less than forty years, as before noted, since the New York Court of
Common Pleas rendered a judgment of $10,000 in favor of a husband
against the relatives of his wife, who at her own request "harbored and
sheltered" her. The Christian principle of man's ownership of woman, for
many hundred years under English law, rendered the party giving shelter
to a fleeing wife liable to the husband, in money damages, upon the
ground of having aided a runaway servant to the master's injury. Under
but one circumstance was such shelter admissible. In case the wife was
in danger of perishing, she could be harbored until morning, when she
must be returned to her master by the person who had thus temporarily
taken care of his perishable property. In England as late as 1876, the
case of a Mrs. Cochrane, who had lived apart from her husband for years,
and showing an

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

other phase of property law in the wife, came up before judge Coleridge.
Her character was not at all impeached, but she indulged in amusements
which her husband considered reprehensible, and through stratagem she
was brought to his lodgings and there kept a prisoner. A writ of habeas
corpus being sued out, the husband was compelled to bring her before the
court of the Queen's Bench. The decision of the judge rendered in favor
of the husband's right of forcible detention, was declared by him to be
upon ground that English law virtually considered the wife as being
under the guardianship of the husband, not a person in her own right,
and this distinctly upon the ground of her perpetual infancy;<span
id="fr_117"></span>[117](#fn_117) she must be restored to her husband.
As late at 1886, the "Personal Rights Journal" of England called
attention to the suit of a clergyman for the "restitution of conjugal
rights" and custody of child. The wife not being able to live in
agreement with the husband, had taken her child and left him. A decree
for such restitution having been pronounced by court, the husband, Rev.
Joseph Wallis, advertised for his absconding wife, Caroline Wallis,
offering one hundred pounds reward for such information as should lead
to her discovery

£100 REWARD.

    WHEREAS, A Decree was pronounced in the Probate, Divorce, and
Admiralty Division of the High Court of justice, on the 5th day of June,
1886, in the suit of Samuel Joseph Wallis versus Caroline Wallis, for
restitution of conjugal rights, and for custody of the child, May
Wallis, to the petitioner, the said Samuel Joseph Wallis. And WHEREAS it
has been ascertained that the said Caroline Wallis has lately been seen
at Whitstable and the Neighborhood,

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

    NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN,

    That the above Reward will be paid to any Person or Persons who
shall give such information as will lead to the discovery of the
whereabouts of the said Caroline Wallis, and the recovery by the said S.
J. Wallis of the custody of the said Child.

    Information to be sent to me, Richard Howe Brightman, of Sheerness,
Kent, Solicitor to the said Samuel Joseph Wallis.

    This brutal advertisement in the dying hours of the nineteenth
century had the effect of rousing public attention to woman's enslaved
condition in the marital relation, and a rapid growth of public
sentiment in recognition of a wife's individual and distinct
personality, took place between 1886 and 1890, a period of four years.
During the latter year another English husband, one Jackson, forcibly
abducted his wife who lived apart from him, holding her prisoner with
gun and bayonet, threatening her friends with death-as was his legal
right-in case of her **attempted** rescue. When this was known, hundreds
of letters poured into the press, upholding the right of a wife to the
control of her own person, and writ of habeas corpus compelled her
production in court. Under the pressure of a public sentiment he found
it wise to conciliate, the judge decided in favor of her right to live
away from her husband, who was also restrained from farther molesting
her. The Supreme Court of Georgia recently rendered a decision in regard
to the rights of husbands as related to the wife's rights of property,
in which the church theory of her subordination was maintained.

    "The wife has been much advanced by the general tenor of legislation
of late years in respect to her property. She has acquired a pretty
independent position

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

as to title, control and disposition, but this relates to her own
property, not to his. The law has not yet raised her to the station of
superintendent of her husband's contracts and probably never will. In
taking a wife a man does not put himself under an overseer. He is not a
subordinate in his own family but the head of it. A subjugated husband
is a less energetic member of society than one who keeps his true place,
yet knows how to temper authority with affection. "

    During the famous Beecher trial, Hon. Win. M. Evarts defined woman's
legal position as one of subordination to man, declaring "that
notwithstanding changing customs and the amenities of modern life, women
were not free, but were held in the hollow of man's hand, to be crushed
at his will." In exemplification of this statement he referred to a
recent decision of the New York Court of Appeals, and to the highest
tribunals of England. He gave his own sanction to these principles of
law, all of which owe their foundation to church teaching regarding
woman, enforced by the peculiar forms of marriage ceremony it has
instituted.

    The church everywhere strenuously opposes civil marriage. The
Plenary Council of 1884, and the celebration of the hundredth
anniversary of the Catholic hierarchy in the United States, each making
church marriage a prominent part of their discussions. Different parts
of Europe and of South America have recently been shaken by church
action in regard to it. Prussia, Belgium, Italy, France, have fallen
under the odium of the church in consequence of the civil laws declaring
marriage valid without the aid of the church. The celebrated M. Godin
founder of the cooperative Familistere, at Guise, was married in 1886
under civil form, to a lady member of the French

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

    League for the Rights of Women, and thus announced the marriage to
their friends:

    M. Godin, manufacturer, founder of Familistere, and Madame Marie
Godin, Dee Moret, his secretary and co-laborer in the work of the
Familistere, and in the propagation of social reform, have the honor of
announcing to you the purely civil marriage which they contracted at
Guise, the 14th day of July, 1886, that they might manifest to all their
union, and the common purpose of all the efforts of their lives.

    Civil marriage, where the church is supreme, is followed by
excommunication and odious insults. In 1885 a remarkable instance of
this kind occurred in the city of Concepcion, Chili. A young couple were
married, with consent of their parents, according to the civil law.
Their social and political prominence made the occasion conspicuous, as
it was the first wedding among the aristocracy in that country,
dispensing with the aid of a priest. The church paper edited by a Jesuit
priest thus commented:

    The "Libertad" calls this "a happy union," but it should remember
that "happy unions" of this sort have hitherto existed only in the
animal kingdom.

    The bride, groom, and all their families suffered excommunication
from the church. But it is not alone the Catholic church which desires
to retain its hold upon marriage. Less than two years since certain
clergymen of the Anglican church agreed to officiate at marriages
without a fee, for the purpose of retaining control of this relation;
and so strong has been the influence of the church during the ages, that
few people look upon a ceremony under the civil law with the same
respect as one performed by a priest, even of a Protestant denomination.
The control of marriage by the church while throwing wealth into its own
coffers, has ever had a prejudicial effect upon

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

morals, as impediments to marriage of whatever character increase
immorality. In the city of Concepcion referred to, of 200,000
inhabitants, there are two thousand children of unknown parentage. In
1884, statistics showed sixty-two per cent. of the children to be
illegitimate. The parents of those little ones were mostly known, being
persons too poor to pay the cost of a church marriage, twenty-five
dollars, its price, being quite beyond the means of the humbler classes.
The Liberal party, in establishing civil marriage as legitimate,
authorized any magistrate to perform the ceremony, and furnish a
certificate for twenty-five cents. This assault upon the ancient
prerogative of the church depriving priests of the largest source of
their revenue, at once made a religious-political issue of the question,
the church taking strenuous action against all connected with framing
the law, and its repeal became the prominent political issue, to aid
which all the faithful were called. Using its old weapons, the church
through the Archbishop issued an edict excommunicating the president of
the republic, the members of his cabinet and the members of congress who
voted for the statute; directing that a similar penalty should fall upon
every communicant who obeyed it and neglected to recognize the church as
the only authority competent to solemnize the marriage rite.

    A correspondent of the "New York Sun," in Chili, wrote:

    This brought matters to a crisis. On the one hand, the State
declared all marriages not under the civil law illegal, and their issue
illegitimate, refusing to recognize rites performed by the priests. On
the other, those who obey the law are excommunicated from the church,
and their cohabitation forbidden by

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

the highest ecclesiastical authority. Thus matrimony is practically
forbidden, and those who choose to enter it have their choice between
arrest and excommunication. A young member of Congress, a man of gifts
and influence, who stands as one of the leaders of the Liberal party,
and who voted and argued for civil marriage, is engaged to the daughter
of a wealthy merchant with proud lineage and aristocratic connections.
He is willing to accept the civil authority, which he helped to create,
and she and her father are also willing, but her mother is a devout
church woman and cannot regard marriage as sacred without the blessing
of a priest. She favors the alliance, but insists that the Church shall
be recognized. The bishop declines to permit the ceremony unless the
young man shall go to the confessional and retract his political record,
with a vow to hereafter remain steadfast to the church. This he refuses
to do. The couple will go to Europe or the States and there have the
ceremony performed.

    This action of the Chilian republic in substituting a civil for a
religious ceremony in marriage and declaring the latter to be illegal,
is a most important step in civilization, of which freedom for woman is
such an essential factor; and its results in that country must be felt
in woman's every relation of life, promoting self-respect, self-reliance
and security in place of the degradation, self-distrust and fear to
which its church has so long condemned her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Polygamy.](wcs09)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_page_295">p. 295</span>  

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1.](#fr_1)  He bought his bride of her parents
according to the custom of antiquity, and she followed the coemption by
purchasing with *three* pieces of copper a just introduction to his
treasury and household duties. Gibbon.--*Rome*, 4; 395.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2.](#fr_2)  By the law of the Twelve Tables
woman possessed the right of repudiation in marriage. These tables were
a compilation of still older laws or customs, a <span
id="fn_page_296">p. 296</span> species of common law incorporated into
statutes by Lachis of Athens, daughter of one Majestes; and were so wise
and of such benefit to the people of Attica that the Romans received
them as natural laws in which there was more of patriotism and purity
than in all the volumes of Popinanus. H. S. Maine.--*Ancient Law*.

<span id="fn_page_296">p. 296</span>  

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3.](#fr_3)  After the Punic triumphs the matrons
of Rome aspired to the common benefits of a free and opulent republic.
\* \* \* They declined the solemnities of the old nuptials; defeated the
annual prescription by an absence of three days, and without losing
their name or independence subscribed the liberal and definite terms of
a marriage contract. Of their private fortunes they commuted the use and
secured the property; the estate of a wife could neither be alienated or
mortgaged by a prodigal husband. Religious and civil rites were no
longer essential, and between persons of similar rank, the apparent
community of life was allowed as sufficient evidence of their nuptials.
\* \* \* When the Roman m-ions became the equal and voluntary companions
of their lords, their marriage like other partnerships might be
dissolved. Gibbon.--*Rome*, 4; 347.

<span id="fn_page_297">p. 297</span>  

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4.](#fr_4)  Uses or Usucapion, was a form of
civil marriage securing the wife more freedom than the form which held
her "under his thumb" as his daughter. It was as old or even older than
the Twelve Tables, and although for many centuries not considered quite
as respectable a form of marriage as that in which the wife became the
husband's slave with divorce impossible, it eventually grew to be the
customary form of Roman marriage. Maine.--*Early History of Ancient p.
Institutions*. 517.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5.](#fr_5)  It was with the state of conjugal
relations thus produced that the growing Christianity of the Roman world
waged a war ever increasing in fierceness, yet it remained to the last
the basis of the Roman legal conception of marriage.--Ibid.

<span id="fn_page_298">p. 298</span>  

<span id="fn_6"></span>[6.](#fr_6)  When the Chremes of Terence
reproaches his wife for not obeying his orders and exposing their
infant, he speaks like a father and master, and silences the scruples of
a foolish woman. Milman--*Note to Gibbons Rome*.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[7.](#fr_7)  "Usus, had the very important
consequence that the woman so married remained in the eye of the law in
the family of her father, and was under his guardianship and not that of
her husband. A complete revolution had thus passed over the constitution
of the family. This must have been the period when a jurisconsult of the
empire defined marriage as a life-long fellowship of all divine and
human rights."

<span id="fn_8"></span>[8.](#fr_8)  Reeves.--*Hist. Eng. Law*, p. 337.

<span id="fn_page_299">p. 299</span>  

<span id="fn_9"></span>[9.](#fr_9)  Maine says: No society which
preserves any tincture of Christian Institutions is likely to restore to
married women the personal liberty conferred on them by middle Roman
laws.--*Ancient Law*.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[10.](#fr_10)  Reeves says, while many great
minds, as Lord Chief justice Hale, Lord <span id="fn_page_200">p.
200</span> John Somers, Henry Spellman, Dr. Brady and Sir Martin Wright
think feudalism came in with the conqueror, others, as Coke, Seldon,
Bacon and Sir Roger Owen are of opinion that tenures were common among
the Saxons. Blackstone, Dalrymple and Sullivan endeavor to compromise
the dispute by admitting all imperfect system of feuds to have been
instituted before the conquest.--History of English Law, Vol. I., p.
18-19.

<span id="fn_page_300">p. 300</span>  

<span id="fn_11"></span>[11.](#fr_11)  A certain bishop, wishing a
person to take charge of his castle during his absence, the latter asked
how he should support himself. For answer the bishop pointed to a
procession of tradesmen with their goods then crossing the valley at
their feet.

<span id="fn_page_301">p. 301</span>  

<span id="fn_12"></span>[12.](#fr_12)  Wives were bought in England from
the fifth to the eleventh century. Herbert Spencer.--*Descriptive
Sociology of England*.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[13.](#fr_13)  There was another law even more
odious than Marquette; the father's right to the price of mundium, in
other words, the price of his daughter. Legouvè.--*Hist. Morales des
Femmes*, p. 104.

<span id="fn_page_302">p. 302</span>  

<span id="fn_14"></span>[14.](#fr_14)  Murder under the name of war, the
ruin of women under the name of gallantry, were the chief occupations of
the nobility Pike.--*Hist. of Crime in England*.

The chief qualification for success at courts was the power of making
and appreciating mirth. The infidelities of women were commonly the
narrator's theme, and an exhortation to avoid matrimony was the most
common form of advice given by a man to his friend. War and intrigue
were regarded as the prime amusements of life; the acquisition of wealth
the only object worth serious consideration. A consequence of this creed
was that the husband frequently set a price upon his wife's virtue, and
made a profit out of his own dishonor. Fathers were ready to sell their
daughters.--*Ibid*.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[15.](#fr_15)  Both married and single found
their worst foes in their nearest friends. The traffic in women was none
the less real in Christian England than it is now in the slave marts of
Stamboul or Constantinople.--*Ibid*.

One of the most recent illustrations of the general regard in which
woman is held throughout Christendom, is the experience of the young
California heiress, Florence Blythe, who although but fifteen years old,
was in constant receipt of proposals of marriage both at home and from
abroad. Her attorney, General <span id="fn_page_303">p. 303</span> Hunt,
said: "I do not think there is a woman living who has had the number of
written proposals that Florence has received, but in all the letters
woman is regarded as a chattel, a thing to be bought and sold. The
constant receipt of letters of this character, and the equally constant
attempt of adventurers to gain a personal interview with the child, at
last became unendurable, and to escape such insulting persecution,
Florence suddenly married a young man of her acquaintance living near
her." These letters, among them, from sixty titled Europeans, lords,
counts, dukes, barons, viscounts, marquises and even one prince, confirm
the statement of August Bebel, that marriage sales of women are still as
common as in the middle ages, and are expected in most Christian
countries.

<span id="fn_page_303">p. 303</span>  

<span id="fn_16"></span>[16.](#fr_16)  A husband upon his return from
the Crusades, finding his wife had been untrue, imprisoned her in a room
so small she could neither stand erect nor lie at full length; her only
window looking out upon the dead body of her lover swinging in chains.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[17.](#fr_17)  The Shoshone Indian who hires his
wife out as a harlot, inflicts capital Punishment on her if she goes
with another without his knowledge. Bancroft--*Native Races*, I; 436.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[18.](#fr_18)  Therefore a single woman for whom
no bid was offered, an "old maid" was looked upon with contempt as a
being of no value in the eyes of men.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[19.](#fr_19)  *Hist, of Crime in England*, Vol.
I, p. 90.

<span id="fn_page_304">p. 304</span>  

<span id="fn_20"></span>[20.](#fr_20)  By the laws of the king of
Wessex, who lived at the end of the VIII. century, the purchase of wives
is deliberately sanctioned; in the preface it is stated that the
compilation was drawn up with the assistance of the Bishop of Winchester
and a large assemblage of God's servants.--*Ibid*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[21.](#fr_21)  Nothing, says Pike, was
considered but the market value of the woman, and the adulterer was
compelled to expend the equivalent of her original price on the purchase
of a new bride, whom he formally delivered to the injured husband. Nor
were these laws merely secular, they were enacted and enforced by all
the dread power of the church.--*Ibid*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[22.](#fr_22)  In the 14th century either the
female character was utterly dissolute, or the tyranny of husbands
utterly reckless, when we find that it was no uncommon circumstance that
women were strangled by masked assassins, or walking by the river side
were plunged into it. This drowning of women gave rise to a popular
proverb: "It is nothing, only a woman being drowned." And this condition
<span id="fn_page_305">p. 305</span> constituted the domestic life of
England from the 12th century to the first civil war, when the taste of
men for bloodshed found wider scope, and from the murder of women they
advanced to the practice of cutting one another's throats.
Disraeli.--*Amenities of Literature*, Vol. I., p. 95.

<span id="fn_page_305">p. 305</span>  

<span id="fn_23"></span>[23.](#fr_23)  "And they were so covetous that
for a little silver they sellen 'ein daughters, 'ein sisters and 'ein
own wives, to putten 'ein to lechery."

<span id="fn_24"></span>[24.](#fr_24)  The Church from the earliest
period furnished its full portion to the codes of our simple
forefathers, that of the first Christian king being that for the
property of God and the Church (if stolen) twelve-fold compensation was
to be made. Thorpe.--*Ancient Laws and Institutions of England*.

<span id="fn_page_307">p. 307</span>  

<span id="fn_2s"></span>[2s.](#fr_2s)  *Journal of Jurisprudence*, Vol.
XVI., Edinburg, 1872.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[26.](#fr_26)  Until the maiden was wedded she
was kept strictly under control, and the kind of discipline which was
enforced is well illustrated by a letter written late in the reign of
Henry V1. The writer was the widow of a landholder, and she Was
corresponding with the brother of the young lady whose case she
describes and whom she is anxious o serve by finding a husband. This
young lady was under the care of her mother, and the following was her
condition: She might not speak with any man. not even her mother's
servants; and she had since Easter the most part been beaten once in the
week, or twice, and sometimes thrice in a day, and her hand was broken
in two or three places. Pike.--*History of Crime in England*.

<span id="fn_page_308">p. 308</span>  

<span id="fn_27"></span>[27.](#fr_27)  Britton.--*Introduction*. p. 39.
Glanville.--*De Legibius Anglica*, p. 158.

<span id="fn_page_311">p. 311</span>  

<span id="fn_28"></span>[28.](#fr_28)  Doubtless in all ages marriages
were by far oftener determined by pecuniary considerations than by love
or affection, but proofs are wanting to show that marriage was formerly
made an object of speculation and exchange in the open market with
anything like the same effrontery as to-day. In our time among the
propertied classes--the poor have no need of it--marriage barter is
frequently carried on with a shamelessness which makes the phrases about
the sacredness of marriage, that some people never tire of repeating,
the emptiest mockery. August Bebel.--*Woman in the Past, Present and
Future*.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[29.](#fr_29)  To make women the special objects
of this torture, to teach them hardness of heart in the office of
executioners, was refinement of atrocity. \* \* \* It was for slaves and
women that the greatest atrocities were reserved.--*Hist. of Crime in
England*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[30.](#fr_30)  Women in England had burned women
to death in the 10th century; they had been set on the stool of filth to
be mocked as brewers of bad ale in the 11th; on the stool of filth they
had been jeered as common scolds from time immemorial; they were legally
beaten by their husbands down to a comparatively recent period. In the
14th century they were such as circumstances had made them; strong of
muscle but hard of heart, more fit to be mothers of brigands than to
rear gentle daughters or honest sons.--*Ibid*.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[31.](#fr_31)  The elder Disraeli says: "Warton,
too, has observed that the style of friendship between males in the
reign of Elizabeth would not be tolerated at the present day." Disraeli
himself declares that "a male friend, whose life and fortunes were
consecrated to another male, who looks upon him with adoration and talks
of him with excessive tenderness, appears to us nothing less than a
chimerical and monstrous lover."--*Amenities of Literature*, Vol. II.,
p. 105.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[32.](#fr_32)  Poisoning or otherwise murdering
husbands was a crime visited with peculiar severity in almost all codes.
Lea.--*Superstition and Force*.

<span id="fn_page_314">p. 314</span>  

<span id="fn_33"></span>[33.](#fr_33)  Blackstone says it was to be no
thicker than a man's thumb, thus an instrument of ever varying size.
According to palmistry the thumb of a self-willed or obstinate man, a
cruel man, or of a murderer, is very large at the upper portion or ball.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[34.](#fr_34)  Petit treason may happen in three
ways: By a servant killing his master; a wife her husband, or an
ecclesiastical person (either secular or regular) his superior, to whom
he owes faith and obedience. The punishment of petit treason in a man is
to be drawn and hanged, and in a woman to be drawn and
burnt.--*Commentaries*, Vol. IV., p. 203-4.

<span id="fn_page_315">p. 315</span>  

<span id="fn_35"></span>[35.](#fr_35)  But in treason of every kind the
punishment of women is the same and different from men. For as the
decency due to the sex forbids the exposing and publicly mangling their
bodies. their sentence is to be drawn (dragged) to the gallows and there
be burnt alive.--*Ibid*, IV., p. 92.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[36.](#fr_36)  The daily press, in its min-ate
record of events, all unwittingly furnishes many a little item, whose
primal reason only the student of history can read. The Syracuse, N. Y.,
"Daily Standard," of February 22, 1884, published from its exchanges the
following incident:

"An eccentric old man in New Hampshire surprised his neighbors and
friends the other day by shouldering his gun and starting for the woods
on the morning of his wife's funeral. On being urged to come back, he
refused, saying: "She warn't no blood relation of mine."

<span id="fn_page_316">p. 316</span>  

<span id="fn_37"></span>[37.](#fr_37)  But now by the statute 30, George
3 c., 48, women convicted in all cases of treason shall receive judgment
to be drawn to the place of execution, and there to be hanged by the
neck till dead. Before this humane statute women ware sentenced to be
burnt alive for every species of treason.--*Commentaries*, p. 97.

<span id="fn_page_317">p. 317</span>  

<span id="fn_38"></span>[38.](#fr_38)  See decision *New York Court of
Appeals*, January, 1892.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[39.](#fr_39)  ST. PETERSBURG, September 22--In
April last Mrs. Aina Sainio, wife of a professor in the State College at
Travasteheuse, Finland, was found guilty of poisoning her husband, and
in accordance with the mediæval law, which is still in force there, she
was sentenced to be beheaded, and her body to be affixed to a beacon and
burned. It was charged that Mrs. Sainio had been unfaithful to her
husband, carrying on a liaison with one of the students at the college.
She strenuously denied this, and said her motive in killing her husband
was to get the insurance of $2,500 on his life as she was deeply in
debt. The case was carried to the Court of Appeals and to-day a decision
was handed down affirming the judgment <span id="fn_page_318">p.
318</span> of the trial court and adding to the punishment. It
transpired during the trial that Mrs. Sainio had forged her husband's
name to checks for small sum, some time before his death, and for this
offense the Court of Appeals ordered that her right hand be cut off.
Then she will be decapitated, her body fastened to a stake covered with
inflammable material and set on fire.

<span id="fn_page_319">p. 319</span>  

<span id="fn_40"></span>[40.](#fr_40)  Reported In the "London
Telegraph.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[41.](#fr_41)  *Telegraphic Report* from
Providence, R. I., September 24. 1892.

<span id="fn_page_321">p. 321</span>  

<span id="fn_42"></span>[42.](#fr_42)  Mrs. Judge Seney's trouble.--A
deserted wife suing the woman who enticed her husband away from her.

TIFFIN, O., February 14-Judge Dodge gave his decision yesterday in the
novel case of the former Mrs. George E, Seney against the present Mrs.
George E. Seney. judge Seney is one of the well known lawyers of Ohio,
and author of <span id="fn_page_322">p. 322</span> a "Civil Code" that
bears his name. He married his first wife, Mrs. Anna Seney, in 1858, and
for fourteen years they lived happily together. At about that time Mrs.
Seney and Miss. Walker became very intimate friends, and continued to be
so until, as is alleged, Mrs. Seney ascertained that Miss Walker was
undermining the affections of her husband. A separation between Mr. and
Mrs. Seney soon followed, and subsequently the judge married Miss
Walker. Mrs. Seney, therefore, instituted a suit against her successor,
claiming damages in the amount of $10,000 for the seduction of her
husband.--"New York Sun."

<span id="fn_page_331">p. 331</span>  

<span id="fn_43"></span>[43.](#fr_43)  James Howard, thirty-five years
old. was taken from jail at Texarkana, Ark., on Wednesday night by a mob
and lynched. He was under arrest for horrible cruelty to his
fourteen-year-old wife. The woman says that he frequently tied her feet
together while she was in a state of nudity, and hanging her up by the
feet beat her unmercifully and threatened to kill her if she told anyone
of his cruelties. On the first of November, Howard took a common
branding iron, used to brand live stock, and heating it red hot branded
a large letter "H" on his wife's person in two places while she was tied
to a bed.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[44.](#fr_44)  "Pall Mall Gazette," 683.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[45.](#fr_45)  "Westminster Review," September.
1887.

<span id="fn_page_332">p. 332</span>  

<span id="fn_46"></span>[46.](#fr_46)  Cato, the Roman (pagan), censor
three centuries before the Christian era, said: "They who beat their
wives or children lay sacrilegious hands on the most sacred things in
the world. For myself, I prefer the character of a good husband to that
of a great senator."

<span id="fn_page_334">p. 334</span>  

<span id="fn_47"></span>[47.](#fr_47)  The bill failed of passing upon
the ground that the lash belonged to the dark ages, degrading a man by
its infliction.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[48.](#fr_48)  An English lady, *Mrs. Margaret
Bright Lucus*, in writing a description of this implement said: "This
country has even now but little to boast in her laws regarding woman,
and your country is burdened with similar evil laws; the Franchise is
most important."

<span id="fn_49"></span>[49.](#fr_49)  The Museum at Reading, England,
contains among its curiosities a bridle formerly used to stop the mouths
of scolding women in that town.

<span id="fn_page_335">p. 335</span>  

<span id="fn_50"></span>[50.](#fr_50)  Sometimes called Timbrel, or Gum
Stole.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[51.](#fr_51)  "It would seem that almost every
English town of any importance had its ducking-stool for scolds. In 1741
old Rugby paid 2s 4d for a chair for the ducking stool. The parish of
Southam, in Warwickshire, got a beautiful stool built in 1713 at an
expense of £2. 12s 4d. Ancient Coventry had two stools."

The most noteworthy of all the instruments designed for the correction
of Eve's offending daughters was the ducking-stool, known as the tumbrel
and the trebuchet. A post, across which was a transverse beam turning on
a swivel and with a chair at one end, was set up on the edge of a pond.
Into the chair the woman was chained, turned toward the water--a muddy
or filthy pond was usually chosen for this purpose when available--and
ducked half a dozen times; or, it the water inflamed her instead of
acting as a damper, she was let down times innumerable, until she was
exhausted and well nigh drowned.

From the frequency with which we find it mentioned in old local and
county histories, in church wardens' and chamberlains' accounts. and by
the poets, we shall probably not be wrong in concluding that at one time
this institution was kept up all over the country.--London Graphic."

<span id="fn_page_336">p. 336</span>  

<span id="fn_52"></span>[52.](#fr_52)  John Dillon,--*Colonial
Legislation of America*.

<span id="fn_page_337">p. 337</span>  

<span id="fn_53"></span>[53.](#fr_53)  *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_page_338">p. 338</span>  

<span id="fn_54"></span>[54.](#fr_54)  JERSEY CITY, N. J., July 23,
I887--Mrs. Mary Brody, convicted a few days ago of being a common scold,
was to-day sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.

Only the other day a woman in this city, under some ancient unrepealed
law of this state, was arrested and brought before a magistrate on the
charge of being a common scold. A too free use of the tongue was
reckoned a public offense in all the American colonies, and in England
the lawful punishment of common scolds was continued until a recent day.
It was for these that the "ducking-stool" was invented, which usually
consists of a heavy chair fastened to the end of a large piece of
timber, which was hung by the middle to a post on the river side. The
offender was tied into the chair, and then soused into the water until
it was judged that her shrewishness had departed from her. Sometimes she
was dipped so thoroughly that her breath departed for good, as happened
to a certain elderly lady at Ratcliffe Highway. The ducking-stool was
constantly hanging in its place, and on the back of it were engraved
devils laying hold of scolds, etc.--"St. Louis Republican."

<span id="fn_page_340">p. 340</span>  

<span id="fn_53"></span>[53.](#fr_53)  If it is a crime to buy and sell
wives, let the men who do such things be punished; if there is no crime
in the transaction, why should the wife who is sold be punished.
Unfortunately this is not a solitary instance of law made or
administered to punish women in order to teach men--*English Women's
Suffrage Journal*.

Before Mr. Justice Denman, at the Liverpool Assizes, Betsy Wardle was
charged with marrying George Chisnal at Eccleston, bigamously, her
former husband being alive. It was stated by the woman that, as her
first husband had sold her for a quart of beer, she thought she was at
liberty to, marry again.

George Chisnal, the second husband, apparently just out of his teens was
called.

His Lordship-"How did you come to marry this woman?"

Witness (in the Lancashire vernacular)--"Hoo did a what?" \[Laughter.\]

Question repeated--"A bowt her." \[Laughter.\]

His Lordship-"You are not fool enough to suppose you can buy another
man's wife? Oi?" \[Laughter.\]

His Lordship-"How much did you give for her?" Six pence. \[Great
laughter.\]

His Lordship asked him how long he had lived with the prisoner.

Witness--"Going on for three years."

His Lordship--"Do you want to take her back again?"

"Awl keep her if you loike." \[Laughter.\]

His Lordship (addressing the prisoner)--It is absolutely necessary that
I should pass some punishment upon you in order that people may
understand that men have no more right to sell their wives than they
have to sell other people's wives, or to sell other people's horses or
cows, or anything of the kind. You cannot make that a legal transaction.
So many of you seem to be ignorant of that, that it is necessary, to
give you some punishment in order that you may understand it. It is not
necessary it should be long, but you must be imprisoned and kept to hard
labor for one week.--"News of the World," 1883.

A peculiar case came up in the mayor's office at Vincennes, Ind., in
1887, A man named Bohn sold his wife to another man named Burch for
$300, and held Burch's note therefor. The sale was a reality, but the
note was never paid, hence the difficulty.

"We know a man in the Black Hills--a man who is well-to-do and
respected--the foundation of whose fortune was $4,000, the sum for which
he sold his wife to a neighbor. The sale was purely a matter of business
all around, and the parties to it were highly satisfied." 1880.-"*The
Times*," Bismarck, N.D.

<span id="fn_page_341">p. 341</span>  

<span id="fn_56"></span>[56.](#fr_56)  In "The Doncaster Gazette" of
March 25, 1803, a sale is thus described: "A fellow sold his wife, as a
cow, in Sheffield market place a few days ago. The lady was put into the
hands of a butcher, who held her by a halter fastened around her waist.
'What do you ask for your cow?' said a bystander. 'A guinea' replied the
husband. 'Done,' cried the other, and immediately led away his bargain.
We understand that the purchaser and his 'cow' live very happily
together." Ashton.--*The Progress of Women*.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[57.](#fr_57)  "Morning Herald," March 11,
1802.--On the 11th of last month a person sold at the market cross, in
Chapel en la Frith, a wife, a child, and as much furniture as would set
up a beggar, for eleven shillings.

"Morning Herald," April 16, 1802--A butcher sold his wife by auction at
the last market day at Hereford. The lot brought £1 4s. and a bowl of
punch.

"Annual Register," February 14, 1806.--A man named John Garsthorpe
exposed his wife for sale in the market at Hall about 1 o'clock, but
owing to the crowd which such an extraordinary occurrence had brought
together, he was obliged to defer the sale, and take her away, about 4
o'clock. However, he again brought her out, and she wag sold for 20
guineas, and delivered with a halter, to a person named Houseman, who
had lodged with them for four or five years.

"Morning Post," October 10, 1808.--One of those disgraceful scenes which
have of late become too common took place on Friday se'nnight at
Knaresborough. Owing to some jealousy, or other family difference, a man
brought his wife, equipped in the usual style, and sold her at the
market cross for 6d and a quid of tobacco.--*Ibid*.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[58.](#fr_58)  Our laws are based on the
all-sufficiency of man's rights; society. exists for men only; for
women, merely in so far as they are represented by some man, are in the
*mundt*, or keeping of some man. Herbert Spencer.-*Descriptive
Sociology, England*.

<span id="fn_page_343">p. 343</span>  

<span id="fn_59"></span>[59.](#fr_59)  A committee appointed by the
National Woman Suffrage Association, at that time in convention
assembled in Washington, waited upon President Cleveland with the
memorial.

<span id="fn_page_345">p. 345</span>  

<span id="fn_60"></span>[60.](#fr_60)  Mediaeval Christian husbands
imprisoned erring wives in cages so small they could neither stand
upright nor lie down at full length. Mediaeval Christian priests boiled
living infants in osier baskets in presence of helpless heretical
mothers. In mediæval times the public scourging of women was one of the
amusements of the carnival; even as late as the eighteenth century
English gentlemen, according to *Herbert Spencer*, made up parties of
pleasure to see women whipped at Bridewell.

<span id="fn_page_346">p. 346</span>  

<span id="fn_61"></span>[61.](#fr_61)  Seduction was connived at that
the guardian might secure the estate of the ward.--*Ibid*.

<span id="fn_page_347">p. 347</span>  

<span id="fn_62"></span>[62.](#fr_62)  The Salic law had not preference
to one sex over the other--purely economical law which gave houses and
lands to males who should dwell there, and consequently to whom it would
be of most service.--*Spirit of the Laws*.

<span id="fn_page_348">p. 348</span>  

<span id="fn_63"></span>[63.](#fr_63)  in order to give color to the
usurpation (for it was nothing better), the lawyers cited an obscure
article from the code of the barbarous Salians, which, as they pretended
had always been the acknowledged law of the French monarchy. \* \* \*
since that time the Salic law, as it is called, has been regarded as an
essential constitutional principle in France.--*Student's History of
France*, p. 19.

<span id="fn_page_349">p. 349</span>  

<span id="fn_64"></span>[64.](#fr_64)  Montesquieu.--*Spirit of the
Laws*.

<span id="fn_page_350">p. 350</span>  

<span id="fn_65"></span>[65.](#fr_65)  Women in England were for more
than a thousand years legislated for as slaves. Crimes committed by men
which could be atoned for by a fine, were by women punished with burning
alive. The period is not very distant when she was distinctly legislated
for as a servant. and but on a level with chattel slaves.--*Hist. Crime
in England*.

<span id="fn_page_351">p. 351</span>  

<span id="fn_66"></span>[66.](#fr_66)  *American Law*, 1829.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[67.](#fr_67)  Through the influence of
*Governor McNutt*, instituted many reforms.

<span id="fn_page_353">p. 353</span>  

<span id="fn_68"></span>[68.](#fr_68)  There was no distinction between
offenses against the church on one hand, and offenses against the state
or individual on the other. Cases of theft and sorcery, like those of
witchcraft, could be tried in the church. From the position of the
clergy as law-givers, it follows not only that the secular laws had the
sanction of religion, but that religious observance were enforced by the
secular arm.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[69.](#fr_69)  From 499 to 1066. Herbert
Spencer.--*Descriptive Sociology*.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[70.](#fr_70)  To women were still applied those
punishments, which had been instituted by the men whose practice it was
to buy their wives and sell their daughters. Pike.--*Hist. Crime in
Eng*.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[71.](#fr_71)  Bracton.--*De Legibus Angliæ* I,
479

<span id="fn_page_354">p. 354</span>  

<span id="fn_72"></span>[72.](#fr_72)  "The reformation altered, but did
not better the condition of woman. Socially it rescued her from the
priest to make her the chattel of the husband, <span id="fn_page_355">p.
355</span> and doctrinally it expunged her altogether. Martin Luther
declared that the two sacred books, which especially point to woman as
the agent of man's final redemption--the books of Esther and
Revelations--that in "so far as I esteem them, it would be no loss if
they were thrown into the river."

<span id="fn_page_355">p. 355</span>  

<span id="fn_73"></span>[73.](#fr_73)  "The forefathers of *Benjamin
Franklin* used a Bible kept fastened under the seat of a four-legged
stool, the leaves held in place by pack-threads. When the family
assembled to hear it read, one of the number was posted as sentinel some
distance from the house to give warning of any stranger's approach, in
which case the stool was hurriedly replaced upon its legs, and some one
seated upon it for more effectual concealment of the book."

<span id="fn_74"></span>[74.](#fr_74)  Herbert Spencer.--*Descriptive
Sociology, England*.

<span id="fn_page_356">p. 356</span>  

<span id="fn_75"></span>[75.](#fr_75)  *The English Women's Suffrage
Journal*, November, 1886, reported: "Mrs. ------ rose to move a
resolution. After reading a memorial, she said: 'Now, when I was asked
to add a few words of support to the memorial I have just read, my first
feeling was that I was very far from the right person to do so, inasmuch
as being a married woman--and therefore disqualified--and rightly
disqualified," etc.

<span id="fn_page_357">p. 357</span>  

<span id="fn_76"></span>[76.](#fr_76)  The coverture of a woman disables
her from making contracts to the prejudice of herself or her husband
without his allowance or confirmation.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[77.](#fr_77)  I have arrived at conclusions
which I keep to myself as yet, and only utter as Greek *phogagta
sunetotsi* principle of which is, that there will never be a good world
for women till the last monk, and therewith the last remnant of the
monastic idea of, and legislation for, woman, *i. e.* the Canon Law is
civilized off the face of the earth. Meanwhile all the most pure and
high-minded women in England and Europe have been brought up under the
shadows of the Canon Law, and have accepted it with their usual divine
self-sacrifice, as their destiny by law of God, and nature, and consider
their own womanhood outraged when it, their tyrant., is meddled with.
Canon Charles Kingsley,--*Letter to John Stuart Mill*, June 17th, 1849,
in *Life and Letters*.

<span id="fn_page_358">p. 358</span>  

<span id="fn_78"></span>[78.](#fr_78)  Dowers were first introduced into
England by the Danish king, Cnut or Canute, and into Denmark by Swein,
father of Canute, who bestowed it upon Danish ladies in grateful
acknowledgment of their having parted with their jewels to ransom him
from the Vandals. For account of Dowers, see History of Dowers;
Grote.--History of Greece 2, 112-13; Alexander.--History of Women; Lord
Kames' Sketch of the history of Man; Histoire des Morales des Femmes. In
Denmark, King Sweinn Forkbeard was the first to give woman a share in
her parents' property. Saxo Grammaticus says, The king was taken
prisoner by the Vinds who demanded so large a sum of money for his
ransom, the men of Denmark would not pay it, so their king remained a
prisoner. The women of Denmark sold their ornaments and ransomed him.
From gratitude the king decreed that afterwards daughters should inherit
one-third of their father's property. *Journal of Jurisprudence*. One
especial right belonged to wives among the Northmen; this was the
custody of her husband's keys, and if he refused them the wife could
compel <span id="fn_page_359">p. 359</span> him bylaw to give her their
possession. These were the keys of the store-room, chest, and cupboard.

<span id="fn_page_359">p. 359</span>  

<span id="fn_79"></span>[79.](#fr_79)  The law of dower was less
favorable to the wife in the 13th century than It became later.

<span id="fn_page_360">p. 360</span>  

<span id="fn_80"></span>[80.](#fr_80)  See *Reeves*, p. p. 156-6.

<span id="fn_page_361">p. 361</span>  

<span id="fn_81"></span>[81.](#fr_81)  Sheldon Amos.--*Science of Law*.

<span id="fn_page_362">p. 362</span>  

<span id="fn_82"></span>[82.](#fr_82)  *History of Women*, 1779.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[83.](#fr_83)  Higgins says the word widow comes
from Vidya, to know.

<span id="fn_page_363">p. 363</span>  

<span id="fn_84"></span>[84.](#fr_84)  *Ancient Laws of Ireland; Sanchus
Mor*. p. p. 347-51.

<span id="fn_page_364">p. 364</span>  

<span id="fn_85"></span>[85.](#fr_85)  At a time when the English law of
husband and wife, which now for three centuries, has been substituted
for the Irish law in this country, has been condemned by a committee of
the House of Commons, as unjust towards the-wife, and when the most
advanced of modem thinkers are trying to devise some plan by which wives
may be placed in a position more nearly approaching to equality with the
husband, it is interesting to discover in the much despised laws of the
ancient Irish, the recognition of the principle on which efforts are
being made to base our legislation on this subject. Preface to *Sanchus
Mor*. Vol. 2

<span id="fn_86"></span>[86.](#fr_86)  Vol. 3, p. 35--Ibid.

<span id="fn_page_365">p. 365</span>  

<span id="fn_87"></span>[87.](#fr_87)  *Rambles and studies in Old South
Wales*.--Wirt Sikes.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[88.](#fr_88)  The three peculiars of a woman
are her cowyll, her gowyn, and her sarand; the reason these three are
called three peculiars, is because they are the three properties of a
woman and cannot be taken from her for any cause; her cowyll is what she
receives for her maidenhood; her sarand is for every beating given her
by her husband, except for three things; and those three for which she
may be beaten are, for giving anything she ought not to give; for being
detected with another man in a covert; and for wishing drivel on her
husband's beard; and if for being found with another man he chastises
her, he is not to have any satisfaction beside that, for there ought not
to be both satisfaction and vengeance for the same crime; her gowyn is,
if she detect her husband with another woman, let him pay her six score
pence for the first offense, for the second, one pound; if she detect
him a third time she can separate from him without leaving anything that
belongs to her. *Acurin Owen*, Professor of Welsh Law.

<span id="fn_page_366">p. 366</span>  

<span id="fn_89"></span>[89.](#fr_89)  The law enacts that she ought not
to suffer loss on account of the Man, since she received no benefit from
him, and therefore he is to rear the child. *Ancient Laws and
Institutions of Wales*.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[90.](#fr_90)  The Welsh laws of Howell the Good
were enacted by four laics and two clerks who were summoned lest the
laws should ordain anything contrary to scripture. *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[91.](#fr_91)  A woman **cannot** be admitted as
surety or as a witness concerning man. *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_page_368">p. 368</span>  

<span id="fn_92"></span>[92.](#fr_92)  *Civil Code*. Art 340.

<span id="fn_page_369">p. 369</span>  

<span id="fn_93"></span>[93.](#fr_93)  *The Woman Question in
Europe*.--T. Stanton. This law of France differs greatly from the old
Welsh pre-christian law, which threw the support of an illegitimate
child upon the father. Notwithstanding the responsibility thus thrown
upon her, a French proverb declares that "the most reasonable woman
never attains the sense of a boy of fourteen."

<span id="fn_page_370">p. 370</span>  

<span id="fn_94"></span>[94.](#fr_94)  It was no mere accident that the
French language only possessed one word, l'homme, for man, and human
being. French law only recognizes man as a human being.--*August Bebel*.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[95.](#fr_95)  Legouvè.--*History of Morals of
Women*.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[96.](#fr_96)  The baby was born in the next
house, and of course I was interested, how can one not be interested
when one of these little angels becomes imprisoned in the earth form and
begins a career that makes one tremble to think of? Meeting the father a
few hours later I ask the customary question.

"Another no account girl to be supported," he said gloomily, and passed
on--*Woman's World*. A father of experience spoke differently: "My gals
never forget me. They married and went away to their own homes: and
though they were none of them well-to-do, yet not one of them ever saw
the time she <span id="fn_page_371">p. 371</span> wouldn't steal a
dollar from her husband to give to father or mother; but it isn't so
with the boys. They never knew they owed me anything; they never put
their hands in their pockets for me: they never laid awake o' nights
thinking how to scrimp household expenses to get me or mother a present
like the gals did. And yet when I was araisin' 'em I thought one boy was
worth a dozen gals."

<span id="fn_page_371">p. 371</span>  

<span id="fn_97"></span>[97.](#fr_97)  See *Scandinavian Jurisprudence*.

<span id="fn_page_372">p. 372</span>  

<span id="fn_98"></span>[98.](#fr_98)  A story is told by an American
traveller, of a party met upon the cars, the mother a delicate little
personage, the father stout and strong. Upon leaving the train he walked
off incommoded by a single traveling impedimenta, while the wife was
almost hidden under the pack she was carrying. With indignation the
American asked, "why do you not let the man take some of these things?"
What, and he the father of a family?' was the surprised answer.

<span id="fn_page_373">p. 373</span>  

<span id="fn_99"></span>[99.](#fr_99)  It is unnecessary to let the
whole many-colored map of German common law pass in review: a few
specimens will suffice. According to German common law woman is
everywhere in the position of a minor with regard to man; her husband is
her lord and master, to whom she owes obedience in marriage. If she be
disobedient, Prussian law allows a husband of "low estate" to inflict
moderate bodily chastisement. As no provision is made for the number or
severity of the blows, the amount of such chastisement is left to the
sovereign discretion of the man. In the communal law of Hamburg the
regulation runs as follows: "The moderate chastisement of a wife by her
husband is just and permissible." Similar enactments exist in many parts
of Germany. The Prussian common law further decrees that the husband can
determine the length of time during which a woman must suckle her child.
All decisions with regard to the children rest with the father. When he
dies the wife is everywhere under the obligation of accepting a guardian
for the children; she is decided to be under age, and incapable of
conducting the education of children alone, even when their means, of
support are derived entirely from her property or her labor. Her fortune
is managed by her husband, and in cases of bankruptcy is regarded in
most states as his and disposed of accordingly, unless a special
contract has been made <span id="fn_page_374">p. 374</span> before
marriage. When landed property is entailed on the eldest child, a
daughter has no rights, as long as husband or brothers are alive; she
cannot succeed unless she has no brothers or has lost them by death. She
cannot exercise the political rights which are as a rule connected With
landed property, unless in some exceptional cases, as for instance in
Saxony, where communal regulations in the country allow her to vote, but
deny her the right of being elected. But even this right is transferred
to her husband if she marry. In most states she is not free to conclude
agreements without the consent of her husband, unless she be engaged in
business on her own account, which recent legislation permits her to do.
She is excluded from every kind of public activity. The Prussian law
concerning societies, forbids school-boys and apprentices under
eighteen, and women to take part in political associations and public
meetings. Until within the last few years women were forbidden by
various German codes to attend the public law courts as listeners. If a
woman becomes pregnant of an illegitimate child she has no claim on
support if she accepted any present from the father at the time of their
intimacy. If a woman is divorced from her husband, she continues to bear
his name in eternal memory of him, unless she happens to marry
again.--August Bebel.--*Woman in the Past, Present and Future*.

<span id="fn_page_375">p. 375</span>  

<span id="fn_100"></span>[100.](#fr_100)  Who, indeed, would not have
been received by the queen.

<span id="fn_page_376">p. 376</span>  

<span id="fn_101"></span>[101.](#fr_101)  A German girl continues to be
a maid-of-all-work until circumstances elevate her to a higher position.
She becomes a mother, and this opens a fresh career to her as an *amme*
or wet nurse. Her lines thenceforward fall in pleasant places. An *amme*
is a person of consideration. No disgrace or loss of character is
attached to the irregularity of conduct which often is the origin of her
promotion to a higher sphere. Her wages are quadrupled; her fare by
comparison is sumptuous; she can never be scolded; she is called upon to
fulfill but one duty. The occupation is so much more remunerative than
ordinary service, that one can scarcely be surprised if plenty of women
are found ready and willing to follow the trade. With them the child is
only a means to an end. Marriage among the lower orders in Germany is
cumbered about with so many restrictions and conditions, that it has
come to be looked upon as almost an impossibility.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[102.](#fr_102)  When Miss. *Aarta Hansteen*, a
Norwegian lady announced her purpose <span id="fn_page_377">p.
377</span> of lecturing on woman's natural equality with man; she met
little or no support, the church strenuously opposing on ground of
woman's original curse.

<span id="fn_page_377">p. 377</span>  

<span id="fn_103"></span>[103.](#fr_103)  Translated into English under
title of "Nora," by Miss. Frances Lord.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[104.](#fr_104)  So profound was its effect
that visiting invitations were coupled with the request not to speak of
the work.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[105.](#fr_105)  *Marian Brown Shipley*, an
American lady, long a resident of Sweden and thoroughly conversant with
its literature and tone of thought, said of it, "A more glorious thing
has not been done in Sweden for centuries, Strindberg has defied church
and state, striking both to their foundations with his merciless satire,
and rallied the Swedish people at a single stroke."

<span id="fn_106"></span>[106.](#fr_106)  Bjornsen said, "The
confiscating of August Strindberg's book *Giftas*, is the greatest
literary scandal in the North in my time. It is worse than when one
wished to put me in, the house of correction on account of the King; or
thrust out Ibsen from the society of honorable people for gjengungerd
(Ghosts)."

<span id="fn_page_378">p. 378</span>  

<span id="fn_107"></span>[107.](#fr_107)  March 30, 1882.

<span id="fn_page_380">p. 380</span>  

<span id="fn_108"></span>[108.](#fr_108)  *Russian Revolt*.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[109.](#fr_109)  A Russian writer of the 17th
century said: "As Eve did wrong, so the whole race or women become
sinful and the cause of evil."

<span id="fn_page_381">p. 381</span>  

<span id="fn_110"></span>[110.](#fr_110)  She was spoken of as a "Vanity
itself," "A storm in the home," "A flood that swells everything," "A
serpent nourished in the bosom," "A spear penetrating the heart," "A
constantly flying arrow."

<span id="fn_page_383">p. 383</span>  

<span id="fn_111"></span>[111.](#fr_111)  *Rural Life in Russia.--The
Nineteenth Century*.

<span id="fn_page_384">p. 384</span>  

<span id="fn_112"></span>[112.](#fr_112)  See Chap. 4. p. 161.

<span id="fn_page_385">p. 385</span>  

<span id="fn_113"></span>[113.](#fr_113)  I myself am the happy
possessor of a little rude wooden bas-relief, framed and glazed, of two
saints, whose names I have ungratefully forgotten, to whom if you pray
as you go out to commit a crime, however heinous, you take your pardon
with you.--*Rural Life in Russia*.

<span id="fn_page_387">p. 387</span>  

<span id="fn_114"></span>[114.](#fr_114)  See Chap. 4. p. 182.

<span id="fn_page_389">p. 389</span>  

<span id="fn_115"></span>[115.](#fr_115)  Reported by *Mrs. Livermore*.

<span id="fn_page_390">p. 390</span>  

<span id="fn_116"></span>[116.](#fr_116)  *Leavenworth Standard*, Dec.
21, 1886.

<span id="fn_page_392">p. 392</span>  

<span id="fn_117"></span>[117.](#fr_117)  under common law a woman is
classified with lunatics, idiots, infants and minors.
