[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wcs01)  [Next](wcs03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# CONTENTS.

    CHAPTER I.--THE MATRIARCHATE.

    Tendency of Christianity from the first to restrict woman's liberty.
Woman had great freedom under the old civilizations. The Matriarchate;
its traces among many nations; it preceded the Patriarchate. The
Iroquois or Six Nations under reminiscences of the Matriarchate.
Government of the United States borrowed from the Six Nations. To the
Matriarchate or Mother-rule, is the world indebted for its first
conception of "inherent rights," and a government established on this
basis. Malabar under the Matriarchate when discovered by the Portuguese.
The most ancient Aryans under the Matriarchate. Ancient Egypt a
reminiscence of the Matriarchal period. Authority of the wife among the
most polished nations of antiquity. As Vestal Virgin in Rome, woman's
authority great both in civil and religious affairs. Monogamy the rule
of the Matriarchate. Polygamy, infanticide and prostitution the rule of
the Patriarchate

[Page 11](wcs03.htm#page_11).

    CHAPTER II.--CELIBACY.

    Original sin. Woman not regarded as a human being by the church.
Marriage looked upon as vile. Celibacy of the clergy; their degrading
sensuality. A double Code of Morals. Celibacy confirmed as a dogma of
the church. Many notable consequences followed. Wives sold as slaves.
Women driven to suicide. Influence of the church unfavorable to virtue.
Women of wealth drawn into monastic life. The church in Mexico.
President Diaz. Protestant Orders.

[Page 49](wcs04.htm#page_49).

    CHAPTER III.--CANON LAW.

    The church makes the legitimacy of marriage depend upon its control
of the ceremony. Change from ancient civilization to renewed barbarism
at an early age of the Christian era, noted by historians, but its cause
unperceived. The clergy a distinct body from the laity; their rights not
the same. A holy sex and an unholy one. Rapid growth of Canon law in
England. Alteration in the laws through the separation of Ecclesiastical
courts from the Civil, recognized by Blackstone as among the remarkable
legal events of Great Britain. Learning prohibited to women. The oath of
seven persons required to convict a priest. Husbands

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

prohibited by Canon law from leaving more than one-third of their
property to wives; might leave them less. Daughters could be
disinherited; sons could not be. The Reformation effected no change,
Governments catering to Pope Leo XIII., at time of his jubilee; the
President of the United States sends a gift;

[Page 113](wcs05.htm#page_113).

    CHAPTER IV.--MARQUETTE.

    Feudalism; its degradation of woman. *Jus Primæ noctis*. Rights of
the Lords Spiritual. Peasants decide not to marry. Immorality of the
heads of the Greek and the Protestant churches. Breton Ballad of the
Fourteenth Century. St. Margaret of Scotland. Pall Mall Gazette's
disclosures. Foreign traffic in young English girls. West End. Eton.
Prostitution chiefly supported by "Heads of Families." Northwestern
Pineries. Governmental crime-makers. Rapid increase of child criminals.
The White Cross society. Baptism of nude women in the early Christian
Church.

[Page 152](wcs06.htm#page_152).

    CHAPTER V.--WITCHCRAFT.

    The possession of a pet of any kind dangerous to woman. Black cats
and witches, The fact of a woman's possessing knowledge, brought her
under suspicion of the church. The three most distinguishing features of
witchcraft. Opposition of the church to the growth of human will.
Persecution for witchcraft a continuance of church policy for obtaining
universal dominion over mankind. The Sabbat. The Black Mass. Women
physicians and surgeons of the middle ages; they discover anæsthetics.
Their learning; their persecution by the church. The most eminent legal
minds incapable of forming correct judgment. Three notable points in
regard to witchcraft. Persecution introduced into America by the
"Pilgrim Fathers." First Synod in America convened to try a woman for
heresy. Whipping half nude women for their religious opinions. Famine
caused by persecution of women

[Page 217](wcs07.htm#page_217).

    CHAPTER VI.--WIVES.

    "Usus." Disruption of the Roman Empire unfavorable to the personal
and proprietary rights of woman. Sale of daughters practiced in England
seven hundred years after the introduction of Christianity. The Mundium.
The practice of buying wives with cattle or money regulated by law. Evil
fame of Christendom. "The Worthier of Blood." Murder of a husband termed
petit treason; punished by burning alive. Mrs. Sainio decapitated in
Finland, 1892, for crime of petit treason. Husbands control wives'
religion. The "Lucy Walker Case;" judge Dodge decides a husband has a
property interest in a wife. Davenport's Rules for his wife. Assaulting
wives protected by law. The Ducking Stool; its use in England; brought
to America by the "Pilgrim Fathers." Salic law. Gavelkind. Women not
permitted to read the Bible. "Masterless women." Woman

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

not admitted as a surety or witness. The Code Napoleon. Morganatic
marriage, Ibsen's "Ghosts." Strindberg's "Giftas." Ancient Slavs. Russia
under Greek Christianity. The Domstroii Marriage forms. Burying wires
alive. "Darkest England." Advertising wives. An English clergyman offers
£100 reward for the capture and return of his wife. Civil marriage
opposed by the church. Action of the Chilian Republic

[Page 295](wcs08.htm#page_295).

    CHAPTER VII.--POLYGAMY.

    Polygamy sustained by the Christian Church and the Christian State.
The first Synod of the Reformation convened to sanction polygamy.
Favoring views of Luther and the other "principal reformers." Favoring
action of the American Board of Foreign Missions. Favoring action of a
Missionary Conference in India. Mormons compared to the Puritans. Mormon
theocracy similar to that of other Christian sects

[Page 398](wcs09.htm#page_398).

    CHAPTER VIII.--WOMAN AND WORK.

    God's "curse" upon Adam. Opposition of the church to amelioration of
woman's suffering as an interference with her "curse." Man's escape from
his own "curse." The sufferings of helpless infants and children because
of woman's labor. Innutrition and the hard labor of expectant mothers
the two great factors in physical degeneration and infantile mortality.
Woman's work in Europe and the United States. Woman degraded under
Christian civilization to labors unfit for slaves

[Page 432](wcs10.htm#page_432).

    CHAPTER IX.--THE CHURCH OF TO-DAY.

    Sin killed by sin. Woman's inferiority taught from the pulpit
to-day. A Pastoral letter. The See trial. Modern sermons on women.
Lenten lectures of Rev. Morgan A. Dix. The Methodist General Conference
of 1880, rejects Miss Oliver's petition for ordination on the plea that
woman already has all the rights that are good for her. Resolves itself
into a political convention. The General Conference of 1888, rejects
women delegates. The Catholic Plenary Council of 1884. Mazzini's
prophecy. The opposition of the church to woman's education has killed
off the inhabitants of the world with greater rapidity than war, famine
or pestilence. The present forms of religion and governments essentially
masculine.

[Page 466](wcs11.htm#page_466).

    CHAPTER X.--PAST, PRESENT, FUTURE.

    The most important struggle in the history of the church. Not
self-sacrifice, but self-development woman's first duty in life. The
protective spirit; its injury to woman. Christanity of little value to
civilization. Looking backward through history; looking forward.

[Page 525](wcs12.htm#page_525).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Matriarchate.](wcs03)
