[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wcs10)  [Next](wcs12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

# CHAPTER IX

### THE CHURCH OF TO-DAY.

    While under advancing civilization, a recognition of the religious
rights of woman is steadily progressing among people at large, it
requires but slight investigation to prove that olden church theories
regarding her not only came into the reformation, but largely remain the
same to-day. The Christianity of the ages having taught the existence of
a superior and an inferior sex possessing different rights in the
Christian Church, held accountable to different codes of morals, it is
not strange that we do not find morality to have been more of a
fundamental principle among the pastors of early Protestant churches
than in the Catholic priesthood. The doctrine of "Once in grace, always
in grace," carries with it a plea for vice, and the early experience of
strict Calvinistic Scotland was much that of mediæval Catholic Europe.
The Presbyterian Conventicles<span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) early
bore an extremely evil reputation. The fact that ministers of the
reformed church were permitted marriage did not change priestly teaching
that woman was created solely for man, and

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

they found apologies in the Bible for illicit conduct. These Protestant
clergymen taught, as had the Catholic, that a priest was incapable of
sinning; and from the Sermon on the Mount, "To the pure all things are
pure," was quoted in proof of this assertion. Even when under
circumstances of great personal peril and danger to life, the trust of
parishioners in the morality of their shepherds was often abused; of
this, Rev. David Williamson, one of the most eminent Presbyterian
ministers of Edinburgh, was a conspicuous example. In defense of his
immorality Mr. Williamson said, "Verily, I do not deny that with St.
Paul I have a law in my members warring against the law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity unto the love of sin which is in my members."
The strangest sermons, most insulting to woman and too indecorous for
quotation, were constantly preached: while her inferiority and
incapacity for understanding even the gospel was also as constantly
declared from the pulpit. An old Presbyterian preacher, Rev. David
Douglas, discovering a woman weeping in the kirk, pointed toward her,
crying, "Wife, what makes you weep? I am sure thou understandeth not
what I am saying; my discourse is directed to the brethren and not to
the like of you." The present century, with all its enlightenment does
not cease to give us glimpses of that favorite mediæval doctrine that
"sin can be killed with sin as the best way of becoming innocent again,"
and its concomitant, that it is impossible for a person in grace to
commit sin.<span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md)The doctrines of holiness

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

and entire sanctification, taught by some sects to day, and the theory
that all experience is necessary in order to a full development of
character, are of the same nature. Eastern "Wisdom Religion" declares
that a person can become neither God nor deva without passing through
all experience, returning again and again to earth for this purpose.

    The departure of the soul-atom from the bosom of the Divinity is a
radiation from the life of the Great All, who expends his strength in
order that he may grow again and live by its return. God thereby
acquires new vital force, provided by all the transformation that the
soul-atom has undergone. Its return is its final reward. Such is the
secret of the evolution of the Great Being and of the Supreme Soul.<span
id="fr_3"></span>[3](#fn_3.md)

    Directions for seeking out the way:

    Seek it not by any one road, to each temperament there is one road
which seems the most desirable. But the way is not found by devotion
alone, by religious contemplation alone, by ardent progress, by
self-sacrificing labor, by studious observation of life. None can take
the disciple more than one step onward. All steps are necessary to make
up the ladder, one by one, as they are surmounted. The virtues of men
are steps indeed, necessary--not by any means to be dispensed with. Yet,
though they create a fine atmosphere and happy future, they are useless
if they stand alone. The whole nature of man must be used wisely by the
one who desires to enter the way. Each man is to himself absolutely the
way, the truth and the life. Seek it by plunging into the mysterious and
glorious depths of your own inmost being. Seek it by testing all
experience, by utilizing the senses in order to understand the growth
and meaning of individuality

and the beauty and obscurity of those other divine fragments which are
struggling side by side with you, and form the race to which you
belong.<span id="fr_4"></span>[4](#fn_4.md)

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

    The Catholic and Calvinistic doctrines of woman's inferiority of
position and intellect taught from the pulpit, are by no means relegated
to past centuries, but continue to be publicly taught by the Protestant
clergy of every sect, as fully as by their Catholic and Greek brethren.
The first National Woman Suffrage Convention which assembled in
Washington, 1869, having invited Rev. Chaplain Gray, of the House, to
open its proceedings with prayer, he referred in this petition to woman
as an after-thought of the Creator, an inferior and secondary being,
called into existence for the special benefit of man. The noble old
Quakeress, Lucretia Mott, sitting in an attitude of devout attention,
suddenly raised her head, and at close of the prayer, Bible in hand, she
read aloud the account of the creation, Genesis I. 27-28, woman and man
equals, both having been given dominion over nature. The thirtieth
anniversary of the first public demand of woman for the recognition of
her equality of right with man, held in Rochester, N. Y., July 18, 1878,
passed a series of resolutions<span id="fr_5"></span>[5](#fn_5.md)
asserting woman's equality and religious rights with man. Three of these
proved especially obnoxious to the clergy of the country, in declaring
the first duty of every individual to be self development; the duty of
every woman to be guided by her own reason rather than the authority of
another; and that it was owing to the perversion of the religious
element in woman that she had been so completely subjugated to
priestcraft and superstition.

    Resolved: That as the first duty of every individual is self
development, the lessons of self-sacrifice and obedience taught to woman
by the Christian church have been fatal, not only to her own vital
interests, but through her, to those of the race.

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

    Resolved. That the great principle of the Protestant Reformation,
the right of individual conscience and judgment heretofore exercised by
men alone, should now be claimed by woman; that, in the interpretation
of Scripture, she should be guided by her own reason, and not by the
authority of the church.

    Resolved: That it is through the perversion of the religious element
in woman-playing upon her hopes and fears of the future, holding this
life with all its high duties in abeyance to that which is to come-that
she and the children she has borne have been wrongfully subjugated by
priestcraft and superstition.

    These resolutions immediately called forth a sermon in opposition
from the Rev. A. H. Strong, D. D., president of the Rochester
Theological Seminary (Baptist,) in which he said:

    She is subordinate to man in office, she is to be helper, not
principal. Therefore man has precedence in the order of creation, woman
is made of man, and to supply the felt need of man. The race, therefore,
is called the race of man and not the race of woman. For this office of
subordination and whether they assert it or not, women are fitted by
their very constitution, and in the very creation of mankind in the
garden of beauty undefiled by the slimy track of the serpent as it was,
God ordained the subordination of woman and the differences of nature
that makes her subordination inevitable. The power of rule seems to me
to have been invested in the head of the family that he may act for
them, or rather that they may act through him.

    The assertion of this theologian that "the race therefore is called
the race of man and not the race of woman," is of the same character as
that of Inquisitor Sprenger in regard to the word femina, as applied to
woman, showing the intellectual calibre of both inquisitor and
theologian to be the same. But in their assertion of woman's inferiority
and subordination,

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

neither Chaplain Gray nor President Strong proceeded quite as far as an
opposing speaker at the Philadelphia Woman Suffrage Convention of 1854,
who said, "Let woman first prove that she has a soul, both the Bible and
the Church deny it." Here we are set back to the Macon Council of the
sixth century, which debated the question of woman's humanity.

    That the church of the nineteenth century possesses the same
character as that of the fourteenth, the twelfth, the fifth, was
forcibly illustrated during the early days of the anti-slavery struggle,
especially in its persecution of the women who took part in that reform.
Lucretia Mott and Esther Moore were integral members of the American
Anti-slavery Society, having assisted in the convention which organized
this society in 1833. Shortly afterward the Grimke sisters of South
Carolina, Sarah and Angelina, convinced of the sinfulness of slavery,
left their delightful home in Charleston, and coming North, spoke
eloquently through Massachusetts against those wrongs of which they
themselves had been witnesses. The church, becoming frightened at
woman's increasing power and influence, determined to crush her work.
Its action began with the Orthodox Congregational, at that time the
largest and most influential ecclesiastical body of Massachusetts, and
in 1837 the General Association of Massachusetts issued a pastoral
letter calling upon all "churches under their care" to defend themselves
by closing their doors against the abolitionists, who had set aside the
laws of God by welcoming women to their platforms and allowing them to
speak in public;<span id="fr_6"></span>[6](#fn_6.md) section third was the

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

most significant portion of this pastoral letter.

    III. We invite your attention to the dangers which at present seem
to threaten the female character with wide spread and permanent injury.

    The appropriate duties and influence of woman are clearly stated in
the New Testament. Those duties and that influence are unobtrusive and
private, but the source of mighty power. When the mild, dependent,
softening influence of woman under the sternness of man's opinions is
fully exercised, society feels the effects of it in a thousand forms.
The power of woman is her dependence, flowing from the consciousness of
that weakness which God has given her for her protection, and which
keeps her in those departments of life that form the character of
individuals and of the nation. There are social influences which females
use in promoting piety and the great objects of Christian benevolence
which we cannot too highly commend. We appreciate the unostentatious
prayers and efforts of woman in advancing the cause of religion at home
and abroad; in Sabbath schools; in leading religious inquirers to the
pastors for instruction; and in all such associated effort as becomes
the modesty of her sex; and earnestly hope that she may abound more and
more in these labors of piety and love.

    But when she assumes the place and tone of man as a public reformer,
our care and protection of her seem unnecessary; we put ourselves in
self-defense against her; she yields the power which God has given her
for her protection, and her character becomes unnatural. If the vine
whose strength and beauty is to lean upon the trellis work, and half
conceal its clusters, thinks to assume the independence and the
overshadowing nature of the elm, it will not only cease to bear fruit,
but fall in shame and dishonor into the

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

dust. We cannot, therefore, but regret the mistaken conduct of those who
encourage females to bear an obtrusive and ostentatious part in measures
of reform, and countenance any of that sex who so far forget themselves
as to itinerate in the character of public lecturers and teachers. We
especially deplore the intimate acquaintance and promiscuous
conversation of females with regard to things which ought not to be
named; by which that modesty and delicacy which is the charm of domestic
life, and which constitutes the true influence of woman in society is
consumed, and the way opened, as we apprehend, for degeneracy and ruin.

    We say these things not to discourage proper influences against sin,
but to secure such reformation as we believe is scriptural, and will be
permanent.

    That we may rightly judge the character of this pastoral letter, it
must be remembered, that no discussion upon what is known as "the woman
question" took place at those meetings, which were, entirely devoted to
the southern slave. This letter was written by men, emanating from a
body of christian people that sustained colored slavery as an
institution upon which God had as equally placed his sanction, as upon
the subordination of woman. To such extent have the conscience and will
been under the bondage of the priesthood, that the more timid members of
the antislavery society became frightened, even some, of those who
believed in woman's equality advising these. speakers to yield their
rights in the meetings, lest the ministers who had joined them should
withdraw, taking others with them. Thus priestly intolerance and the
timidity of anti-slavery men, had the effect of silencing the
philanthropic and eloquent Grimke sisters<span
id="fr_7"></span>[7](#fn_7.md), in their efforts; for the freedom

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

of the slave. After ten month's work, their voices were heard no more.
These sisters were not only persecuted in the North, under ban of the
church, but in the South the State united with the Church, and by a
decree of the city of Charleston they were rendered permanent exiles
from home, and informed that should they return despite this, they would
not be able to escape personal violence from a mob. With one noble
exception, this mandate of the church and clergy had effect for a time
in silencing woman's plea for the slave. For seven long years the voice
of but one woman, that of Abby Kelly,<span id="fr_8"></span>[8](#fn_8.md)
was heard upon the anti-slavery platform, and the persecutions of the
church made her life one long martyrdom; her appeals for the slave were
met by mob violence, furious howls, cries, and the vilest language being
supplemented by more material efforts for silencing her voice. Were
these proceedings not so thoroughly substantiated, the time so shortly
past, credence could not be given as to the means used against this
noble woman to prevent her pleading for those so greatly wronged.<span
id="fr_9"></span>[9](#fn_9.md) Ministers of high standing assailed her from
the pulpit, a favorite text being, "Revelations" 2-20. I "have a few
things against thee, because thou suffereth that woman, Jezebel, which
calleth herself a prophetess, to teach and seduce my servants to commit
fornication." Not alone the Congregational body, but all Christian
sects, were imbued with the same persecuting spirit, a Methodist
presiding elder characterizing the Garrisonian societies, as no longer
anti-slavery, but "no-government, no-sabbath, no-church, no-bible,
no-marriage, woman's rights societies."

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

    That woman had assumed the right to speak in public for the
oppressed was the origin of all this vituperation. Its real cause was of
the same nature as that which laid 30,000 heads low, at St. Bartholomew,
that woman's voice had been heard in public contrary to the teaching of
the church. It was perhaps foreseen that she might, as really at a later
period was done, draw a vivid illustration of the similitude between the
condition of the white wife and the black slave.<span
id="fr_10"></span>[10](#fn_10.md) The unity and peace of the World's
Antislavery Convention, London, 1840, was disturbed by the hostility of
several clergymen, and a few bigoted laymen of the same spirit, who
objected to the recognition of the women delegates sent by several
American societies, among whom were Lucretia Mott and Esther Moore,
members of the parent organization. After a spirited discussion their
admission was decided to be a violation of the ordinances of Almighty
God, and their credentials were rejected.<span
id="fr_11"></span>[11](#fn_11.md)

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

    In 1843, the Hopkinson Association of Congregational Divines, of New
Hampshire, unanimously enacted a statute in opposition to women opening
their lips in church, even to "sigh" or "groan" in contrition; doubtless
agreeing with Minister Douglas, that they were incapable of
understanding a discourse directed to the brethren, who alone were
allowed to shout "Amen," "Bless the Lord," and "Glory." By a strange
inconsistency women were still allowed to sing "under men as leaders."
This statute of restriction declared:

    "But, as to leading men, either in instruction or devotion, and as
to any interruption or disorder in religious meetings, 'Let your women
keep, silence in the churches;' not merely let them be silent, but let
them keep or preserve silence. Not that they may not preach, or pray, or
exhort merely, but they may not open their lips to utter any sounds
audibly. Let not your women in promiscuous religious meetings preach or
pray audibly, or exhort audibly, or sigh, or, groan, or say Amen, or
utter the precious words, 'Bless the Lord,' or the enchanting sounds,
'Glory! Glory!'"

    In 1888, forty-five years after this statute, Rev. Dr. Theodore L.
Cuyler in the "New York Evangelist," gave his opinion in regard to
woman's action in reform work and her demand for a share in making the
laws which govern her, in this wise:

    "We can say frankly to our temperance brethren, that if they attempt
to lash the wise project of prohibition of saloons and the foolish
project of female suffrage inseparably together, they will encounter
fatal opposition. They will repel tenfold more sensible voters than they
will win. Their most eloquent and logical advocate, Dr. Herrick Johnson,
is intensely opposed to the Lucy Stone and Elizabeth Cady Stanton
doctrines of

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

woman suffrage, as I am. Nineteen-twentieths of our Presbyterian
ministers will never cast a vote which is nominally only for
prohibition, and yet is really a vote for burdening womanhood with civil
government. What is true of our church is true of the Episcopal,
Reformed, Baptist, Congregationalist, and the most influential portion
of the Methodist church."

    The same year of President Strong's opposing sermon, 1878, the
United Presbyterian Assembly passed a resolution to the effect that they
found no sufficient authority in Scripture to warrant the ordination of
women as deacons, yet they might with profit to themselves, and great
advantage to the cause of suffering humanity, and for Christ, be
*allowed to act as assistants to deacons*, thus emphasizing the dominant
church teaching of woman's irresponsibility and secondary position to
man. The same year, however, an advance step was taken in Europe, the
Synod of Born (Old Catholic,) following the example of Père Hyacinth,
adopted a resolution in favor of the marriage of the clergy by a vote of
76 to 22. At the same time the Old Catholics were taking this advance
step, the Protestant Episcopal Diocesan Convention of South Carolina
forbade woman's voting upon church matters, although it was proven
during the discussion that in some parishes there were but five male
members. The Southern Baptist Convention, held in Savannah, Georgia,
1885, appointed a committee with title of, and whose business was to
decide upon "Representation by Women" in church affairs. This committee
reported in favor of the word "brethren" instead of "members" being
incorporated in the constitution, thus confirming the right of man alone
to take part, in church. councils. Having thus effectively closed the
lips of women on discussion of church questions,

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

the convention introduced a resolution on divorce<span
id="fr_12"></span>[12](#fn_12.md) followed by a speech declaring that but
one cause could exist. The convention having shut off all chance for
woman's opinion upon this question of equal and even of more vital
interest to her, "applaudingly and overwhelmingly adopted the
resolution." At the annual election for officers of Christ Church, New
Haven, Connecticut, April 1886, a discussion arose upon the right of
women to become members of the society and consequently voters **in
it**. Several ladies having signified a desire to unite with the
society, Bishop Williams was consulted as to their admission; he decided
the Canon was clearly against them, and on motion of the clerk their
application was rejected, only one member speaking in favor.

    The title of the sermons still preached upon woman, illustrate
priestly thought regarding her. Among those of recent date are found,
"Blighted Women;" "Sins of Women;" "Women and Divorce;" "Women and
Skepticism;" "Woman's Place and Work;" "Our Common Mother," "The
Relation of Husband and Wife;" "Marriage and Divorce;" "The Sphere of
Woman;" "Husband and Wife;" "A Mission for Women;" "The Church and the
Family;" "The Duties of Wives to Husbands;" these sermons all
subordinating woman to man in every relation of life; all designed to
repress woman's growing tendency towards freedom, and her claim for the
same opportunities in life conceded to man. That the clerical teaching
of woman's subordination to man was not alone a doctrine of the dark
ages, is proven by the most abundant testimony of to-day. The famous See
trial of 1876, which shook not only the Presbytery of

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

    Newark, but the whole Synod of New Jersey, and finally the General
Presbyterian Assembly of the United States, was based upon the doctrine
of the divinely appointed subordination of woman to man, and arose
simply because Rev. Dr. Isaac See admitted two ladies to his pulpit to
speak upon temperance; Rev. Dr. Craven, the prosecutor, declared this
act to have been "an indecency in the sight of Jehovah." He expressed
the general clerical and church view, when he said:

    I believe the subject involves the honor of my God. I believe the
subject involves the headship and crown of Jesus. Woman was made for man
and became first in the transgression. My argument is that subordination
is natural, the subordination of sex. Dr. See has admitted marital
subordination, but this is not enough; there exists a created
subordination; a divinely arranged and appointed subordination of woman
as woman to man as man. Woman was made for man and became first in the
transgression. The proper condition of the adult female is marriage; the
general rule for ladies is marriage. Women without children, it might be
said, could preach, but they are under the general rule of
subordination. It is not allowed woman to speak in the church. Man's
place is on the platform. It is positively base for a woman to speak in
the pulpit; it is base in the sight of Jehovah. The whole question is
one of subordination.<span id="fr_13"></span>[13](#fn_13.md)

    Thus before a vast audience largely composed of women, Dr. Craven
stood and with denunciatory manner, frequently bringing his fists or his
Bible emphatically down, devoted a four hours speech to proving that the
Bible taught woman's subordination to man.

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

His arguments were the same as those of the church in the past and were
based upon the same theory, viz. that woman was created inferior *to*
man, *for* man, and was the first in sin. He referred to the fashions as
aid in his argument, saying. "In every country, under every clime, from
the peasant woman of Naples, with a handkerchief over her hair, to the
women before me with bonnets, every one wears something upon her head in
token of subordination." Dr. Craven made this statement in direct
contradiction to, historical facts which prove that the head covering is
always removed in presence of a superior. To remain bareheaded is an act
of deference to a higher authority. Even the Quaker custom of men's
wearing the hat in meeting, originated as an act of defiance to the
Anglican Church. Dr. Craven also forgot to state that flowing hair has
always been regarded as an emblem of superiority and freedom; clipped
hair that of a slave or prisoner. Thus Dr. Craven's appeal to fashion
re-acted against him in the minds of all historically informed persons,
yet together with his other statements it was fully endorsed by most of
his brother clergymen present, some of whom enthusiastically shouted,
"Amen!" At the close of his speech several other clergymen gave their
views. Dr. Ballentine considered the subject too simple for an argument.
Dr. Few Smith, although he "admired Miss Smiley, more than almost any
orator he had ever listened to, did not want her or any other woman to
permanently occupy the Presbyterian pulpit." Dr. Wilson rejoiced to see
so many women crowding in the lecture room; but Brother See should not
take all the glory to himself. He was glad to see the women take so deep
an interest in the subject under discussion;

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

but as he looked at them he asked himself: "What will all the children
do while these women are away from home?" A decision of censure against
Dr. See, was agreed in by the Synod of New Jersey, and confirmed by the
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of the United States, in
session at **Pittsburgh**.

    Thus we find that the Christianity of to-day continues to teach the
existence of a superior and an inferior sex in the church, possessing
different rights and held accountable to a different code of morals. Not
alone did Dr. Craven express the idea that woman's very dress was
typical of her inferiority, but the Right Rev. Dr. Coxe, Bishop of the
Western (Episcopal) Diocese of New York refused the sacrament in 1868 to
the lady patients of the Clifton Springs sanitarium whose heads were
uncovered, although the chapel was under the same roof and on the same
floor with the patients' rooms. This same Right Rev. Dr. Coxe, in a
speech at his installation as first president of the Ingham Seminary for
young ladies, declared "the laws of God to be plainly Salic." Rev. W. W.
Patten, D. D., president of Howard University, Washington, D. C., in a
sermon preached at the Congregational church, upon "Woman and
Skepticism," January, 1885, advanced the proposition that as soon as
they (women), depart from their natural sphere, they become atheistical
and immoral.<span id="fr_14"></span>[14](#fn_14.md) In March, 1891, a half
column editorial in the "Presbyterian" discussed the ethics and
aesthetics of woman's dress at communions, not precisely in line with
Dr. Coxe, yet of the same general character as to regulating woman's
dress, in, "Should women receive the elements at communion

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

with gloved hands?" Some authorities objected, to the practice upon the
ground "that nothing might come, between the recipient and the mystic
power contained in the bread and wine after consecration by the priest,
But while, as the editor remarks, "It is after all a very small matter,"
it is in a historical aspect, a great one, showing such pronounced
change from the church teaching of but a few centuries since, when women
were forbidden to take the eucharist in their naked hands because of
their impurity. Rev. Mr. Denhurst, member of the Connecticut Legislature
(House), during a hearing before a committee upon that question March,
10, 1886, while speaking favorably of woman suffrage still betrayed his
belief in the old theological idea that women brought sin into the
world,--through which her subordination to man ensued. But like Dr. See
he limited this subordination to married women, saying;

    As a minister of the gospel, I deny that you can find anywhere in
the Bible, woman's subordination till she sent the curse of sin upon the
world, and that relates only to married women, and marriage is a matter
of choice.

    The spiritual and temporal superiority of man over woman is affirmed
by clergymen of the present day as strongly as by those of the dark
ages, and sermons in opposition to her equality of rights are as
frequently preached, The entrance of woman into **remunerative**
industries is as energetically opposed as is her demand for governmental
and religious freedom. Rev. Morgan Director of Trinity church, New York,
in a series of "Lenten Lectures,"<span id="fr_15"></span>[15](#fn_15.md) a
few years since, made woman the subject of violent attacks as an
inferior and subordinate

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

being, now attempting to pass beyond the bounds set by God for her
restraint.

    There is a more emphatic, a more hopeless degradation for her. It is
seen when she seeks to reverse the laws of her nature and upset the
economy of the universe, pushing her way out of her own sphere into, a
rivalry with men in their sphere and in their proper pursuits. On that
must follow a degradation, greatly to be feared. When the claim for
rights seems to be taking the form of a competition with man, on a field
which God has reserved for man only, in a work not suited to the woman,
and in professions already overstocked that must end, not in enhancing
the merit of woman in his eye but in making her offensive and
detestable. There is a point beyond which patience will not hold out;
and of this let the woman be sure: that if she go too far the end will
arise; and man having long borne her manners and finding that she is
becoming a social nuisance and a general tormentor, will finally lose
all respect for her and thrust her away with loathing and disgust and
bid her behave herself and go back to her old inferiority.

    In this series of lectures, Dr. Dix emphatically declared man's
spiritual supremacy even in the household.

    The father is by Gods' law, priest over his household; to him should
they look as a witness for that God who gave him his rank and
title.<span id="fr_16"></span>[16](#fn_16.md)

    The sects agree in their teachings regarding woman; Rev. A. Sherman,
at one time president of Bacon College, Kentucky, declaring that woman
was first in transgression, that she beguiled man and was therefore put
in bondage under his authority, said:

    The wide spreading contempt for this truth exhibited by the
political-religious fashion and infidelity of the age, is one of the
most alarming symptoms of approaching anarchy and the overthrow of our
liberties. The

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

attempt which is being made in these United States to elevate the wife
to a perfect equality with the husband, or to change in any respect the
relation between them, established by God himself, is rank infidelity,
no matter what specious disguise it may assume.

    In a sermon of his Lenten series, entitled "The Calling of a
Christian Woman, and her Training to Fulfill it," Dr. Dix said:

    We, priests, who whatever our personal short comings, have a
commission from above and a message to man from God, and are the
mouth-piece of that church to which his hand-maidens belong, may be and
ought to be able to help occasionally, by merely stating what the Bible
and the church declare on certain great matters, on which many lower
ones depend. \* \* What did Almighty God, the Creator, the wise Father
of all, make woman for? What did be intend her to do? What did he not
mean her to do or try to do?

    He answered these questions in a lecture entitled, "A Mission for
Woman," of the same series.

    Looking for a mission, for a work to do, this is the attitude of
many women to-day. \* \* You hear of the education of women, of
co-education of the sexes of emancipation of woman from bonds--what
bonds the Lord only knows! Here is a mission worthy of yourselves, it is
of all works that could be rendered the fittest for a church woman,
because she was at the beginning of all the trouble in the world. \* \*
We believe the old story of the Bible re-affirmed by Christ and his
apostles, that Adam was not deceived by the devil, but that the woman
being deceived, was in the transgression. Now to her with whom the wrong
began, we look for the beginning of the right. Remember that in the
woman are the poles of the good and the evil in human nature.

    When she is good she is the best of all that exists; when bad, the
worst.

    Another sermon of this Lenten series, expressed the views of the
reverend gentleman upon the family

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

relation, bearing of children and divorce, in which he expressed his
hatred of modern development saying:

    I feel great solicitude about the subject of this evening's lecture;
I had rather not touch it at all. You may think that its selection is an
instance of that disrespect to which I have referred. Not so, oh, not
so. I hold the old ideas. I abhor and detest the modern development;
before any woman who fears God, does her duty, and gives us in her life
and acts the picture of a true and beautiful womanliness, I rise up and
bless her and do her reverent homage. It is thus in no spirit of
assumption that I shall say what I have to say to-night. It is rather in
a tone of remonstrance, of wonder, of expostulation. Why do women err as
they do? Why lower themselves to men's level? Why should the queens
abdicate their thrones and go down to the ring and act unseemly parts
and lay their honor in the dust? Let us think this evening of some
things done by women which one would have said that no woman with a
woman's heart and a woman's sense could, after due reflection, justify.
Sins fall naturally into groups or classes, and if I speak this evening
of only one class of sins it is because the time does not permit us to
take a larger survey of the field. We shall limit ourselves, then, to
these topics.

    The lack of serious views of life and the habit of turning the
thoughts exclusively to enjoyment. The degradation of the idea of
matrimony, as shown by entering into that estate for low and unworthy
motives. The deliberate determination of some married women to defeat
the objects for which marriage was instituted; to have no real home; to
avoid first the pains and next the cares and duties of maternity. The
habit, where a home exists, of neglecting it by spending most of the
time away from it, running up and down in pursuit of excitement and
turning their children over to the care of servants. The growing
indifference to the chief of all social abominations, divorce, and the
toleration of lax notions about it.

    These questions of most vital import to woman, to

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

her material condition, intellectual development and place in the
church, Rev. Dr. Dix and the great body of the church, deem themselves
supremely competent to adjust without woman's voice upon them. Wherever
she has shown her views upon the subject of education, industries, the
family, the church, to be in opposition to those of theologians, she has
at once been told to remain in her old position of "inferiority" looking
up to man as her divinely appointed master and spiritual head; Dr. Dix,
in his lectures, but gave the views of priests of all denominations at
the present day. Despite the advancing civilization of the age, and the
fact that in so many avocations woman has shown her capacity for taking
equal part with man, we find theology still unprogressive; a portion of
the press, however, severely criticised these discourses." The "Lenten
Pastoral" 1886, of Rev.

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

A. Cleveland Coxe, bishop of Western New York, to the laity of his
diocese, contained a middle-age reminder to women of the impurity of
motherhood, in the demand made for church cleansing subsequent to her
bringing an immortal being into life:

6\. Christian women, active as they often are, above all comparison with
men, are yet sometimes negligent of their immediate duties as wives and
mothers and fail to exert that healthful influence over the family,
which God has made it the high privilege of woman to exercise in this
sphere of her duty and her glory. The office for "the Churching of
Women"' testifies against those who neglect it, as forgetting the
dignity of motherhood and that gratitude to God which every woman owes
to the Christian religion, for enthroning her in the household, and
making the example

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

of the "Blessed among Women" her peculiar lesson and incentive to piety.

    Many portions of this advice is an open insult to woman, and could
the divine but see it, is even from the Christian standard an imputation
upon that being he professes to revere as the Creator of the universe.

    A work was recently written by an English bishop, bearing upon the
governmental effort for repeal of the law forbidding marriage with a
deceased wife's sister or brother. This work was written for the express
purpose of proving that, while it is eminently improper and sinful for a
woman to marry her deceased husband's brother, it is eminently proper
and right for a man to marry his deceased wife's sister, and this upon
the same principle that governed the disinheritance of woman under the
Salic law; i. e., because by marriage a woman becomes merged into her
husband's family. He specifically declares that the sister of the wife
is in no sense the sister of the husband, therefore it is permissible
for a man to marry his wife's sisters successively. But he affirms that
to the contrary, the widow cannot marry her deceased husband's brother,
as by the act of her marriage she became a part of her husband's family;
a second marriage to such husband's brother thereby becoming incestuous.
This is the law of England, both religious and civil. A striking
evidence of the incongruity of this law is found in the fact that the
illegitimacy of such brother is held to destroy the relationship, as by
law of both church and state an illegitimate child is not held as
related to its father; he is the son of nobody. A woman can marry two
brothers in succession, one the child of marriage, the other a child of
the same father born outside of the marriage relation. The son of
nobody,

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

a being unfathered in the eye of the law, is the brother of nobody. A
striking instance of the effect of this law occurred in England within
the past few years, when a lady successively married two brothers, the
first a natural son of the Earl of Waldegrave, the second his legitimate
son. The father, although not recognized as such in law, left the bulk
of his property to his natural son; the title, over which he had no
power of alienation, descending to the son born under authority of the
church. The first husband, dying, the lady afterward married the
legitimate son, thus becoming first, "Mrs." Waldegrave, and after wards,
"Lady" Waldegrave, securing both fortune and title by her marriage with
the non-recognized and law-recognized sons of the same father, and
breaking neither the law of state or church in so doing. American
clergymen of the Episcopal church have expressed views in accordance
with those of the English bishop. Rev. George Zabriskie Gray, D. D.,
dean of the Episcopal Theological School of Cambridge, Mass., published
a work in 1885 entitled "Husband and Wife," also suggested by the
constantly debated English question of State, concerning the lawfulness
of marriage with a deceased wife's sister. Dr. Gray coincides with many
of his reverend brethren in the declaration that with the wife no
liberty of divorce is allowable, but his reasons present somewhat the
freshness of novelty. As previously stated, the non-relationship of
husband and wife was at one time the general Christian belief. While
like the English bishop, Rev. Mr. Gray admits the relationship of the
wife to the husband to such extent that becoming fully absorbed by him
his relatives become hers; like the English bishop he farther declares
that inconsequence

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

of this absorption, the wife loses her former family relationship, her
mother and father, her sister or brother no longer bearing relationship
to her, but have become to her as strangers. He said:

    The wife becomes a member of his family, while he does not become
one of her own. The equilateral idea is a physiological<span
id="fr_18"></span>[18](#fn_18.md) and psychological impossibility. The
unity is in the man. The woman by marriage becomes a member of the man,
therefore she cannot put him away; for a member cannot put away the
head; the impurity of the wife imperils the family, renders pedigree and
all concerned therein uncertain, and so she may be put away. But the
husband's unchastity, while it may be as sinful, yet has no such effect.
It does not render it doubtful who are rightful children of his stock,
who are entitled to the name that he and his wife both bear, and
therefore does not call for the severance of the marriage tie, that is,
the dissolution of the family. That is, divorce so far as Scripture goes
seems to be a measure for the protection of the family and of the
rightful inheritance of whatever is to be transmitted to the children,
and so a remedy open only to man. There seems to be no way of preventing
the abuse of divorce, if any principle is admitted that will extend it
to woman.

    Under this form of reasoning, both Dr. Gray and the English bishop
dispose with ease of the state obstacle to marriage with a deceased
wife's sister. Inasmuch as by marriage the husband forms no ties of
consanguinity with the wife's family, she having become a member of his
family without his having become a member of hers, marriage with his
deceased wife's sister would be the same as marriage with an entire
stranger, saying:

    As the husband enters into no connection with the

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

wife's family, her sisters are no more his sisters than they had been
before. Therefore he may marry one of them as freely as any one else, as
far as any real principle involved in matrimony is concerned.

    The "Christian Register," of Boston, commenting upon Dr. Gray's
work, although itself a recognized organ of the Unitarian church, vet in
a spirit more in accord with modern thought, carefully corrected the
size of type in the word "wife" upon the title-page and outside of the
book, thus: HUSBAND AND WIFE:<span id="fr_19"></span>[19](#fn_19.md) also
facetiously referring to the late Artemus Ward, who at time of the late
civil war was ready to sacrifice all his wife's relations.<span
id="fr_20"></span>[20](#fn_20.md) These two works of

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

the English bishop and the American dean are consistent with the
teaching of the Christian ages in reference to woman. Not held as
belonging primarily to herself, but ever to some man, her very
relationship to the mother who brought her into life destroyed by law,
she once again through the church is presented to the world as a being
without a birthright, not even receiving for it Esau's mess of pottage,
or a father's shorn blessing, after its loss. She is held up to view as
without father, mother, or individual existence. Rev. Knox-Little, a
high church clergyman of England, traveled in the United States in the
fall of 1880. During his stay in Philadelphia, he preached a "Sermon to
Women," in the large church of St. Clements. As reported in the "Times"
of that city, its chief features were a representation of woman's
inferior intellect, her duty of unqualified obedience to her husband,
however evil his life, the sinfulness of divorce and the blessedness of
a large family of children. He said:

    God made himself to be born of a woman to sanctify the virtue of
endurance; loving submission is an attribute of woman; men are logical,
but women lacking this quality, have an intricacy of thought. There are
those who think woman can be taught logic; this is a mistake, they can
never by any power of education arrive at the same mental status as that
enjoyed by man, but they have a quickness of apprehension, which is
usually called leaping at conclusions, that is astonishing. There, then,
we have distinctive traits of a woman, namely: endurance, loving
submission and quickness of apprehension. Wifehood is the crowning

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

glory of a woman. In it she is bound for all time. To her husband she
owes the duty of unqualified obedience. There is no crime which a man
can commit which justifies his wife in leaving him or applying for that
monstrous thing, divorce. It is her duty to subject herself to him
always, and no crime that he can commit can justify her lack of
obedience. If he be a bad or wicked man, she may gently remonstrate with
him, but refuse him, never. Let divorce be anathema; curse it; curse
this accursed thing, divorce; curse it, curse it! Think of the
blessedness of having children. I am the father of many and there have
been those who have ventured to pity me; 'keep your pity for yourself,'
I have replied.' They never cost me a single pang.' In this matter let
women exercise that endurance and loving submission, which with
intricacy of thought are their only characteristics."

    Such a sermon as the above preached to women under the full blaze of
nineteenth century civilization, needs few comments. In it woman's
inferiority and subordination are as openly asserted as at any time
during the dark ages. According to Rev. Knox-Little, woman possesses no
responsibility; she is deprived of conscience, intelligent thought,
self-respect, and is simply an appendage to man, a thing. As the clergy
in the Middle Ages divided rights into those of persons and things,
themselves being the persons, the laity things, so the Rev. Knox-Little
and his ilk of today, divide the world into persons and things, men
being the persons, and women the things. Rev. Dr. T. De Witt Talmage, of
Brooklyn, New York, joins his brethren in preaching of "the first, fair,
frail woman; her creation, her fall and her sorrow." Speaking of the
trials of housekeepers, he said:

    Again, there is the trial of severe economy. Nine hundred and
ninety-nine households out of the thousand are subject to it, some under
more, and some under

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

less stress of circumstances. Especially if a man smokes very expensive
cigars and takes very costly dinners at the restaurants, he will be
severe in demanding domestic economies. This is what kills thousands of
women; attempting to make five dollars do the work of seven. How the
bills come in. The woman is the banker of the household; she is the
president, and cashier, and teller, discount clerk, and there is a panic
every four weeks. This thirty years war against high prices; this
perpetual study of economics, this lifelong attempt to keep the outgoes
less than the income exhausts millions of housekeepers. O, my sister,
this is part of divine discipline."

    It should require but little thought upon woman's part to see how
closely her disabilities are interwoven with present religious belief
and teaching as to her inferiority and pre-ordained subordination. If
she needs aid to thought, the Cravens, the Knox-Littles, the Talmages,
will help her. The spirit of the priesthood, Protestant equally with
Catholic, is that of the early and middle ages. The foundation being the
same, the teaching is of similar character. From the sermons referred
to, we can justly declare they express the opinions of the priesthood as
a body; we meet no protest against them. Not a single church has denied
these degrading theories; no clergyman has preached against the
doctrines mentioned, blasphemous as they are against the primal rights
of the soul. These sermons stand as representatives, not only of high
church theology in regard to woman, but as expressing the belief of all
churches in her creation and existence as an inferior and appendage to
man. All her suffering, material or spiritual, her restrictions, her
sorrows, her deprivation of the right of unrestricted conscience are
depicted as parts of her divine discipline, which she must accept with
endurance and loving

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

submission. Even from the criminal, she is not to free herself, or
refuse him obedience. Scarcely a Protestant sect that has not within a
few years, in some way, placed itself upon record as sustaining the
doctrine of woman's subordination. The Pan-Presbyterian Council that
assembled in Edinburg a few years since refused to admit a woman even as
a listener to its proceedings, although women constitute at least
two-thirds of the **membership** of that church. A solitary woman who
persisted in remaining to listen to the discussions of this body was
removed by force; "six stalwart Presbyterians" lending their ungentle
aid to her ejection. The same Pan-Presbyterian body in session in
Philadelphia, the summer of 1880, laughed to scorn the suggestion of a
liberal member that the status of woman in that church should receive
some consideration; referring to the work of the Sisters of Charity, in
the Catholic church, and that of women among the Quakers. Although this
question was twice introduced it was as often "met with derisive
laughter," and no action was taken upon it. But had this liberal member
been wise enough to have brought before this body the fact that the
Presbyterian church is losing its political influence because of the
great preponderance of its women members without the ballot, he would
have received more consideration. As all churches seek influence in
politics, we may rest assured that when the church as a whole, or any
sect thereof, shall be found sustaining the political rights of woman or
her religious equality in the church, it will be from the worldly wisdom
of a desire to retain fleeting political power. The life or the death of
the church largely depends upon its political forethought.

    Differing political rights have ever been productive

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

of diverse moral codes. What was considered right for the king and the
nobility has ever been wrong for the peasant. The moral rights of the
master and the slave were ever dissimilar, while under Christianity two
codes of morals have ever been extant, the lax code for man, the strict
for woman. This diversity is shown by the different position that
society accords to an immoral man and an immoral woman, but nowhere is
the recognition of differing codes of morals for man and woman as
clearly shown as in the church, as presented in discourses of clergymen.
To them adultery in the husband is merely a pastime in which he can
indulge without injury to his wife, who is powerless to put him away,
nor has she been wronged. But to the contrary, under the same teaching,
should the wife prove thus unfaithful she should immediately be cast
out. Colored pastors unite with their white brethren in denying woman's
moral, spiritual or personal equality with man. Rev. Alexander
Crummel,<span id="fr_21"></span>[21](#fn_21.md) a colored clergyman of
Washington, rector of St. Lukes (Episcopal) church, in 1881, preached a
sermon upon the biblical position of woman, which was published in tract
form for circulation. He referred to her as having been created inferior
to man, with no right, natural or acquired, by creation or revelation,
to govern herself or hold opinions of her own. This sermon--"Marriage
and Divorce"--laid down the following principles:

    Marriage is a divine institution. It came from God. It is not,
therefore, the creation of legislative action.

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

It is not merely a civil contract. It is not the invention of man. The
estate of matrimony is a sacred one; originated by the will of God, and
governed by his law. Marriage is indissoluble. Adultery on part of the
wife is ground for divorce. Thus far we have considered the case with
reference to the unfaithfulness of the wife, and have shown that when a
woman violates the covenant of marriage by adultery, her husband has the
right to divorce her. But now the question comes, "Is not this a
reciprocal right?" When husbands are unfaithful, have not wives the
right to the divorce them? My reply is that no warrant for such divorce
can be found in the Bible. Under both covenants, the right of divorce is
given exclusively to husband. The right in all cases is guaranteed to
the man only. And so far forth we have the word of God for its specific
reservation to husbands. In no case is it even hinted that a woman has
the right of divorce, if even her husband be guilty of unfaithfulness.
There is a broad, general obligation laid upon woman in the marriage
relation. The sum of the matter respecting the woman seems to be this;
the woman is bound by the ties of wedlock during the whole period of her
husband's life; and even under distressful circumstances has no right to
break them; i. e., by divorce.

The additional reasons presented by Rev. Mr. Crummel against woman's
right of divorce, even for the infidelity of the husband, are "The
hidden mystery of generation, the wondrous secret of propagated life
committed to the trust of woman." In thus referring to those laws of
nature whose conditions are not yet fully understood, Rev. Mr. Crummel
presented the strongest reasons why the mother and not the father should
be regarded as the true head of the family. This "hidden mystery of
generation,--this wondrous secret of propagated life, committed to the
trust of woman," most forcibly demonstrates that she should be the one
in whose power is placed the opportunity

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

for escape from an adulterous husband, thus enabling her to keep her
body a holy temple for its divine-human uses, over which as priestess
she alone should possess control. The assertion of Rev. Alexander
Crummel, that an adulterous husband cannot do the same wrong to the wife
that the wife does to the husband under similar circumstances, is
absolutely false. By reason of certain "physiological mysteries," to
which he refers, but of which he also shows absolute ignorance, the
wrong done woman by reason of her potential motherhood is infinitely
greater to her than similar infidelity upon her part can possibly be to
the husband. And not to her alone but to the children whom she may bring
to life. His attempted justification of the husband's adultery upon the
plea that "when a man begets bastard children, he does so beyond the
boundary of the home," and so cannot "foist spurious children upon the
household and kindred--that the family is kept together," are most
sophistical and fallacious methods of reasoning, entirely inimical to
truth and purity. Of an absolutely selfish and libidinous character,
they have been used by profligates in the church and in the state as
pleas for a license that has no regard to the rights of woman, or the
duties of fatherhood, and are not only essentially immoral in
themselves, but are equally destructive of personal and social purity.

    The individual and not the family is the social unit; the rights of
individuals are foremost. Immorality of man everywhere presents a more
serious and destructive aspect than that of woman. Aside from the
unmarried mother whom society does not recognize as longer a part of it,
is the irreparable wrong done to those innocent human beings whom Rev.
Mr. Crummel

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

designates as "spurious children;" whom the Catholics call
"sacrilegious" when the father is shown to be a priest, and upon whom
society at large terms "illegitimate." Closely connected with injury to
the innocent child itself, thrust into being without provision for its
future needs, is the detriment to society which thus finds itself
compelled to assume the duties belonging to the bastard's father. Such
children, for whom neither home nor fatherly care awaits, are allowed by
him to grow up neglected street waifs, uneducated, untrained, uncared
for, filling alms-houses, reformatories, and prisons of the land,
perhaps to die upon the gallows. The responsibility of such fathers is
not a subject of church teaching; it is simply passed carelessly by,
regardless of the unspeakable wrongs connected with it. If, as the Rev.
Mr. Turnstall asserts, the Bible is not for woman, if his position is
true, or if that of the Jews who claim that the Ten Commandments were
given to man alone, is true, it is to man alone that adultery is
forbidden. Luther asserted that the Ten Commandments applied to neither
Gentiles nor Christians, but only to the Jews. It was to man alone that
Christ spoke against adultery, saying: "Whosoever looketh upon a woman
to lust after her hath already committed adultery with her, in his
heart." To man, Christ also said: "Owing to the hardness of their
hearts, Moses permitted a man to put away his wife, but it was not so
from the beginning." Man, and not woman, is commanded to leave father
and mother; man is to cleave unto his wife, hot woman unto her husband.
It was the men of Corinth whom Paul addressed concerning lewdness, "Such
fornication was never known among the heathen as that a man should take
his father's wife."<span id="fr_22"></span>[22](#fn_22.md)

<span id="page_500">p. 500</span>

    One of the most remarkable facts connected with church teaching, is
the lightness with which such positive declarations of Christ as to the
relations of husband and wife are cast aside, or his teaching entirely
reversed, in order that man may receive license for an immorality
forbidden to woman.

    It must be noted that the chief reason given by the church for
assuming woman's greater guilt in committing adultery is not based upon
the greater immorality of the act, *per se*, but the injury to property
rights, succession, etc. It must also be noted that the great objection
of the church to divorce on part of woman lies in the fact that the wife
thus escapes from a condition of bondage to one of comparative freedom.
In securing a divorce she repudiates the husband's "headship," she thus
subverts his authority; by this act she places herself upon an equality
of moral and property rights with man, and the church not admitting such
equality between man and woman, is hostile to divorce upon her part.
Every new security gained by woman for the protection of her civil
rights in or out of the family, is a direct blow at the church theory of
her inferiority and subordination. Her full freedom is to be looked for
through her increased legal and political rights and not through the
church.

    During the same year of the remarkable sermon by Rev. Alexander
Crummel, 1881, Rev. S. W. Dilke read a paper before the Social Science
Association at Saratoga, entitled "Lax Divorce Legislation." He showed
the same disregard for the rights of the individual, when the individual
was a wife, as his brother clergymen, saying: "Our lax divorce system
treats the wrongs of the wife chiefly as those of a mere individual." He
was assiduous in his regard for the

<span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

protection of the womanly nature, recognizing sex, "her sex" as "a
profound fact in nature, but why the sex of woman should be a more
"profound fact" than the sex of man, he did not show. That woman now
claims a recognition of her individuality as a being possessed of
personal rights, is the basis of present attack upon divorce by the
church; nor is the state more ready to admit her individual
representation and personal rights of self-government. In March, 1887,
Rev. E. B. Hurlbert preached a sermon in the First Baptist church of San
Francisco on "The Relation of Husband and Wife, "afterward published, in
which he said:

    "The principal objection to the Episcopal marriage service raised by
the self-willed woman of the period is that it requires her to *obey*
her husband. But this objection is leveled equally against the
requirement of the word of God, and, furthermore, the additional promise
to honor and love him can only be kept in the spirit of obedience. This
obligation is founded upon the fact that he is her husband, and if she
cannot reverence him for what he is in himself, still she must reverence
him for the position which he holds. And, again, she must render this
submissive reverence to her husband's headship as unto the Lord, as is
fit in the Lord.' She reverences him not simply as a man, but as her own
husband, behind whom stands the Lord himself. It is the Lord who has
made him husband, and the honor with which she regards him, though
himself personally not deserving it, is in reality an honoring of the
Lord. Many a Christian woman, actuated by this motive, has been most
tenderly submissive, dutiful and patient, as towards the most
unreasonable and despotic of husbands-inspired by the remembrance that
it was a service rendered unto Christ. Let the wife, then, reverence her
husband for what he is in himself, for his loving and noble qualities;
but if these qualities do not belong to him, then let her reverence him
for the sake of his office

<span id="page_502">p. 502</span>

simply because he is her husband--and in either event let her reverence
him, because in doing so she is honoring the Lord and Savior."

    It is but a short time since the pastor of the Swedenborgian church,
Washington, D. C., as reported by one of his flock, expressed to that
body his opinion that the **church** had better remain unrepresented
rather than have women represent it, and this, although nine-tenths of
his congregation are women. It is, however, pleasing to state that the
committee for that purpose elected an equal number of women with men;
the efforts of the pastor against woman, securing but seven votes. The
Unitarian and Universalist churches which ordain women to preach and
administer the ordinances, still make these women pastors feel that the
innovation is not a universally acceptable one. In a lengthy pastoral
letter issued by the Episcopal convention held in Chicago a few years
since, it was asserted that the claim of the wife to an equal right with
her husband to the control of her person, her property and her earnings
was "disparaging the Christian law of the household." The Methodist
church still refuses to place woman upon an equality with man, either in
the ministry or in lay representation, a few years since taking from
them their previous license to preach, and this despite the fact that
Mrs. Van Cott, a woman evangelist, did such severe work during a period
of fourteen years, as to seriously injure her health, and so successful
were her ministrations that she brought more converts to the church than
a dozen of its most influential bishops during the same time. To such
bitter lengths has opposition to woman's ordination been carried in that
church that Rev. Mr. Buckley, editor of "The Christian Advocate,"<span
id="fr_23"></span>[23](#fn_23.md) when debating

{p.503}

the subject, declared that he would oppose the admission of the mother
of our Lord into the ministry, the debate taking on most unseemly
form.<span id="fr_24"></span>[24](#fn_24.md) Miss Oliver who had long been
pastor of the Willoughby Street church, in Brooklyn, appealed to the
General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, at its session in
Cincinnati, May, 1880, for full installment and ordination, saying:

    "I am sorry to trouble our dear mother church with, any perplexing
question, but it presses me also, and the church and myself must decide
something. I am so thoroughly convinced that the Lord has laid commands
upon me in this direction that it becomes with me really a question of
my own soul's salvation." She then gave the reasons that induce her to
believe that she is called to pastoral work, and concluded: "I have made
almost every conceivable sacrifice to do what I believe to be God's
will. Brought up in a conservative circle in New York City, that held it
a disgrace for a woman to work, surrounded with the comforts and
advantages of ample means, and trained in the Episcopal church, I gave
up home, friends and support, went counter to prejudices that had become
second nature to me, worked several years to constant exhaustion, and
suffered cold, hunger and loneliness; the things hardest for me to bear
were laid upon me. For two months my own mother would not speak to me.
When I entered the house she turned and walked away, and when I sat at
the table she did not recognize me. I have passed through tortures to
which the flames of martyrdom would be nothing, for they would end in a
day; and through all this time and to-day I could turn off to positions
of comparative ease and profit. I ask you, fathers and brethren, tell me
what would you do in my place? Tell me what would you wish the church to
do toward you, were you in my place? Please only apply the golden rule,
and vote in conference accordingly."

    In answer to this powerful and noble appeal, and

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

in reply to all women seeking the ministry of that church, the General
Conference passed this resolution:

    Resolved: That women have already all the rights and privileges in
the Methodist church that are good for them, and that it is not
expedient to make any change in the books of discipline that would open
the doors for their ordination to the ministry.

    The General Conference, after so summarily deciding what was for the
spiritual good of women, in thus refusing to recognize their equality of
rights to the offices of that church, resolved itself as a whole into a
political convention, adjourning in a body to Chicago before its
religious business was finished, in order that its presence might
influence the National Republican Convention there assembled, to
nominate General Grant for a third term to the presidency of the United
States; General Grant being in affiliation with the Methodist church.

    The Congregational church is placed upon record through laws,
governing certain of its bodies, which state that:

    By the word "church" is meant the adult males duly admitted and
retained by the First Evangelical church of Cambridgeport, present at
any regular meeting of said church and voting by a majority.

    The New York "Independent," of February 24, 1881, commenting upon
this official declaration that only "adult males" are to be considered
the "church," says:

    The above is Article XIV. of the by-laws of the society connected
with the aforesaid church. It is a matter of gratitude that the society,
if it forbids females to vote in the church, yet allows them to pray and
to help the society raise money.

    The Rev. W. V. Turnstall, in the "Methodist Recorder,"

<span id="page_505">p. 505</span>

a few years since, gave his priestly views in regard to woman, and by
implication those of the Methodist church. He declared woman to be under
the curse of subjection to man, a curse not removable until the
resurrection. He said that under the Mosaic law woman had no voice in
anything; that she could hold no office, yet did so in a few instances
when God wished to especially humiliate the nation; that she was
scheduled as a higher piece of property; that even the Bible was not
addressed to her but to man alone; woman finding her salvation even
under the new covenant, not through man; his points were:

    First: That woman is under a curse which subjects her to man.

    Second: This curse has never been removed, nor will it be removed
until the resurrection.

    Third: That woman under the Mosaic law, God's civil law, had no
voice in anything. That she was not allowed her oath; that she was no
part of the congregation of Israel; that her genealogy was not kept;
that no notice was taken of her birth or death, except as these events
were connected with some man of providence; that she was given no
control of her children; that she could hold no office; nor did she,
except in a few instances, when to reproach and humiliate the nation,
God suspended his own law, and made an instrument of women for the time
being. That she offered no sacrifices, no redemption money was paid for
her; that she, received no religious rites; that the mother's cleansing
was forty days longer, and the gift was smaller for a female child than
for a male; and that in the tenth commandment--always in force--she is
scheduled as a higher species of property; that her identity was
completely merged in that of her husband.

    Fourth: That for seeking to hold office Miriam was smitten with
leprosy; and that under the new covenant

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span>

she is only permitted to pray or prophesy with her head covered, which
accounts for the fashion of wearing bonnets in public to this day; that
she is expressly prohibited from rule in the church or usurpation of
authority over the man.

    Fifth: That to vote is to rule, voting carrying with it all the
collaterals of making, expounding, and executing law; that God has
withheld from woman the right to rule, either in the church, the state
or the family; that He did this because of her having "brought sin and
death into the world, and all our woe."

    Sixth: That the Bible is addressed to man and not to woman; that man
comes to God through Jesus, and woman comes to Jesus through man; that
every privilege the wife enjoys she but receives through the husband,
for God has declared that woman shall not rule man, but be subject unto
him.

    A more explicit statement of the opinion of the church regarding
woman is seldom found. Later action of the Methodist body proves its
agreement with Rev. Mr. Turnstall. The General Conference of that church
convened May 1, 1888, in the Metropolitan Opera House, New York,
numbering delegates from every part of the United States as well as many
from foreign lands. Among these delegates were sixteen women. The
question of their admission came up the first day. The senior bishop,
Rev. Thomas Bowman, in his opening remarks, declared that body to stand
in the presence of new conditions, in that they found names upon the
roll of a class of persons whose eligibility had never been determined
by the high tribunal of the church. A committee was appointed to report
upon their admission. Bishop Merrill, occupying the chair upon the
second day, said that "for the first time in the history of a
conference, women had been sent as delegates, but the bishops did not
think the women were eligible. The report of the committee

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

was submitted, which declared that after a serious discussion they had
become convinced that, while the rule was passed relating to the
admission of lay delegates to the General Conference, the church
contemplated admission only to men as lay delegates, and that under the
constitution and laws, women were not eligible. The committee agreed
that the protest against women should be sustained, and the conferences
from which they were sent be notified that their seats were vacant. A
long discussion ensued. Rev. John Wiley, president of the Drew
Theological Seminary of the New York Conference, spoke against woman's
admission, saying:

    That if the laws of the church were properly interpreted they would
prove that women are not eligible and then, besides, no one wanted them
in the General Conference.

    Rev. J. R. Day, the New York Conference, argued against the
admission of women, saying:

    When the law was passed for the admission of lay delegates it was
never intended that women should be delegates to the General Conference.
It is proposed to-day to make one of the most stupendous pieces of
legislation that has been known to Christendom. I am not opposed to
woman doing the work that she is capable of doing but I do not think
that she should intrude upon the General Conference. Woman has not the
necessary experience; this is a tremendous question.

    Rev, Jacob Rothweiler, of the Central German Conference, asserted
that:

    The opponents of the report are trying to override the constitution
of the church, and are making an effort to strike at the
conscientiousness of go per cent of the Christian church which has
existed for the last 1,800 years. The history of Christianity shows that
women were never intended to vote.

<span id="page_508">p. 508</span>

    The conference was seriously divided upon this question. Although
eventually lost, yet many clergymen permeated with the spirit of
advancing civilization, voted in its favor, among them Rev. Dr. Hammond,
of Syracuse, New York, a delegate for the episcopacy; while arrayed in
bitter opposition was Rev. Mr. Buckley, editor of "The Christian
Advocate," also a candidate for the bishopric, and the man that when the
question of the ordination of Miss Oliver came up a few years since,
declared he would oppose the admission of the Mother of the Lord to the
ministry. His remark recalls that of Tetzel, the great Catholic dealer
in indulgences, given in another part of this work, and illustrates to
what extent of blasphemy the opponents of women's equality proceed. It
was not until the seventh day of the Conference that the question of
woman's admission was decided in the negative, and the great Methodist
Episcopal church put itself upon record as opposed to the recognition of
more than one-half of its members. The women delegates were not even
allowed seats upon the floor during the debate. Mrs. Nind, president of
the Woman's Foreign Missionary Society, arose to vote, but was not
counted, although the Woman's Foreign Missionary societies are making
converts where men cannot reach--in the zenanas. The action of the
Conference was foreshadowed by that of Baltimore a few weeks previously,
when it was decided that women missionaries should not be permitted to
administer communion in the zenanas as it would open the door for their
ordination to the ministry and this despite the fact that women alone
are admitted to the zenanas. At the Methodist minister's bi-monthly
meeting, Syracuse, N. Y., near time of the General Conference, Rev.

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

Thomas Tinsey, of Clyde, read a paper entitled "Is it advisable to make
women of the church eligible to all the ecclesiastical councils and the
ministerial order of the church," quoting Paul in opposition to giving
her a voice, saying:

What can our modern advocates of licensing and ordaining women and
electing them to annual conferences, do with the command to the
Corinthians, "Let your women keep silence in the church;" or to Timothy:
"Let the women learn in silence and all subjection," Paul certainly
meant something by such teaching. The position taken by the Fathers of
Methodism appears to me to be the only tenable one, viz: that the
prohibition applies to the legislation or official business of the
church-precisely the kind of work contemplated in the effort to make
them eligible to the General Conference, and to Methodist orders.
Concerning these things, "Let them learn of their husbands at home."

    Rev. Mr. Tinsey farther gave his opinion as to the comparative
uselessness of woman. He was able to conceive of no good reason for her
creation, aside from that of burden bearer in the process of
reproduction, saying:

    Woman is that part or side of humanity upon which the great labor,
care and burden of reproduction is placed. We can conceive of no good
reason for making women aside from this. Man is certainly better suited
to all other work."

    After discussion, the ministers present generally agreed that,
because of motherhood, woman should be debarred from such official
recognition.

    The final ground of women's exclusion as delegates to the. General
Conference, is most noticeable inasmuch as appeal was ultimately made to
the State. Upon the seventh day's session it was resolved to suspend the
rules and continue the debate on the admission

<span id="page_510">p. 510</span>

of women as lay-delegates. So anxious were men to speak that forty-one
delegates at once sprung to their feet and claimed the floor. Judge
Taylor, a lay delegate from the St. Louis conference, walking down the
aisle with a number of law books under his arm, proceeded to argue the
question on constitutional grounds, saying:

    "It would do much harm to admit women at the present time. There are
bishops to be elected and other important matters to be voted on, and if
women are: admitted and allowed to vote, and it should subsequently be
decided that women should not be entitled to seats, the acts of the
present General Conference would be illegal and unconstitutional."

    While claiming, personally, to favor women's admission, he quoted
law to sustain their rejection, and wished the question to be submitted
to a vote of the church. The 'vote of the church,' as shown by the
adoption of Rev. F. B. Neely's amendment, signifying the ministers
present at annual conferences.<span id="fr_25"></span>[25](#fn_25.md) The

<span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

vote upon this amendment, which excluded women from seats in the General
Conference, submitting their eligibility to the decision of ministers of
the annual conferences, was adopted 237 to 198. It thus requires
three-fourths vote of the members present and voting at the: annual
conferences, this vote to be ratified by a two-thirds vote of the
General Conference in order to woman's acceptance as lay delegate to
such General Conference<span id="fr_26"></span>[26](#fn_26.md). Aside from
the fact of an appeal to the civil law for the exclusion of woman, thus
showing the close union of church and state, one other important point
must be noticed. In the declaration that the church should be consulted
in regard to such an important matter, that body was defined as the
ministers of the annual conference, laymen not here ranking as part of
the church. The lay delegates, unnarrowed by theological studies were,
as a body, favorable to woman's admission. Nor did they refrain from
criticising the clergy, declaring that the episcopacy did not interpret
the law of the church, this power resting in the General Conference. But
one more favoring vote would have tied the question. Gen. Samuel H.
Hurst, dairy and food commissioner of Ohio, the first layman to gain the
floor, defended the right of women to admission. He alluded to the

<span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

opponents of the women as "old fogies." He criticized the bishop's
address.

    "The episcopacy does not interpret the law of the church, but the
General Conference does. Woman does not come here as a strong-minded
person demanding admittance, but she comes as representative of the lay
conference. The word 'laymen' was interpreted to mean all members of the
church not represented in the ministry. That is the law, and if women
are 'laymen' they are entitled to admission."

    The Southern Baptist Association, meeting in New Orleans in July of
the same year, refused to admit women by a vote of 42 to 40. The church
as of old, is still strenuous in its efforts to influence legislation.
An amendment to the National Constitution is pressed by the National
Reform Association, recognizing the sectarian idea of God; another
placing marriage and divorce under control of the general government by
uniform laws; while priestly views upon the political freedom of woman
are thrust into the very faces of our law makers.<span
id="fr_27"></span>[27](#fn_27.md) The following portions of a sermon
preached at the Cathedral of the Holy Cross, Boston, February 21, 1886,
by the Rev. Father J. P. Bodfish, were printed and distributed among the
members of the Massachusetts Legislature that spring by the opponents of
woman suffrage:<span id="fr_28"></span>[28](#fn_28.md)

    Not that I would have woman step out of her sphere; the man is the
natural protector, the father, the lawgiver, of his; family; nor would I
counsel wives to usurp the places of their husbands at the polls. I
believe this to be one of the errors of modern times, to

<span id="page_513">p. 513</span>

try to unsex woman, and take her from the high place she occupies and
drag her into the arena of public life. What has she to do there? We
might as well try to drag down the angels to take part in the menial
affairs of this world as to take woman from the high place she occupies
in the family, where 'tis her privilege and duty to guide, to counsel
and to instruct to lead that family in the way of righteousness. It is
but offering her a degradation; Almighty God never intended it. The
charm, the influence of woman, is in that purity that comes from living
in a sphere apart from us. God forbid that we should ever see the day
that a man, a husband or a father, is to find his will opposed and
thwarted at the polls by his daughter or his wife. Then farewell to that
reverence which belongs to the character of woman.

    She puts herself on an equal footing with man when she steps down
from that place where every one regards her with reverence, and becomes
unsexed by striving to make laws which she cannot enforce, and taking
upon herself duties for which she is altogether unfitted.

    Decrees of various characters presenting woman as a being of
different natural and spiritual rights from man, are constantly
formulated by the churches. The Plenary Council of Baltimore, 1884,
busied itself in the enactment of canons directly bearing upon marriage
and divorce, re-affirming the sacramental character of marriage and
declaring that marriages under civil rites should be resented by the
whole Catholic world This council was preceded by an encyclical from the
Pope, laying out its plans by work yet leaving it within the power of
the diocesan bishops to promulgate its canons according to their own
wisdom. Consequently, not until three years later were those upon
marriage published on the Pacific Coast, at which time the archbishop of
San Francisco, the bishops of Monterey, Los Angeles and Grass Valley,
addressed a pastoral

<span id="page_514">p. 514</span>

letter to the Catholics of those regions, condemning civil marriage as a
sin and sacrilege, illegal, and a "horrible concubinage." It was farther
stated that marriage unblessed by a priest, subjected the parties to
excommunication. At the still later Catholic Congress, in honor of the
hundredth anniversary of the Catholic Hierarchy in America, divorces
were affirmed to be the plague of civilization, a discredit to the
government, a degradation of the female sex, and a standing menace to
the sanctity of the marriage bond. In noting these canons of the Plenary
Council, and the resolutions of the Catholic Congress, it should be
borne in mind that the chief secret of the long-continued power of the
Catholic church has been its hold upon marriage and the subordination of
woman in this relation. To these celibate priests, nothing connected
with woman is sacred. Celibacy and the sacramental nature of marriage
are each of them based upon the theory of woman's created inferiority
and original sin. Priestly power over marriage, and the confessional,
through which means it is able to wrest all family and state secrets to
its own use, are powers that will not be peaceably relinquished. Their
destruction will come through the growing intelligence of people, and
the responsibility of political self-government. These will insure
confidence in the validity of civil marriage and a belief in the
personal rights of individuals. To woman, the education of Political
responsibility is most essential in order to free her from church bonds,
and is therefore most energetically opposed by the church. In 1890, a
number of Catholic ladies of Paris formed a union for the emancipation
of woman from different kinds of social thraldom.<span
id="fr_29"></span>[29](#fn_29.md) Their first attack

<span id="page_515">p. 515</span>

was upon the priesthood, whom they declared the mortal adversary of
woman's advancement, affirming that every woman "who abets the abbes is
an enemy of her sex." This open rebellion of Catholic ladies against the
power of the hierarchy, is a significant sign of woman's advancing
freedom.

    All canons, decrees, resolutions and laws of the church, especially
bearing upon the destinies of woman are promulgated without the bearing
of her voice, either in confirmation or rejection. She is simply
legislated for as a slave. Two of the later triennial conclaves of the
Episcopal church of the United States, energetically debated the subject
of divorce, not, however, arriving at sufficient unanimity of opinion
for the enactment of a canon. When Mazzini, the Italian patriot, was in
this country, 1852, he declared the destruction of the priesthood to be
our only surety for continued freedom, saying:

    They will be found as in Italy, the foes of mankind, and if the
United States expects to retain even its political liberties, it must
get rid of the priesthood as Italy intends to do.<span
id="fr_30"></span>[30](#fn_30.md)

    Frances Wright, that clear-seeing, liberty-loving, Scotch
free-thought woman, noted the dangerous purpose and character of the
Christian party in politics, even as early as 1829; and the present
effort of this body, now organized as the "National Reform Association"
with its adjunct "The American Sabbath Union," officered by priests and
influential members of the Woman's Christian Temperance Union, and
kindred bodies, is a perpetual menace to the civil and religious
liberties of the United States. Its effort for an amendment to the
Federal Constitution which shall recognize

<span id="page_516">p. 516</span>

the United Sates as a Christian nation, is a determined endeavor toward
the union of church and state; and its success in such attempt will be
the immediate destruction of both civil and religious liberty. That such
a party now openly exists, its intentions no secret, is evidence that
the warnings of Italian patriot and the Scotch free thinker were not
without assured foundation.

    As a body, the church opposes education for woman, and all the
liberalizing tendencies of the last thirty-five or forty years, which
have opened new and varied industries to women and secured to wives some
relief from their general serf condition. Bishop Littlejohn, of the
Episcopal church, at the Triennial Conclave of bishops, 1883, preached
as his "triennial charge" upon "The Church and the Family," presenting
the general church idea as to woman's inferiority and subordination. He
made authoritative use of the words "sanctities of home," a phrase
invented by the clergy as a method of holding woman in bondage; directed
the church to "strictly impose her doctrines as to marriage and divorce,
clash as they may with the spirit of the times and the laws of the
state" (thus emulating the Catholic doctrines of the supremacy of the
church). He declared that in any respect to change the relation
established by God himself between husband and wife, was. rank
infidelity, no matter what specious, disguise such change might assume,
explicitly declaring the authority of the church over marriage, as
against the authority of the state; protesting against omission of the
word "obey" from the marriage service, and the control of the wife over
her own earnings and expenditures, saying:

    "If it be outside the province of the states to treat

<span id="page_517">p. 517</span>

marriage as more than a contract between a man and a woman, the church
must make it understood, as it is not, that it is inside her province to
treat it as a thing instituted of God. Practically, we have reached a
point where the wife may cease to have property interests in common with
her husband, may control absolutely her own means of living, and
determine for herself the scale of expenditures that will suit her
tastes or her caprices. The man is no longer the head of the household,
the husband. It has been made an open question whether the man or his
wife will fulfill that function, and 'a community of interests, with the
recognized authority of the husband to rule the wife, and the recognized
duty of the wife to obey that authority, is no longer deemed expedient
or necessary:' This rebellion against the old view of marriage is so
strong that in many cases the word 'obey' is omitted from the marriage
service."

    Even among Christianized Indians we find different laws governing
man and woman. In 1886, the governor of Maine paid a visit to the
governor of the Passamaquody Indians, at a time when a large council was
in progress upon the St. Croix reservation. This council first assembled
at the chapel, where the Revised Statutes-the whole basis of government
of the Passamaquodies are pasted. These statutes having been approved by
Bishop Healy, of Portland, are also looked upon as canons of the
church.<span id="fr_31"></span>[31](#fn_31.md)

    The statutes principally affecting women, are:

    Third: No woman who is separated from her husband shall be admitted
to the sacrament, or to any place in the church except the porch in
summer and the back seat in winter, unless by the consent of the bishop.

    Fourth: Any woman who admits men into her house by night shall be
treated as a criminal and delivered. to the courts.

<span id="page_518">p. 518</span>

    Fifth: Any woman who is disobedient to her husband, any common scold
or drunkard, shall not be permitted to enter the church, except by
permission of the priest.

    It will be noted that these statutes forbid the sacrament to the
woman who is separated from her husband, not even permitting her an
accustomed seat in church. She must remain in the porch during the
summer and in a back seat during the winter, except "the bishop"
otherwise permits. Also the woman not rendering obedience to her
husband, is denied permission to enter the church except under priestly
permit The Christian theory of woman's inferiority and subordination to
man, is as fully endorsed by these statutes as in the mediæval priestly
instruction to husbands.<span id="fr_32"></span>[32](#fn_32.md)

    No profession as constantly appeals to the lower nature as the
priestly, the emotions rather than reason, are constantly invoked;
ambition, love of power, hope of reward, fear of punishment, are the
incentives presented and in no instance are such incentives more fully
made use of than for purposes of sustaining the supremacy of man over
woman. The teaching of the church cannot fail to impress woman with the
feeling that if she expects education, or even opportunity of full
entrance into business, she must not heed the admonitions of the
priesthood, when, as by Dr. Dix, she is contemptuously forbidden to
enter the professions on the ground that God designed these offices
alone for man. When women sought university honors at Oxford, a few
years since, many "incredibly foolish" letters, said "London Truth,"
were written by its opponents,

<span id="page_519">p. 519</span>

who were chiefly clergymen. Canon Liddon's influence was against the
statute; the Dean of Norwich referred to it as "an attempt to defeat
divine Providence and Holy Scripture." Dr. Gouldbourne thought it would
"unsex woman.'

    "There is no sin," said Buddha, "but ignorance," yet according to
Rector Dix, Rev. S. W. Turnstall, Dr. Craven and the priesthood of the
present day, in common with the earlier church, woman's normal condition
is that of ignorance, and education is the prerogative of man alone; and
yet the dangers of ignorance have by no means been fathomed, although
the latest investigations show the close relation between knowledge and
life. That as intelligence is diffused, there is a corresponding
increase of longevity, is proven; the most uneducated communities
showing the greatest proportion of deaths. Ignorance and the death rate
are parts of the same question; education and length of life are
proportionately synonymous. Statistics gathered in England, Wales and
Ireland a few years since showed the percentage of infantile deaths to
be much greater in those portions where the mother could not read and
write, than where the mother had sufficient education to read a
newspaper and write her own name. In districts where there was no other
appreciable difference except that of education, the mortality was the
largest in the most ignorant districts.

    In deprecating education for women, no organized body in the world
has so clearly proven its own tyrannous ignorance as has the priesthood,
and no body has shown itself so fully the enemy of mankind. Church

<span id="page_520">p. 520</span>

teaching and centuries of repression acting through the laws of heredity
have lessened woman's physical size, depressed her mental action,
subjugated her spirit, and crushed her belief in her right to herself
and the proper training of her own children. The church, in its
opposition to woman's education through the ages, has literally killed
off the inhabitants of the world with much greater rapidity than war,
pestilence, or famine; more than one-half the children born into the
world have soon died because of the tyranny and ignorance of the
priesthood.<span id="fr_34"></span>[34](#fn_34.md) The potential physical
energy of mankind thus destroyed can in a measure be estimated, but no
one can fathom the infinitely greater loss of mental and moral force
brought about through condemnation of knowledge to woman; only by
induction can it even be surmised. Lecky points out the loss to the
world because so many of its purest characters donned the garb of monk
or nun. That injury was immediately perceptible, but in the denial of
education and freedom to woman more than ninety per cent of the moral
and physical energy of the world has literally been suffocated, and
owing to ignorance and lack of independent thought this loss is as yet
scarcely recognized. So dense the pall of ignorance still overshadowing
the world that even woman herself does not yet conjecture the injury
that has been done her, or of what she and her children have been
deprived. Nor has the world yet roused to a full consciousness of the
mischief to mankind that has been perpetrated through the falsehood and
ignorant presumption of those claiming control over its dearest rights
and, interests. Resistance to the wrong thus

<span id="page_521">p. 521</span>

done the world has been less possible because perpetrated in the name of
God and religion. It has caused tens of thousands of women to doubt
their equality of right with man in education, to disbelieve they
possess the same authority to interpret the Bible or present its
doctrines as man; neither, having been deprived of education, do they
believe themselves to be man's political equal, or that they possess
equal rights with him in the household. This degradation of woman's
moral nature is the most direful result of the teaching of the church in
regard to her. A loss of faith in one's own self, disbelief in one's own
right to the fullest cultivation of one's own powers, proceeds from a
debasement of the moral sentiments. Self-reliance, self-respect,
self-confidence, are acquired through that cultivation of the
intellectual faculties which has been denied to woman. Rev. Dr. Charles
Little, of the Syracuse University, says: "In the report of a sermon of
a distinguished theologian which appeared not long ago, this striking
passage occurred: If I were to choose between Christianity as a life and
Christianity as a dogma, I would choose Christianity as a dogma".
Judging from its treatment of woman and the many recent trials for
heresy, dogma rather than life is the general spirit of the churches
everywhere. It is dogma that has wrecked true religion; it is dogma that
has crushed humanity; it is dogma that has created two codes of morals;
that has inculcated the doctrine of original sin; that has degraded
womanhood; that has represented divinity as possessing every evil
attribute.

    From all these incontrovertible facts in church and state, we see
that both religion and government are essentially masculine in their
present forms and

<span id="page_522">p. 522</span>

development. All the evils that have resulted from dignifying one sex
and degrading the other may be traced to one central error, a belief in
a trinity of masculine gods, in one from which the feminine element is
wholly eliminated; and yet in the scriptural account of the simultaneous
creation of man and woman, the text plainly recognizes the feminine as
well as the masculine element in the God-head, and declares the equality
of the sexes in goodness, wisdom and power. Genesis i, 26-27.

    And God said, Let us make man in our own image, after our likeness,
and so God created man in his own image; in the image of God created He
him, male and female created He them, and gave them dominion over the
fish of the sea and over the fowl of the air, and over every living
thing that moveth upon the earth.

    In nothing has the ignorance and weakness of the church been more
fully shown than in its controversies in regard to the creation. From
time of the "Fathers" to the present hour, despite its assertion and its
dogmas, the church has ever been engaged in discussions upon the Garden
of Eden, the serpent, woman, man, and God as connected in one
inseparable relation. Amid all the evils attributed to woman, her loss
of Paradise, introduction of sin into the world and the consequent
degradation of mankind, yet Eve, and through her, all women have found
occasional defenders. A book printed in Amsterdam, 1700, in a series of
eleven reasons, threw the greater culpability upon Adam, saying:

    First: The serpent tempted her before she thought of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, and suffered herself to be persuaded that
not well understood his meaning.

    Second: That believing that God had not given such prohibition she
eat the fruit.

<span id="page_523">p. 523</span>

    Third: Sinning through ignorance she committed a less heinous crime
than Adam.

    Fourth: That Eve did not necessarily mean the penalty of eternal
death, for God's decree only imported that man should die if he sinned
against his conscience.

    Fifth: That God might have inflicted death on Eve without injustice,
yet he resolved, so great is his mercy toward his works, to let her
live, in (that) she had not sinned maliciously.

    Sixth: That being exempted from the punishment contained in God's
decree, she might retain all the prerogatives of her sex except those
that were not incidental with the infirmities to which God condemned
her.

    Seventh: That she retained in particulars the prerogative of
bringing forth children who had a right to eternal happiness on
condition of obeying the new Adam.

    Eighth: That as mankind was to proceed from Adam and Eve, Adam was
preserved alive only because his preservation was necessary for the
procreation of children.

    Ninth: That it was by accident therefore, that the sentence of death
was not executed on him, but that otherwise he was more (justly)
punished than his wife.

    Tenth: That she was not driven out from Paradise as he was, but was
only obliged to leave it to find out Adam in the earth; and that it was
with full privilege of returning thither again.

    Eleventh: That the children of Adam and Eve were subject to eternal
damnation, not as proceeding from Eve, but as proceeding from Adam.

    In 1580, but three hundred years since, an inquiry set on foot as to
the language of Paradise, resulted in the statement that God spoke
Danish; Adam, Swedish; and the serpent, French. Eve doubtless was

<span id="page_524">p. 524</span>

conceded to have spoken all three languages, as she conversed with God,
with Adam, and with the serpent, Hieronymus, a Father of the Church,
credited Eve with possessing a much finer constitution than Adam, and in
that respect as superior to him.<span id="fr_35"></span>[35](#fn_35.md)
Thus, during the ages, the church through its "Fathers" and its priests
has devoted itself to a discussion of the most trivial questions
concerning woman, as well as to the formation of most oppressive canons
against her, and although as shown, she has found an occasional
defender, and even claimants for her superiority upon certain points,
yet such discussions have had no effect upon the general view in which
the church has presented her, as one accursed of God and man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Past, Present, Future.](wcs12.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_page_466">p. 466</span>  

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1.](#fr_1.md)  Generally these conventicles
produced very many bastards, and the excuse they (the ministers) made
for that was, "where sin abounds the Grace of God super-abounds; there
is no condemnation in those that are in Christ." Sometimes this: 'The
lambs of God may sport together; to the pure all things are pure." Nay,
generally they are of opinion that a man is never a true saint till he
have a fall like that of David with Bathsheba, *The true character of
the Presbyterian Pastors and People of Scotland*. Reign of King Charles
II--and since the Revolution. p. 12.

<span id="fn_page_467">p. 467</span>  

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2.](#fr_2.md)  Mr. Mott a member of the Salvation
army in Syracuse, having led astray another member, a young girl of
seventeen and being requested to do her the justice of marrying her,
replies that he has a great mission in converting the world and has no
time for marrying. He took an active part in the salvation meeting the
other night. He says he was doing as Jesus did, and was free from sin.
He carried the flag in the streets and prayed three times. There was
great <span id="fn_page_468">p. 468</span> disorder and indignation at
Mott's impudence in praying. and speaking.--*Syracuse Daily Standard*.
1883.

<span id="fn_page_468">p. 468</span>  

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3.](#fr_3.md)  *The Book of Pitris*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4.](#fr_4.md)  *Light on the Path*. 3-80.

<span id="fn_page_469">p. 469</span>  

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5.](#fr_5.md)  Mrs. Gage, *Chairman of the
Resolution Committee*.

<span id="fn_page_471">p. 471</span>  

<span id="fn_6"></span>[6.](#fr_6.md)  Both Marie Weston Chapman, and
Whittier, immortalized this letter in verse, Mrs. Chapman by a spirited
poem entitled: "The Times that try Men's souls," and Whittier in one
called "A Pastoral Letter."<span id="fn_page_472">p. 472</span>

This "Clerical Bull" was fulminated with special reference to those two
noble South Carolina women, Sarah M. and Angelina E. Grimke, who were at
that time publicly pleading for those in bonds as bound with them, while
on a visit to Massachusetts. It was written by the Rev. Dr. Nehemiah
Adams, of Boston, author of "A South-side View of Slavery.

<span id="fn_page_473">p. 473</span>  

<span id="fn_7"></span>[7.](#fr_7.md)  No man who remembers 1837 and its
lowering clouds will deny that there was hardly any contribution to the
anti-slavery movement greater or more impressive than the crusade of
these Grimke sisters from South Carolina through the New England
States.--*Wendell Phillips*.

<span id="fn_page_474">p. 474</span>  

<span id="fn_8"></span>[8.](#fr_8.md)  Who afterwards married Stephen
Foster, one of the apostles of the antislavery cause.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[9.](#fr_9.md)  Decomposed eggs, the contents of
stables, and even of outhouses, were hurled at the speaker and those
assembled to listen.

<span id="fn_page_475">p. 475</span>  

<span id="fn_10"></span>[10.](#fr_10.md)  Rev. Samuel J. May first had his
attention called to the wrongs of women under Church and State by a
striking comparison of the two from the lips of a woman.

Priestly opposition to new ideas, and to woman's taking part in reform
work, still continues to be manifest, as shown by the tour of General
Weaver and Mrs. Lease, through the Southern States in the fall of 1892.
"The notorious Mrs Lease," as she was termed, was met by hooting,
howling, egg-throwing mobs, and in Atlanta "an eminent minister of the
strongest religious denomination (Baptist) in the South" preached
against the third party, September 18th, five days before that on which
General Weaver and Mrs. Lease were to speak in that city. This sermon,
reported by the Constitution, as a "red-hot roasting" declared against
the political party that would employ women as speakers, "unsex American
women," as an evidence of the skepticism of the age. Nor is this the
only recent instance of pulpit opposition to woman. After the formation
of the Woman's National Liberal League, Washington, February 1890,
clergymen in different portions of the country--Washington, Iowa,
Massachusetts, etc., hurled their anathemas against this association, as
inimical to Bible morality, and especially against the women leading in
this step. In addition to these sermons, a Catholic Orphanage of seven
hundred children, was instructed to pray against such demoralizing
ideas; and beyond this, letters passing between influential women fell
under United States supervision, and were opened in transit.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[11.](#fr_11.md)  Lucretia Mott foremost among
these delegates, after this rejection decided <span id="fn_page_476">p.
476</span> upon holding a Woman's Rights Convention, upon her return to
America, which should present the wrongs under which women suffered,
This was done, 1848, at Seneca Falls, N. Y.

<span id="fn_page_478">p. 478</span>  

<span id="fn_12"></span>[12.](#fr_12.md)  Through *Senator Joseph E.
Brown*.

<span id="fn_page_479">p. 479</span>  

<span id="fn_13"></span>[13.](#fr_13.md)  Several ladies well known for
their work in the enfranchisement of their sex, attended this trial, the
*New York Sun* facetiously referring to the presence of "those eminent
Presbyterians, Lillie Devereux Blake. Matilda Joslyn Gage and Susan A.
King."

<span id="fn_page_483">p. 483</span>  

<span id="fn_14"></span>[14.](#fr_14.md)  Report of the Washington D. C.
"*Republican*."

<span id="fn_page_482">p. 482</span>  

<span id="fn_15"></span>[15.](#fr_15.md)  Ably reviewed each week as they
appeared, by Mrs. Lillie Devereux Blake.

<span id="fn_page_483">p. 483</span>  

<span id="fn_16"></span>[16.](#fr_16.md)  *Lenten Lectures*, p. 56-7-114.

<span id="fn_page_486">p. 486</span>  

<span id="fn_17"></span>[17.](#fr_17.md) 

WOMEN AND THEIR SPHERE!

Rev. Dr. Dix, some weeks since, came to the front with a series of
sermons in which, by unsupported assertion, he managed to demonstrate
that women in the United States are no longer ornamental. The trouble in
the mind of the reverend D. D. seems to be that women, having grown in
the knowledge of the truth and of that liberty wherewith Christ maketh
free, have concluded that their sphere is not to be man's slave--his
plaything, a human gewgaw, to be fondled, caressed, or kicked as the
masculine mind may elect. If it is important for man to "know himself,"
brave women have concluded that it is quite as essential for a woman to
know herself, and with a heroism born of rights conferred by God
Himself, women have in these latter days resolved to map out their own
sphere independent of man's dictation. They have made commendable
headway. They have succeeded in shaking down a number of antiquated
citadels where ignorance, superstition, prejudice, despotism and cruelty
found refuge, and, as they tumbled, the breath of popular indignation
has blown the fragments away like chaff in the grasp of a tornado. These
brave women, finding out that--

"Life is real, life is earnest,"

set themselves about solving its problems for themselves and for their
sex. Some of them asked for the ballot. Why? Because they wanted to
obliterate from the statute books such laws as restricted their
liberties and circumscribed their sphere. As wives they wanted to be the
equals of their husbands before the law. Why not? As mothers they wanted
to be the equal of their sons before the law. Why not? A thousand
reasons have been assigned why not, but they do not answer the demand.
What is wanted as prudent guarantees that the ballot will be wisely
wielded by those upon whom the great right has been conferred? The
answer is <span id="fn_page_487">p. 487</span> ready--intellect,
education, a fair comprehension of the obligations of citizenship,
loyalty to the Government, to republican institutions and the welfare of
society. It is not contended that women do not possess these
qualifications, but the right is withheld from them nevertheless, and by
withholding this right a hundred others are included, every one of which
when justice bears sway will be granted. This done woman's sphere will
regulate itself as does man's sphere. "The Boston Herald" in a recent
issue takes Dr. Dix to task for narrowness of vision and weakness of
grasp in discussing "the calling of a Christian woman," and then
proceeds to outline its own views on the "sphere of capable women," in
which it is less robust than the reverend D. D. To intimate that the
Infinite Disposer of Events favors the narrow, vulgar prejudices of Rev.
Dr. Dix and his organ, the "Boston Herald," is to dwarf the Almighty to
human proportions and bring discredit upon His attributes in the midst
of which justice shines with resplendent glory, but the demand is that
women themselves shall determine for themselves the boundaries of their
sphere. It is not a question of mere sentiment, it is not a matter of
fancy or caprice. It is a rugged question. It involves food, clothing,
shelter. It means self-reliance. Women are not appealing to man's
gallantry, nor to any quality of less importance than his sense of
justice for their rights, Man is not likely to regard his mother with
less affection and reverence because she is his father's equal, and if
in the past, when women were more degraded than at present, the best men
have found in women inspiration for their best work, good men will not
find less inspiration for good work when women are emancipated from the
thraldom of vicious laws, and crowned man's equal in all matters
relating to "sphere," shall, by laws relating to physical and mental
organism, take their chances in the world's broad field of battle,
demanding and receiving for work done in any of the departments of human
activities men's pay when they perform men's work.--*Indianapolis
Sentinel*, May 13, 1883.

<span id="fn_page_490">p. 490</span>  

<span id="fn_18"></span>[18.](#fr_18.md)  It is not a physiological cause
which produced our present family with the father as ruler and owner of
all property.--*Kemptsky*.

<span id="fn_page_491">p. 491</span>  

<span id="fn_19"></span>[19.](#fr_19.md)  By a singular lack of oversight
in making up the title-page and lettering the cover, the words "Husband
and Wife" have been printed as though they referred to objects of equal
importance. Even the carefully trained eye of a former editor of the
"Christian Register," the Rt. Rev. F. D. Huntington, D. D. Bishop of
Central New York, who furnishes a brief and cautious introduction to the
volume, did not detect this error. It has been left to us to call
attention to the incongruity of the title-page, and to give the
sentiment of the book proper typographical expression. The conventional
sobriety and ecclesiasticism of the title-page do not prepare one for
the novelty of the contents. It is only by reading the book that we
become aware of them. The sensation of the reader is somewhat the same
as one would have on going into a building which from the facade
appeared to be a plain, dignified Episcopal church, but which on
entering he found to be a mediæval circus. Not that there is anything
intentionally hilarious in the arena of this book or that it displays
any athletic vigor of thought, but that it is essentially novel and
revolutionary. Dr. Gray is not unconscious of the novelty of his
doctrine. "It is believed," he says. "that the position of this essay is
new to the discussion. it has not been urged or stated in print in
England or America;" and, later on, he expresses a well-grounded belief
that "some will smile" at his views as "antiquated and fanciful." All of
these claims maybe readily granted. First, the doctrine is new. It is
new at least in its present dress--as new as Adam would seem to be, if
he put on a modern costume, dyed his gray hairs, and appeared in Boston
as a social lecturer.--*The Christian Register*, Boston.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[20.](#fr_20.md)  Who has forgotten the sublime
magnanimity of Artemus Ward, when he proposed on a certain occasion to
sacrifice all his wife's relatives? This is exactly what Dean Gray
theoretically achieves. He not only abolishes his own wife's relatives,
but those of other men who have entered into the marriage relationship.
He makes thorough work of it. Not only does be extinguish the wife's
sister as a relative, but also her cousins and her aunts. In fact, he
even abolishes the mother-in-law. The luxury of a mother-in-law is
granted to the wife, who by virtue of marriage becomes related to her
husband's mother, but is not granted to the husband, who has no relation
whatever to the mother of his wife. As to <span id="fn_page_492">p.
492</span> the sisters, the cousins and the aunts, there may be a reason
why Sir Joseph Porter, K. C. B., would view with dismay an equal
addition to their number through the offices of matrimony; but the
majority of men not blessed with a similar superfluity would hardly wish
to forego this delightful form of conjugal perquisite.--*Ibid*.

<span id="fn_page_496">p. 496</span>  

<span id="fn_21"></span>[21.](#fr_21.md)  One of the most learned colored
men in the country is Alexander Crummell, Rector of St. Luke's
Protestant Episcopal Church, Washington, D. C. When he desired to study
for holy orders he applied at Kenyon College, Gambier, O., but was
refused admission. He made applications elsewhere, which were equally
unsuccessful. He finally went to Oxford, England, and there took a full
course. He is an eloquent preacher, and his congregation embraces a
large number of prominent colored citizens."

<span id="fn_page_499">p. 499</span>  

<span id="fn_22"></span>[22.](#fr_22.md)  I Corinthians, V: 1

<span id="fn_page_502">p. 502</span>  

<span id="fn_23"></span>[23.](#fr_23.md)  And one of the most bitter
opponents to the admission of the women lay delegates to the Methodist
General Conference.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[24.](#fr_24.md)  As reported in Syracuse, New York
"Sunday Morning Courier," March 4th, 1877.

<span id="fn_page_510">p. 510</span>  

<span id="fn_25"></span>[25.](#fr_25.md)  Rev. F. B. Neely, of
Philadelphia, said that he was in favor of submitting the question to
the annual conferences. He offered the following amendment to the report
of the committee:

But since there is great interest in this question, and since the church
general should be consulted in regard to such an important matter,
therefore.

Resolved: That we submit to the annual conferences the proposition to
amend the second restrictive rule by amending the words "and said
delegates may be men or women" after the words "two lay delegates" for
an annual conference so that it would read, "Nor of more than two lay
delegates for an annual conference, and the said delegates may be men or
women."

The amendment was seconded by Dr. Paxton.-*Telegram*.

New York, May 12.--The debate on the admission of women delegates was
one of the most lengthy in the history of the church. It occupied the
time of the conference during the larger part of six sessions. It is the
common remark, too, that never before was a subject contested in this
body with such obstinacy, not to say bitterness. The struggle to obtain
recognition from the chair was a revelation to those: who did not know
previously how fond Methodists are of speaking in meeting. The instant
the chairman's gavel fell, announcing the termination of one speech,
fifty delegates or more were on their feet, and from fifty stentorian
voices rang out the pitiful appeal, "Mr. Chairman!" This was the order
of affairs from the beginning of the debate to the close. One delegate
who was finally recognized proved to be so hoarse from his protracted
efforts to get the floor that it was with difficulty he could be heard
when he did get it.--Correspondence, Syracuse. *N. Y. Sunday Herald*,
May 13.

<span id="fn_page_511">p. 511</span>  

<span id="fn_26"></span>[26.](#fr_26.md)  The final vote, excluding women
from this conference and submitting the question of their eligibility to
the annual conferences, stood: To exclude and submit, 237; against,
198--making a majority of 39 only of the total vote, while the laymen
were so evenly divided that the change of one vote would have tied them.
If now the annual conference shall decree by a three-fourths vote of all
the ministers present and voting, that women are eligible, and if four
years hence the general conference by a two-thirds vote shall ratify
that decree, the fair sisters will thereafter have free course in that
body, Otherwise they will be tolerated only as mere lookers-on. From the
fact, that many who voted to submit the matter to the annual conference
did so, not because they wish the women to come in, but merely as the
best method of getting rid of a troublesome question for the time being,
it looks as though their chances of gaining admittance as delegates four
years hence were little better, if any, than in the present
instance.--*Sunday Herald* Syracuse, N. Y. May 13.

<span id="fn_page_512">p. 512</span>  

<span id="fn_27"></span>[27.](#fr_27.md) 

THE PRIESTHOOD.

Now, too oft the priesthood wait  
At the threshold of the state  
Waiting for the beck and nod  
Of its power as law and God.--From Whittier's "Curse of the Charter
Brothers.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[28.](#fr_28.md)  From "The Woman's Journal."
Boston.

<span id="fn_page_514">p. 514</span>  

<span id="fn_29"></span>[29.](#fr_29.md)  Headed by Mme. Artie de Valsayre.

<span id="fn_page_515">p. 515</span>  

<span id="fn_30"></span>[30.](#fr_30.md)  When the temporal kingdom took
possession of Italy, the rate of ignorance {(*i.e., illiteracy?--jbh*)}
was 90 per cent. It has now been reduced to 45 per cent.

<span id="fn_page_517">p. 517</span>  

<span id="fn_31"></span>[31.](#fr_31.md)  The "*Boston Herald*," Aug. 17,
1886, heading an article upon these statutes, "*Copper Colored Blue
Laws*."

<span id="fn_page_518">p. 518</span>  

<span id="fn_32"></span>[32.](#fr_32.md)  A husband is entitled to punish
his wife when he sees fit. At first he is to use remonstrances; if these
do not avail, he is to have recourse to more severe punishment.

The confessor is at first bound not to pay much heed to women
complaining of their husbands, because women are habitually inclined to
lie.

<span id="fn_page_519">p. 519</span>  

<span id="fn_33"></span>[33.](#fr_33.md)  The scene in the convocation was
animated, the public at large favoring the women. The senior Proctor
being slow in his figuring, one of the "Gods in the Gallery" becoming
impatient for the announcement of the numbers, shouted "Call in one of
the ladies to help you, sir."

<span id="fn_page_520">p. 520</span>  

<span id="fn_34"></span>[34.](#fr_34.md)  In Egypt, where women received
the same education as men, very few children died--a fact noted in the
absence of child mummies.

<span id="fn_page_524">p. 524</span>  

<span id="fn_35"></span>[35.](#fr_35.md)  "Eve lived 940 years, giving
birth to a boy and a girl every year. Eve lived ten years longer than
Adam. They must give this first woman the best constitution in the world
for while her husband lived 930 years and communicated to his sons for
several generations the principle of so long a life (which is no less
applicable to Eve than to him), he must have been of very vigorous
constitution; \* \* \* turn the thing as you will it will always be an
argument from the greater to the less to show that Eve's body was better
constituted than that of her husband."
