[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](brk18)  [Next](brk20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMAYK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Brahma Knowledge*, by L. D. Barnett, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

§ 16. <span class="smallcaps">Māyā</span>.—The word *māyā,* magic
illusion, is commonly used in the later Vedānta to denote the phantom
character of the phenomenal world; and in this sense it does not appear
in the Upanishads until the Śvetāśvatara (IV. 10). It is not found in
the Brahma-sūtra; and hence the question has often been raised whether
the idea denoted by it was actually present in the minds of the authors
of the older Upanishads.

That phenomena, even to the first principles under which they are
cognised (space, time, and causality), are unreal relatively to Absolute
Being, is a cardinal doctrine not only of the Upanishads but of all
metaphysics. Even the Vedic poets assert a real being of primal unity
concealed behind the manifold of experience; and on this is founded the
Upanishadic principle that the universe exists only in and by virtue of
a World-Idea essentially identical with the individual consciousness.
This, however, is still far from the *māyā*-theory of the later Vedānta.
The authors of the older Upanishads were still much influenced by the
realism of the Vedas, and it is therefore doubtful whether they could
have agreed with the Vedantists who treat the world of experience as
*absolutely* unreal, a mere phantom

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

conjured up by the Self for its own delusion. As typical of the
Upanishadic attitude we may regard the theory of the Five Ātmās (§ 12)
and the long passage of the Bṛihad-āraṇyaka (III. vii. 3 f.) where the
Self is described in detail as the *antaryāmī,* or "inward controller,"
functioning as soul within matter as its body. Their view was in the
main somewhat as follows. Phenomena are evolved from the Self, and hold
their existence as *intelligibilia* in fee from the Self; with the
knowledge of the Self they become known as phases of it; hence they are,
to this extent, and no further, really existent (*satya,* B.A. I. vi.
3), provisionally true, although it is only ignorance of the Self that
regards them as really independent of the Self and manifold. The
Upanishads on the whole conceive the empiric soul's ignorance as a
negative force, an absence of light; with Śankara and the later Vedānta
it is positive, a false light, a constructive illusion. Brahma as cause
of phenomena is in the Upanishads a *real* material, in Śankara's school
an *unreal* material.

The difficulties besetting Śankara when he endeavours to bring logical
order into the vague idealism of the Upanishads are very serious. On the
one hand he maintains that the whole phenomenal world is unreal
*(avastu)*. As a magician *(māyāvī)* causes a phantom or wraith to issue
from his person which has no real existence and by which the magician
himself is entirely unaffected,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

so Brahma creates from himself a universe which is an utter phantom and
nowise modifies his absolute existence. His creative "powers" (which are
real only when regarded from the standpoint of his creation, the world
of finite subjects and objects) constitute the demiurgic principle of an
empiric universe, which is, from its own standpoint, coextensive with
him, whereas absolutely speaking it does not exist at all (see
commentary on Brahma-sūtra, II. i. 6, 9, etc., and above, § 9). On the
other hand, the universe, phantom as it is, nevertheless is a fact of
consciousness. Illusion though it be, the illusion *is.* This predicate
of existence is the bond uniting it with its source, the truly existent,
Brahma (on II. i. 6). Brahma is absolute thought, the world is false
thought; but the subject in both cases is the same, the thinking Self.
Thus *Māyā* denotes the sum of phenomena—or, as more narrowly defined by
some later Vedantists, the sum of matter—as illusively conceived by the
Self; it is the Ignorance which creates the phantom of a universe and of
an individual ego by imposing its figments upon pure Thought (§ 12).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Relation of Universal to Individual Soul](brk20)
