[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](brk17)  [Next](brk19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMAYK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Brahma Knowledge*, by L. D. Barnett, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

§ 15. <span class="smallcaps">Phases of the Self</span>.—The highest
existence is thus Thought without thinking, the state in which the soul
has no consciousness of any external object, or indeed of any object at
all, strictly speaking, for it is itself in conscious identity with the
sum of all being or Universal Idea; "whilst he seeth not a thing, yet
doth he see, though he see not the thing erstwhile to be seen. He that
hath sight loseth not his sight, for it is imperishable. But there is
naught beside

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

him, naught apart from him, that he may see" (B.A. IV. iii. 23).

The only analogy that experience furnishes for this supposed condition
of soul is that of dreamless sleep; and it was inferred that in such
sleep the soul is actually in this transcendent state.

Besides this, the earlier Upanishads recognise two other states of the
soul, waking and dreaming. When awake the soul puts forth out of itself
a world of sense and organs of sense and empirical thought, and renders
itself the subject of the experiences conjured up by them. In dreaming
sleep the sense-organs swoon away and are absorbed into the *manas,* the
organ forming the centre of empirical cognition and will (§ 18), which
thus has now the vision of the world as it is reflected from the waking
state; at the same time the "life-breaths," *prāṇas,* are active as in
waking.

The later Upanishads assume yet another phase, which they call the
"Fourth" *(turīya, chaturtha)*. In this the soul, transcending dreamless
sleep, is absolutely wakeful in its union with the universal subject of
thought, and exercises in perfect stillness an infinite real
consciousness of all in the Self which is different in kind from the
"unconscious consciousness" ascribed to dreamless sleep.

The waking, dreaming, and dreamless phases are respectively termed
*Vaiśvānara* ("common to all mankind"), *Taijasa* ("luminous," for in

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

dreams the soul is its own light, B.A. IV. iii. 9), and *Prājna*
("intelligent," for in deep sleep the Self is one with the Universal
Idea or "intelligent Self," *prājna ātmā,* B.A. IV. iii. 21); these
terms do not occur until Māṇḍ. iii. ff. On *dreaming sleep* see also
B.A. II. i. 18 (soul wanders about within the body), IV. iii. 9-14 (two
accounts, in one of which soul leaves the body, while in the other it
remains in it), iii. 20 f., Ch. VIII. x. 2, Pra. IV. 2 f. *Dreamless
sleep,* B.A. IV. iii. 19-33, Ch. VIII. vi. 3, x.-xi. *Fourth State,*
Māṇḍ. VII., Maitr. VI. 19, VII. 11, Māṇḍūkya-kārikā I. 12-16, III. 33 f.
See also Śankara on Brahma-sūtra I. iii. 19 f., 40 f., III. ii. 1 f.
Śankara, following Ch. IV. iii. 3, holds that in deep sleep, in which
the soul is in temporary identity with Brahma, the functions of sense,
together with the *manas,* in which they are absorbed, are merged in the
"breaths" travelling through the pericardium and veins (cf. § 18), while
the soul becomes one with the Brahma residing under "determinations" in
the heart (in B.A. II. i. 19, it rests in the pericardium, in Ch. VIII.
vi. 3 in the veins). The statement of Ch. VIII. xii. 3, that "the Calm
*(samprasāda)*, rising from this body, wins to the Supreme Light, and
shows itself in its own form; this is the highest spirit *(purusha)*" is
taken by Śankara (on Brahma-sūtra IV. iv. 1 f.) as referring to the soul
not in dreamless sleep, but in its final release from the body after
enlightenment (see § 24); this "own form" is the existence

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

of the soul in its absolute selfhood, where there is no longer a
distinction between individual and universal soul. For the theories of
the Vedānta after Śankara see above, § 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Maya](brk19)
