[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](brk26)  [Next](brk28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMAYK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Brahma Knowledge*, by L. D. Barnett, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

§ 24. <span class="smallcaps">Salvation</span>.—I. *Upanishads.*—Release
of the soul *(mukti, moksha)*, which falls to the lot of the elect few,
consists in enlightenment, intuitive vision of the eternal unity of the
thinker's Self with Brahma, to which he has hitherto been blind. When
once this saving knowledge has been gained, the enlightened man is no
longer under the power of "works." He has everything in himself, for he
is one with the All; together with the false idea of a self distinct
from the universal Self the forces of former works have vanished away;
thus he has no desire and no pain, and can have none. And when his soul
has cast off the body, it will be reborn nevermore; it is united for
ever with the Absolute Brahma. See especially the fine exposition in
B.A. IV. ii.-iv.; also Ch. VII. xxvi. 2, Taitt. II. 9, Kena 11-12,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Muṇḍ. II. ii. 8,
III. ii. 9, and Śankara on Brahma-sūtra, I. i. 4, III. iv. 1 f., IV. i.
13 f.

II\. *Later Vedānta.*—Śankara points out that this saving intuition is
unattainable by effort of will or thought; it arises from the power of
the inner self, the metaphysical ego within us, which from a theistic
and therefore empiric standpoint may be conceived as personal God, "the
Lord," or "qualified Brahma" (§§ 12, 22). This knowledge annuls not only
all sins, but likewise all works, no matter whether good or bad, which
have not yet begun to bear fruit in present experience. The works
however which are the cause of the present series of experience must
continue in operation even after the attainment of enlightenment, until
their power is exhausted, whereupon the soul leaves the flesh for ever,
as the potter's wheel continues to run round for a while after the
potter's hand has been removed; but this subsequent bodily experience no
longer has any influence upon the soul. The B.A. IV. iv. 6 teaches that,
whereas on death the souls of those who have only exoteric knowledge or
no knowledge at all go forth to continue in empiric conditions, the Self
of the enlightened man does not "go out" *(na utkrāmanti)*, but enters
into Brahma, with entire annihilation of spatial conditions; its
*upādhis* or "determinations" wholly vanish, and it is absorbed in
abstract entirety into the abstract Brahma (on Brahma-sūtra III. iii.
30, IV. ii. 12 f.). See § 15.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

There has been much speculation upon the divisions of *karma.* A common
classification is that which divides it into *sanchita, prārabdha,* and
*kriyamāṇa.* The *sanchita* or "accumulated" *karma* is that which was
created in former births and has not yet begun to operate upon the soul.
*Prārabdha* or "commenced" *karma* is that which has already begun to
affect the soul. *Kriyamāṇa* is "being made," that is, it is the
activity of the present which will influence the soul in future births.
The intellectual illumination of perfect "Brahma-knowledge" annuls both
*sanchita* and *kriyamāṇa;* only the *prārabdha* remains, and this
exhausts itself mechanically by prolonging the sage's physical life
until all influence of *karma* is spent, and his body then dies.

The later Vedānta designates by the term *jīvanmukti* the condition of
the enlightened sage previous to death, while his *prārabdha* karma is
exhausting itself; his subsequent condition is called *videha-mukti,*
"emancipation in freedom from the body."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The After Life](brk28.md)
