[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](brk35)  [Next](brk37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMAYK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Brahma Knowledge*, by L. D. Barnett, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### VIII. <span class="smallcaps">Gārgī and Yājnavalkya</span> <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32)

"Yājnavalkya," said she, "as a warrior from the land of Kāśi or Videha
might string his unstrung bow and come forward holding in his hand two
arrows to pierce through his foe, even so I have come forward against
thee with two questions; answer me them."

"Ask, Gārgī."

"Yājnavalkya," said she, "that which is above the heavens, which is
beneath the earth, which is midway between the heavens and the earth,
which they call *What hath* *been, What is,* and *What shall be*—in what
is it woven and woofed?"

"Gārgī," said he, "that which is above the heavens, which is below the
earth, which is midway between the heavens and the earth, which they
call *What hath been, What* *is,* and *What shall be,* is woven and
woofed in the ether."

"Homage to thee, Yājnavalkya," said she. "for thou hast answered me
this; make ready for the other."

"Ask, Gārgī."

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

"Yājnavalkya," said she, "that which is above the heavens, which is
below the earth, which is midway between the heavens and the earth,
which they call *What hath* *been, What is,* and *What shall be*—in what
is it woven and woofed?"

"Gārgī," said he, "that which is above the heavens, which is below the
earth, which is midway between the heavens and the earth, which they
call *What hath been, What* *is,* and *What shall be,* is woven and
woofed in the ether."

"And in what is the ether woven and woofed?"

"Gārgī," said he, "that is what Brahmans call the Unfading; it is not
gross, not fine, not short, not long, not red, not fluid, not shadow,
not darkness, not wind, not ether, not clinging, without taste, without
smell, without eye, without ear, without speech, without mind, without
vital force, without breath, without mouth, without measure, without
aught inward, without aught outward; it consumes nothing, none consumes
it. At the behest of the Unfading, Gārgī, sun and moon are held asunder;
at the behest of the Unfading, Gārgī, heaven and earth are held asunder;
at the behest of the Unfading, Gārgī, minutes, hours, days and nights,
fortnights, months, seasons, and years are held asunder; at the behest
of the Unfading, Gārgī, flow the rivers, some eastward from the white
mountains, some westward, each in its own way. At the behest of the
Unfading, Gārgī, men praise

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

givers, the Gods hang upon the sacrifice-giver, the Fathers upon the
ladle. Indeed, Gārgī, to him who makes oblation and sacrifice, and
mortifies himself in this world for many thousands of years without
knowing the Unfading, it comes to an end. Indeed, Gārgī, he who departs
from this world without knowing the Unfading is wretched. But he who
departs from this world knowing the Unfading, Gārgī, is the Brahman.
Indeed, Gārgī, the Unfading unseen sees, unheard hears, unthought
thinks, uncomprehended comprehends. There is naught else than this which
sees, naught else that hears, naught else that thinks, naught else that
comprehends. In the Unfading, forsooth, Gārgī, is the ether woven and
woofed."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[72:1](brk36.htm#fr_32) Bṛihad-āraṇyaka
Upanishad, III. viii. 2-11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX: The Everlasting Nay](brk37)
