[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](brk34)  [Next](brk36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMAYK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Brahma Knowledge*, by L. D. Barnett, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### VII. <span class="smallcaps">The Soul in Sleep</span> <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25)

"What is the Self?"

"It is the Spirit <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26) made of
understanding among the Breaths, the inward light within the heart, that
walks abroad, abiding the same, through both worlds. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[3](#fn_27) He meditates, as it were; He hovers about,
as it were. Turned to sleep, He passes beyond this world, the shapes of
death.

This Spirit at birth enters into the body, and is

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

blent with evils; at death He passes out, and leaves evils.

Two seats has this Spirit, this and the seat in the world beyond <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28); and midway is a third, the seat of
dreams. Standing in this midway seat, He looks upon these two seats,
this and the seat in the world beyond. Now as this is a step toward the
seat in the world beyond, He makes this step and beholds both evils and
delights.

When He sleeps, He takes matter from this all-containing world, Himself
hews it down, Himself builds it up, and sleeps in His own brightness,
His own light. Here the Spirit has Self for light.

Therein are no cars, no car-teams, no roads; but He creates cars,
car-teams, roads. Therein are no joys, mirths, merriments; but He
creates joys, mirths, merriments. Therein are no pools, lakes, streams;
but He creates pools, lakes, streams. For He is the maker…

When in this dreaming He has wantoned and wandered, and seen good and
evil, He hastens back according to His entrance and His place to the
bound of waking. He is followed by naught of all that He has seen there;
for to this Spirit nothing clings…

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

When in this waking He has wantoned and wandered, and seen good and
evil, He hastens back according to His entrance and His place to the
bound of dreams. Even as a great fish passes along both banks, on this
side and on yonder side, so this Spirit passes along both bounds, the
bound of dreaming and the bound of waking.

But as a falcon or an eagle, when it is wearied with flying about in
yonder sky, folds its wings and sets itself to couch down, so this
Spirit hastens toward that bound wherein He sleeps desiring no desire,
beholding no dream… Whatever waking terror He sees \[in dreams\], when
men seem to smite Him or to oppress Him, when an elephant seems to crush
Him, or He seems to fall into a ditch, this in His ignorance He deems
true. But when like a god, like a king, He thinks "I am this All,
universal," this is the highest world for Him.

This is His shape wherein He is beyond desire, free from ill, fearless.
As when a man embraced by his beloved knows naught of whatsoever is
without or within, so this Spirit embraced by the Self of Intelligence
knows naught of what is without or within. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) This is His shape wherein desire is won,
desire is of Self, desire is not, grief is gone. Herein the father is no
father, the mother no mother, the worlds no worlds, the Gods no

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gods, the Vedas no
Vedas; herein the thief is no thief, the murderer no murderer, the
Chāṇḍāla no Chāṇḍāla, the Paulkasa no Paulkasa, <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) the beggar-monk no beggar-monk, the
ascetic no ascetic. Good attaches not, evil attaches not; for then has
He overpast all griefs of the heart.

While He sees not, yet without seeing He sees; the sight of the seer is
not to be broken, for it is imperishable. But there is naught beside
Him, naught apart from Him, that He should see… When He understands not,
yet without understanding He understands; the understanding of the
understander is not to be broken, for it is imperishable. But there is
naught beside Him, naught apart from Him, that He should understand.

If there should be as it were another, one would see another, smell
another, taste another, speak to another, hear another, think of
another, feel another, understand another.

The Seer is the Waters, <span id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31) one with
naught beside. He is the Brahma-world, O king." Thus did Yājnavalkya
teach him. "This is the highest way for Him, this the highest fortune
for Him,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

this the highest world for Him, this the highest bliss for Him; of this
bliss other creatures live on but a morsel."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[68:1](brk35.htm#fr_25) Bṛihad-āraṇyaka
Upanishad, IV. iii. 7-33.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[68:2](brk35.htm#fr_26) *Purusha;* see above p.
56.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[68:3](brk35.htm#fr_27) Namely, this world in
waking and dreaming, and the world of Brahma in deep sleep or death.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[69:1](brk35.htm#fr_28) The soul's seats are (1)
that in this world, and (2) that in the transcendental "Brahma-world,"
which it visits on death. The former is the site of sorrows, the latter
of pure joy. Between these is the condition of sleep; for dreaming sleep
is still in touch with waking experience, and dreamless sleep is a
temporary approach towards the "Brahma-world."

<span id="fn_29"></span>[70:1](brk35.htm#fr_29) In dreamless sleep the
individual consciousness is merged into universal consciousness, *prājna
ātmā* or "Self of Intelligence," and thus arises absolute
unconsciousness.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[71:1](brk35.htm#fr_30) Two of the basest
castes.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[71:2](brk35.htm#fr_31) This may refer to an
Indian theory according to which water is essentially tasteless, but
derives its special flavour from its surroundings, as in a cocoanut or a
lemon (see Sānkhya-kārikā, xvi.); or perhaps it is based upon the Vedic
theory that made water the first principle of cosmic being, as in the
doctrine of Thales of Miletus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII: Gargi and Yajnavalkya](brk36)
