[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](brk30)  [Next](brk32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DEMAYK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Brahma Knowledge*, by L. D. Barnett, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### III. <span class="smallcaps">The World Within</span> <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13)

"Now within this town of Brahma <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14) is a
dwelling, a little lotus-flower; within this is a little space; what is
therewithin men should inquire after, yea, should seek to know."

If they should say to him: "Within this town of Brahma is a dwelling, a
little lotus-flower; within this is a little space; what is found
there-within which men should inquire after, yea, should seek to know?"—

he shall say: "Verily that space within the heart is as great as this
Space; therein are lodged both heaven and earth, both fire and wind,
both sun and moon, lightning and stars, what one hath here and what he
hath not, all this is lodged therein."

If they should say to him: "If all this is lodged in this town of
Brahma, and all beings and all

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

desires—what remains thereof when old age comes upon it, or it
dissolves?"—

he shall say: "This grows not old with his aging, nor is it smitten by
slaying of him. This is the true town of Brahma. In it are lodged the
Desires. <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) It is the Self, free from
evil, ageless, deathless, sorrowless, hungerless, thirstless, real of
desire, real of purpose…So they who depart without finding here the Self
and these real Desires, walk not as they list in any worlds; but they
who depart after finding here the Self and these real Desires, walk as
they list in all worlds…

These real Desires are covered over by Untruth; real as they are,
Untruth is their covering. Man here can see no more any of his folk who
depart hence. But when he goes *there* <span
id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16) he finds all—those of his folk who are
living, and those who have departed, and whatever else he wins not for
seeking. For there those real Desires are that were covered over by
Untruth. It is as with men who, knowing not the ground, should walk
again and again over a hidden treasure and find it not; even so all
creatures,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

coming to it day by day, find not this Brahma-world, for they are cast
back by Untruth <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](brk32.htm#fn_17)…

Now that perfect Peace, rising up from this body, enters into the
Supreme Light and issues forth in its own semblance. This is the Self,"
said he, "this is the deathless, the fearless; this is Brahma…

Now the Self is the dyke holding asunder the worlds that they fall not
one into another. Over this dyke pass not day and night, nor old age,
nor death, nor sorrow, nor good deeds, nor bad deeds. All ills turn away
thence; for this Brahma-world is void of ill. Therefore in sooth the
blind, after passing over this dyke is no more blind, the wounded no
more wounded, the sick no more sick. Therefore in sooth even Night after
passing over this dyke issues forth as Day; for in this Brahma-world is
everlasting light"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[61:1](brk31.htm#fr_13) Chhāndogya Upanishad,
viii. 1 f.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[61:2](brk31.htm#fr_14) The body, whose organs
of sense are compared to gates; the king within is the soul, or Self;
the lotus the heart.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[62:1](brk31.htm#fr_15) Namely, the knowledge
and will of the absolute subject of thought, or true Self. As such,
these Desires are essentially infinite; their limitation arises from an
external "Untruth," the finite conditions of the world of physical
experience, which the thinker is able to cast off.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[62:2](brk31.htm#fr_16) Namely, into his own
heart, into the full consciousness of his selfhood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV: The Infinite I](brk32)
