[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hloh28)  [Next](hloh30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XXV

### KAMAPUAA LEGENDS

##### LEGENDS OF THE HOG-GOD

SOME of the most unique legends of the nations have centered around
imagined monsters. Centaurs, half man and half horse, thronged the
dreams of Rome. The Hawaiians knew nothing about any animals save the
fish of the seas, the birds of the forests, and the chickens, the dogs
and the pigs around their homes. From the devouring shark the Hawaiian
imagination conceived the idea of the shark-man who indulged in
cannibalistic tendencies. From the devastations of the hogs they built
up the experiences of an rude vicious chief whom they called Kamapuaa,
who was the principal figure of many rough exploits throughout the
islands. Sometimes he had a hog's body with a human head and limbs,
sometimes a hog's head rested on a human form, and sometimes he assumed
the shape of a hog--quickly reassuming the form of a man. Kalakaua's
legends say that he was a hairy man and cultivated the stiff hair by
cutting it short so that it stood out like bristles, and that he had his

{p. 247}

body tattooed so that it would have the appearance of a hog. In place of
the ordinary feather cloak worn by chiefs he wore a pigskin with its
bristles on the outside and a pigskin girdle around his waist.

The legends say that he was born at Kaluanui, a part of the district of
Hauula or Koolau coast of the island Oahu. His reputed father was
Olopana, the high chief of that part of the island, and his mother was
Hina, the daughter of a chief who had come from a foreign land. Other
legends say that his father was Kahikiula (The Red Tahiti), a brother of
Olopana. These brothers had come to Oahu from foreign lands some time
before. Fornander always speaks of Olopana as Kamapuaa's uncle, although
he had taken Hina as his wife.

The Koolauloa coast of Oahu lies as a luxuriant belt of ever-living
foliage a mile or so in width between an ocean of many colors and dark
beetling precipices of mountain walls rising some thousands of feet
among the clouds.

From these precipices which mark the landward side of a mighty extinct
crater come many mountain streams leaping in cascades of spray down into
the quiet green valleys which quickly broaden into the
coral-reef-bordered seacoast. From any place by the sea the outline of
several beautiful little valleys can be easily traced.

{p. 248}

One morning while the sunlight of May looked into the hidden recesses
and crevices of these valleys, bringing into sharp relief of shadow and
light the outcropping ledges, a little band of Hawaiians and their white
friends lay in the shade of a great kamani\[1\] tree and talked about
the legends which were told of the rugged rock masses of each valley,
and the quiet pools of each rivulet. Where the little party lay was one
of the sporting-places of Kamapuaa the "hog-child treated in the legends
as a demigod." Not faraway one of the mountain streams had broadened
into a quiet bush-shaded lakelet with deep fringes of grass around its
borders. Here the legendary hog-man with marvellous powers had bathed
from time to time. A narrow gorge deep shadowed by the morning sun was
the place which Kamapuaa had miraculously bridged for his followers when
an enemy was closely pursuing them. Several large stones on the edges of
the valleys were pointed out as the monuments of various adventures. An
exquisitely formed little valley ran deep into the mountain almost in
front of the legend-tellers. Far away in the upper end where the
dark-green foliage blended with still darker shadows the sides of the
valley narrowed until they were only from sixty to seventy feet apart,
and unscalable

\[1. Calophyllum Inophyllum.\]

{p. 249}

precipices bent toward each other, leaving only a narrow strip of sky
above. On the right of this valley is a branch-gorge down which fierce
storms have hurled torrents of waters and mist. The upper end has been
hollowed and polished in the shape of a finely rounded canoe of immense
proportions. It was from this that the valley took its name Ka-liu-waa,
possibly having the meaning, "the leaky canoe." Some of the legends say
that this was Kamapuaa's canoe leaning against the precipice and always
leaking out the waters which fell in it. Lying toward the west was a
very fertile and open tract of land, Kaluanui, where Kamapuaa was said
to have been born of Hina. After his birth he was thrown away by
Kahiki-houna-kele, an older brother, and left to die. After a time Hina,
the mother, went to a stream of clear, sweet water near her home to
bathe. After bathing she went to the place where she had left her pa-u,
or tapa skirt, and found a fine little hog lying on it. She picked it up
and found that it was a baby. She was greatly alarmed, and gave the
hog-child to another son, Kekelaiaika, that he might care for it, but
the older brother stole the hog-child and carried it away to a cave in
which Hina's mother lived. Her name was Kamaunuaniho. The grandmother
knew the hog-child at once

{p. 250}

as her grandson endowed with marvellous powers, and since the gods had
given him the form of a hog he should be called kama (child), puaa
(hog). Then she gave to the older brother kapa quilts in which to place
Kamapuaa. These were made in layers, six sheets of kapa cloth formed the
under quilt for a bed and six sheets the upper quilt for a cover. In
these Kamapuaa slept while his brother prepared taro\[1\] and breadfruit
for his food. Thus the wonderful hog ate and slept usually in the form
of a hog until size and strength came to him. Then he became mischievous
and began to commit depredations at night. He would root up the taro in
the fields of his neighbors, and especially in the field of the high
chief Olopana. Then he would carry the taro home, root up ferns and
grass until he had good land and then plant the stolen taro. Thus his
grandmother and her retainers were provided with growing taro, the
source of which they did not understand.

His elder brother prepared an oven in which to cook chickens. Kamapuaa
rooted up the oven and stole the chickens. This brother
Kahiki-houna-kele caught the hog-child and administered a sound
whipping, advising him to go away from home if he wanted to steal, and
especially to take what he wanted from Olopana. Adopting this advice,
Kamapuaa extended his raids

\[1. Calocasia antiquorum.\]

{p. 251}

to the home of the high chief. Here he found many chickens. Kamapuaa
quickly killed some, took them in his mouth and threw many more on his
back and ran home. The morning came before he had gone far and the
people along the way saw the strange sight and pursued him. By the use
of charms taught him by his sorceress-grandmother he made himself run
faster and faster until he had outstripped his pursuer. Then he carried
his load to his grandmother's cave and gave the chickens to the family
for a great luau (feast).

Another time he stole the sacred rooster belonging to Olopana, as well
as many other fowls. The chief sent a large number of warriors after
him. They chased the man who had been seen carrying the chickens. He
fled by his grandmother's cave and threw the chickens inside, then fled
back up the hillside, revealing himself to his pursuers. They watched
him, but he disappeared. He dropped down by the side of a large stone.
On this he seated himself and watched the people as they ran through the
valley calling to each other. The high grass was around the stone so
that for a long time he was concealed. For this reason this stone still
bears the name Pohaku-pee-o-Kamapuaa (Kamapuaa's-hiding-stone). After a
time a man who had climbed to the opposite ridge cried

{p. 252}

out, "E, E, there he is sitting on the great stone!" This man was turned
into a stone by the magic of Kamapuaa. The pursuers hastened up the
hillside and surrounded the stone, but no man was there. There was a
fine black hog, which they recognized as the wonderful one belonging to
Kamaunuaniho. So they decided that this was the thief, and seized it and
carried it down the bill to give to the high chief Olopana. After
getting him down into the valley they tried to drive him, but he would
not go. Then they sent into the forest for ohia poles and made a large
litter. It required many men to carry this enormous hog, who made
himself very heavy.

Suddenly Kamapuaa heard his grandmother calling: "Break the cords! Break
the poles! Break the strong men! Escape!" Making a sudden turn on the
litter, he broke it in pieces and fell with it to the ground. Then he
burst the cords which bound him and attacked the band of men whom he had
permitted to capture him. Some legends say that he: killed and ate many
of them. Others say that he killed and tore the people.

The wild life lived by Kamapuaa induced a large band of rough lawless
men to leave the service of the various high chiefs and follow Kamapuaa
in his marauding expeditions. They made themselves the terror of the
whole Koolau region.

{p. 253}

Olopana determined to destroy them, and sent an army of four hundred
warriors to uproot Kamapuaa and his robbers. It was necessary for them
to hasten to their hiding-places, but they were chased up into the hills
until a deep gorge faced them. No way of escape seemed possible, but
Kamapuaa, falling on the ground, became a long hog--stretching out he
increased his length until he could reach from side to side of the deep
ravine-thus he formed a bridge over which his followers escaped.

Kamapuaa, however, was not able to make himself small quickly enough to
escape from his enemies. He tried to hide himself in a hole and pull
dead branches and leaves over himself; but they soon found him, bound
him securely, and tied him to a great stone which with "the stone of
hiding" and "the watcher" are monuments of the legends to this day.

The people succeeded in leading the hog-man to Olopana's home, where
they fastened him, keeping him for a great feast, which they hoped to
have in a few days, but Kamapuaa, Samson-like, broke all his bonds,
destroyed many of his captors--wantonly destroyed coconut-trees and taro
patches, and then went back to his home.

He knew that Olopana would use every endeavor to compass his
destruction. So he

{p. 254}

called his followers together and led them up Kaliuwaa Valley, stopping
to get his grandmother on the way. When he came to the end of the
valley, and the steep cliffs up which his people could not possibly
climb, he took his grandmother on his neck and leaned back against the
great precipice. Stretching himself more and more, and rubbing against
the black rocks, at last he lifted his grandmother to the top of the
cliffs so that she could step off on the uplands which sloped down to
the Pearl Harbor side of the island. Then the servants and followers
climbed up the sides of the great hog by clinging to his bristles and
escaped. The hollow worn in the rocks looked like a hewn-out canoe, and
was given the name Ka-waa-o-Kamapuaa (The canoe of Kamapuaa). Kamapuaa
then dammed up the water of the beautiful stream by throwing his body
across it, and awaited the coming of Olopana and his warriors.

An immense force had been sent out to destroy him. In addition to the
warriors who came by land, a great fleet of canoes was sent along the
seashore to capture any boats in which Kamapuaa and his people might try
to escape.

The canoes gathered in and around the mouth of the stream which flowed
from Kaliuwaa Valley. The warriors began to march along the stream up
toward the deep gorge. Suddenly

{p. 255}

Kamapuaa broke the dam by leaping away from the waters, and a great
flood drowned the warriors, and dashed the canoes together, destroying
many and driving the rest far out to sea. Uhakohi is said to be the
place where this flood occurred.

Then Kamapuaa permitted the people to capture him. They went up the
valley after the waters had subsided and found nothing left of Kamapuaa
or his people except a small black hog. They searched the valley
thoroughly. They found the canoe, turned to stone, leaning against the
precipice at the end of the gorge. They said among themselves, "Escaped
is Kamapuaa with all his people, and ended are our troubles."

They caught the hog and bound it to carry to Olopana. As they journeyed
along the seashore their burden became marvellously heavy until at last
an immense litter was required resting on the shoulders of many men. It
was said that he sometimes tossed himself over to one side, breaking it
down and killing some of the men who carried him. Then again he rolled
to the other side, bringing a like destruction. Thus he brought trouble
and death and a long, weary journey to his captors, who soon learned
that their captive was the hog-man Kamapuaa. They brought him to their
king Olopana and

{p. 256}

placed him in the temple enclosure where sacrifices to the gods were
confined. This heiau was in Kaneohe and was known as the heiau of
Kawaewae. It was in the care of a priest known as Lonoaohi.

Long, long before this capture Olopana had discovered Kamapuaa and would
not acknowledge him as his son. The destruction of his coconut-trees and
taro patches had been the cause of the first violent rupture between the
two. Kamapuaa had wantonly broken the walls of Olopana's great fish-pond
and set the fish free, and then after three times raiding the fowls
around the grass houses had seized, killed and eaten the sacred rooster
which Olopana considered his household fetish.

When Olopana knew that Kamapuaa had been captured and was lying bound in
the temple enclosure be sent orders that great care should be taken lest
he escape, and later he should be placed on the altar of sacrifice
before the great gods.

Hina, it was said, could not bear the thought that this child of hers,
brutal and injurious as he was, should suffer as a sacrifice. She was a
very high chiefess, and, like the Hinas throughout Polynesia, was
credited with divine powers. She had great influence with the high
priest Lonoaohi and persuaded him to give Kamapuaa

{p. 257}

an opportunity to escape. This was done by killing a black hog and
smearing Kamapuaa's body with the blood. Thus bearing the appearance of
death, he was laid unbound on the altar. It was certain that unless
detected he could easily climb the temple wall and escape.

Olopana, the king, came to offer the chants and prayers which belonged
to such a sacrifice. He as well as the high priest had temple duties,
and the privilege of serving at sacrifices of great importance. As was
his custom he came from the altar repeating chants and prayers while
Kamapuaa lay before the images of the gods. While he was performing the
sacrificial rites, Kamapuaa became angry, leaped from the altar, changed
himself into his own form, seized the bone daggers used in dismembering
the sacrifices, and attacked Olopana, striking him again and again,
until he dropped on the floor of the temple dead. The horrified priests
had been powerless to prevent the deed, nor did they think of striking
Kamapuaa down at once. In the confusion he rushed from the temple, fled
along the coast to his well-known valleys, climbed the steep precipices
and rejoined his grandmother and his followers.

Leading his band of rough robbers down through the sandalwood\[1\]
forests of the Wahiawa region, he crossed over the plains to the Waianae

\[1. Iliahi or Santalum.\]

{p. 258}

Mountains. Here they settled for a time, living in caves. Other lawless
spirits joined them, and they passed along the Ewa side of the island,
ravaging the land like a herd of swine. A part of the island they
conquered, making the inhabitants their serfs.

Here on a spur of the Waianae Mountains they built a residence for
Kama-unu-aniho, and established her as their priestess, or kahuna. They
levied on the neighboring farmers for whatever taro, sweet-potatoes\[1\]
and bananas they needed. They compelled the fishermen to bring tribute
from the sea. They surrounded their homes with pigs and chickens, and in
mere wantonness terrorized that part of Oahu.

### KAMAPUAA ON OAHU AND KAUAI

Fornander says that Kamapuaa was sometimes called "the eight-eyed" and
was also gifted with eight feet. He says, "This specialty of four faces
or heads and of corresponding limbs is peculiar to some of the principal
Hindoo deities." The honorary designation of gods and even high chiefs
in Hawaiian mythology was frequently maka-walu (eight-eyed),

\[1. Ipomea Batatas.\]

{p. 259}

to express their great endowment of divine powers. Fornander notes
"coincidence as bearing upon the derivation of Polynesian myths and
legends. The Kamapuaa stories, however, seem to have no counterpart in
any mythology beyond the borders of the Hawaiian Islands."

While he lived on the Koolau coast he was simply a devastating, brutal
monster, with certain powers belonging to a demi-god, which he used as
maliciously as possible. After being driven out to the Honolulu side of
the mountains, for a time he led his band of robbers in their various
expeditions, but after a time his miraculous powers increased and he
went forth terrorizing the island from one end to the other. He had the
power of changing himself into any in of a fish. As a shark and as a hog
he was represented as sometimes eating those whom he conquered in
battle. He ravaged the fields and chicken preserves of the different
chiefs, but it is said never stole or ate pigs or fish.

He wandered along the low lands from the taro patches of Ewa to the
coconut groves of Waikiki, rooting up and destroying the food of the
people.

At Kamoiliili he saw two beautiful women coming from the stream which
flows from Manoa Valley. He called to them, but when they saw his
tattooed body and rough clothing made from

{p. 260}

pigskins they recognized him and fled. He pursued them, but they were
counted as goddesses, having come from divine foreign families as well
as Kamapuaa. They possessed miraculous powers and vanished when he was
ready to place his hands upon them. They sank down into the earth.
Kamapuaa changed himself into the form of a great hog and began to root
up the stones and soil and break his way through the thick layer of
petrified coral through which they had disappeared. He first followed
the descent of the woman who had been nearest to him. Down he went
through soil and stone after her, but suddenly a great flood of water
burst upward through the coral almost drowning him. The goddess had
stopped his pursuit by turning an underground stream into the entrance
which he had made.\[1\]

After this narrow escape Kamapuaa rushed toward Manoa Valley to the
place where he had seen the other beautiful woman disappear. Here also
he rooted deep through earth and coral, and here again a new spring of
living water was uncovered. He could do nothing against the flood, which
threatened his life. The goddesses escaped and the two wells have
supplied the people of Kamoiliili for many generations, bearing the
name, "The wells, or fountains, of Kamapuaa."

\[1. Near the Kamoiliili church.\]

{p. 261}

The chief of Waikiki had a fine tract\[1\] well supplied with bananas
and coconuts and taro. Night after night a great black bog rushed
through Waikiki destroying all the ripening fruit and even going to the
very doors of the grass houses searching out the calabashes filled with
poi waiting for fermentation. These calabashes he dashed to the ground,
defiling their contents and breaking and unfitting them for further use.
A crowd of warriors rushed out to kill this devastating monster. They
struck him with clubs and hurled their spears against his bristling
sides. The stiff bristles deadened the force of the blows of the clubs
and turned the spear-points aside so that he received but little injury.
Meanwhile his fierce tusks were destroying the warriors and his cruel
jaws were tearing their flesh and breaking their bones. In a short time
the few who were able to escape fled from him. The chiefs gathered their
warriors again and again, and after many battles drove Kamapuaa from
cave to cave and from district to district. Finally he leaped into the
sea, changed himself into the form of a fish and passed over the channel
to Kauai.

He swam westward along the coast, selecting a convenient place for
landing, and when night came, sending the people to their sleep, he went

\[1. Near the Cleghorn residence.\]

{p. 262}

ashore. He had marked the location of taro and sugar-cane patches and
could easily find them in the night. Changing himself into a black hog
he devoured and trampled the sugar-cane, rooted up taro and upset
calabashes, eating the poi and breaking the wooden bowls. Then he fled
to a rough piece of land which he had decided upon as his hiding-place.

The people were astonished at the devastation when they came from their
houses next morning. Only gods who were angry could have wrought such
havoc so unexpectedly, therefore they sent sacrifices to the heiaus,
that the gods of their homes might protect them. But the next night
other fields were made desolate as if a herd of swine had been wantonly
at work all through the night. After a time watchmen were set around the
fields and the mighty hog was seen. The people were called. They
surrounded Kamapuaa, caught him and tied him with strongest cords of
olona\[1\] fibre and pulled him to one side, that on the new day so soon
to dawn they might build their oven and roast him for a great feast.

When they thought all was finished the hog suddenly burst his bonds,
became invisible and leaped upon them, tore them and killed them as he
had done on Oahu, then rushed away in the darkness.

\[1. Touchardia latifolia.\]

{p. 263}

Again some watchers found him lying at the foot of a steep precipice,
sleeping in the daytime. On the edge of the precipice were great
boulders, which they rolled down upon him, but he was said to have
allowed the stones too strike him and fall shattered in pieces while he
sustained very little injury.

Then he assumed the form of a man and made his home by a ledge of rock
called Kipukai. Here there was a spring of very sweet water, which lay
in the form of a placid pool of clear depths, reflecting wonderfully
whatever shadows fell upon its surface. To this two beautiful sisters
were in the habit of coming with their water-calabashes. While they
stooped over the water Kamapuaa came near and cast the shadow as a man
before them on the clear waters. They both wanted the man as their
husband who could cast such a shadow. He revealed himself to them and
took them both to be his wives. They lived with him at Kipukai and made
fine sleeping mats for him, cultivated food and prepared it for him to
eat. They pounded kapa that he might be well clothed.

At that time there were factions on the island of Kauai warring against
each other. Fierce hand-to-hand battles were waged and rich spoils
carried away.

With the coming of Kamapuaa to Kauai a new

{p. 264}

and strange appearance wrought terror in the hearts of the warriors
whenever a battle occurred. While the conflict was going on and blows
were freely given by both club and spear, suddenly a massive war-club
would be seen whistling through the air, striking down the chiefs of
both parties. Mighty blows were struck by this mysterious club. No hand
could be seen holding it, no strong arm swinging it, and no chief near
it save those stricken by it. Dead and dying warriors covered the ground
in its path. Sometimes when Kamapuaa had been caught in his marauding
expedition, he would escape from the ropes tying him, change into a man,
seize a club, become invisible and destroy his captors. He took from the
fallen their rich feather war cloaks, carried them to his dwelling-place
and concealed them under his mats. The people of Kauai were terrified by
the marvellous and powerful being who dwelt in their midst. They
believed in the ability of kahunas, or priests, to work all manner of
evil in strange ways and therefore were sure that some priest was
working with evil spirits to compass their destruction. They sought the
strongest and most sacred of their own kahunas, but were unable to
conquer the evil. Meanwhile Kamapuaa, tired of the two wives, began to
make life miserable for them, trying to make them angry, that he might
have good

{p. 265}

excuse for killing them. They knew something of his marvellous powers as
a demi-god, and watched him when he brought bundles to his house and put
them away. The chief's house then as in later years was separated from
the houses of the women and was tabu to them, but they waited until they
had seen him go far away. Then they searched his house and found the war
cloaks of their friends under his mats. They hastened and told their
friends, who plotted to take vengeance on their enemy.

The women decided to try to drive the demigod away, so destroyed the
spring of water from which they had daily brought water for his need.
They also carefully concealed all evidences of other springs. Kamapuaa
returned from his adventures and was angry when he found no water
waiting for him. He called for the women, but they had hidden
themselves. He was very thirsty. He rushed to the place of the spring,
but could not find it. He looked for water here and there, but the
sisters had woven mighty spells over all the water-holes and he could
not see them. In his rage he rushed about like a blind and crazy man.
Then the sisters appeared and ridiculed him. They taunted him with his
failure to overcome their wiles. They laughed at his suffering. Then in
his great anger he leaped upon them, caught them and threw them over a

{p. 266}

precipice. As they fell upon the ground he uttered his powerful
incantations and changed them into two stones, which for many
generations have been guardians of that precipice. Then he assumed the
form of a hog and rooted deep in the rocky soil. Soon he uncovered a
fountain of water from which he drank deeply, but which he later made
bitter and left as a mineral-spring to the present day.

The people of Kauai now knew the secret of the wonderful swinging war
club. They knew that a hand held it and an invisible man walked beside
it, so they fought against a power which they could not see. They felt
their clubs strike some solid body even when they struck at the air.
Courage came back to them, and at Hanalei the people forced him into a
corner, and, carrying stones, tried to fence him in, but he broke the
walls down, tore his way through the people and fled. The high chief of
Hanalei threw his magic spear at him as he rushed past, but missed him.
The spear struck the mountain-side near the summit and passed through,
leaving a great hole through which the sky on the other side of the
mountain can still be seen. Kamapuaa decided that he was tired of Kauai,
therefore he ran to the seashore, leaped into the water and, becoming a
fish, swam away to Hawaii.

{p. 267}

### PELE AND KAMAPUAA

The three great mountains of Hawaii had been built many centuries before
Pele found an abiding home in the pit of Kilauea. Kilauea itself appears
rather as a shelter to which she fled than as a house of her own
building. The sea waters quenched the fires built by her at lower
levels, forcing her up higher and higher toward the mountains until she
took refuge in the maelstrom of eternal fire known for centuries among
the Hawaiians as Ka lua o Pele (The pit of Pele),--the boiling centre of
the active pit of fire. Some legends say that Kamapuaa drove Pele from
place to place by pouring in water.

The Kalakaua legends probably give the correct idea of the growths of
Pele-worship as the goddess of volcanic fires when they say that the
Pele family of brave and venturesome high chiefs with their followers
settled under the shadows of the smoke-clouds from Kilauea and were
finally destroyed by some overwhelming eruption. And yet the destruction
was so spectacular, or at least so mysterious, that the idea took firm
root that Pele and her brothers and sisters, instead of passing out of
existence,

{p. 268}

entered into the volcano to dwell there as living spirits having the
fires of the under-world as their continual heritage. From this home of
fire Pele and her sisters could come forth assuming the forms in which
they had been seen as human beings. This power has been the cause of
many legends about Pele and her adventures with various chiefs whom she
at last overwhelmed with boiling floods of lava tossed out of her angry
heart. In this way she appeared in different parts of the island of
Hawaii apparently no longer having any fear of danger to her home from
incoming seas.

The last great battle between sea and fire was connected with Pele as a
fire-goddess and Kamapuaa, the demi-god, part hog and part man. It is a
curious legend in which human and divine elements mingle like the
changing scenes of a dream. This naturally follows the statement in some
of the legends that Ku, one of the highest gods among the Polynesians as
well as among the Hawaiians, was an ancestor of Kamapuaa, protecting him
and giving him the traits of a demi-god. Kamapuaa had passed through
many adventures on the islands of Oahu and Kauai, and had lived for a
time on Maui. He had, according to some of the legends, developed his
mysterious powers so that he could become a fish whenever he wished, so
sometimes he was

{p. 269}

represented as leaping into the sea, diving down to great depth, and
swimming until he felt the approach of rising land, then he would come
to the surface, call out the name of the island and go ashore for a
visit with the inhabitants or dive again and pass on to another island.
Thus he is represented as passing to Hawaii after his adventures on the
islands of Kauai and Oahu.

On Hawaii he entered into the sports of the chiefs, gambling, boxing,
surf-riding, rolling the round ulu maika stone and riding the holua
(sled). Here he learned about the wonderful princess from the islands of
the southern seas who had made her home in the fountains of fire.

Some of the legends say that he returned to Oahu, gathered a company of
adherents and then visited the Pele family as a chief of high rank,
winning her as his bride and living with her some time, then separating
and dividing the island of Hawaii between them, Pele taking the southern
part of the island as the scene for her terrific eruptions, and Kamapuaa
ruling over the north, watering the land with gentle showers or with
melting snow, or sometimes with fierce storms, until for many centuries
fertile fields have rewarded the toil of man.

The better legends send Kamapuaa alone to the contest with the
fire-goddess, winning her for

{p. 270}

a time and then entering into a struggle in which both lives were at
stake.

It is said that one morning when the tops of the mountains were painted
by the sunlight from the sea, and the shadows in the valley were
creeping under the leaves of the trees of the forests, that Pele and her
sisters went down toward the hills of Puna. These sisters were known as
the Hiiakas, defined by Ellis, who gives the first account of them, as
"The cloud-holders." Each one had a descriptive title, thus
Hiiaka-noho-lani was "The heaven-dwelling cloud-holder,"
Hiiaka-i-ka-poli-o-Pele was "The cloud-holder in the bosom of Pele."
There were at least six Hiiakas, and some legends give many more.

That morning they heard the sound of a drum in the distance. It was the
tum-tum-tum of a hula. Filled with curiosity they turned aside to see
what strangers had invaded their territory. One of the sisters, looking
over the plain to a hill not far away, called out, "What a handsome
man!" and asked her sisters to mark the finely formed athletic stranger
who was dancing gloriously outlined in the splendor of the morning
light.

Pele scornfully looked and said she saw nothing but a great hog-man,
whom she would quickly drive from her dominions. Then began the

{p. 271}

usual war of words with which rival chiefs attacked each other. Pele
taunted Kamapuaa, calling him a hog and ascribing to him the
characteristics belonging to swine. Kamapuaa became angry and called
Pele "the woman with red burning eyes, and an angry heart unfit to be
called a chiefess." Then Pele in her wrath stamped on the ground until
earthquakes shook the land around Kamapuaa and a boiling stream of lava
rolled down from the mountains above. The stranger, throwing around him
the finest tapa, stood unmoved until the flood of fire began to roll up
the hill on which he stood. Then raising his hands and uttering the
strongest incantations he called for heavy rains to fall. Soon the lava
became powerless in the presence of the stranger. Then Pele tried her
magical powers to see if she could subdue this stranger, but his
invocations seemed to be stronger than those falling from her lips, and
she gave up the attempt to destroy him. Pele was always a cruel,
revengeful goddess, sweeping away those against whom her wrath might be
kindled, even if they were close friends of her household.

The sisters finally prevailed upon her to send across to the hill
inviting the stranger, who was evidently a high chief, to come and visit
them. As the messenger started to bring the young man to the sisters he
stepped into the shadows, and

{p. 272}

the messenger found nothing but a small hog rooting among the ferns.
This happened day after day until Pele determined to know this stranger
chief who always succeeded in thoroughly hiding himself, no matter how
carefully the. messengers might search. At last the chant of the hula
and the dance of the sisters on the smooth pahoehoe\[1\] of a great
extinct lava bed led the young man to approach. Pele revealed herself in
her rare and tempting beauty, calling with a sweet voice for the
stranger to come and rest by her side while her sisters danced. Soon
Pele was overcome by the winning strength of this great chief, and she
decided to marry him. So they dwelt together in great happiness for a
time, sometimes making their home in one part of Puna and sometimes in
another. The places where they dwelt are pointed out even at this day by
the natives who know the traditions of Puna.

But Kamapuaa had too many of the habits and instincts of a hog to please
Pele, besides she was too quickly angry to suit the overbearing
Kamapuaa. Pele was never patient even with her sisters, so with Kamapuaa
she would burst into fiery rage, while taunts and bitter words were
freely hurled back and forth. Then Pele stamped on the ground, the earth
shook, cracks opened

\[1. Pahoehoe, smooth lava. A-a, rough lava.\]

{p. 273}

in the surface and sometimes clouds of smoke and steam arose around
Kamapuaa. He was unterrified and matched his divine powers against hers.
It was demi-god against demi-goddess. It was the goddess of fire of
Hawaii against the hog-god of Oahu. Pele's home life was given up. The
bitterness of strife swept over the black sands of the seashore. When
the earth seemed ready to open its doors and pour out mighty streams of
flowing lava in the defence of Pele, Kamapuaa called for the waters of
the ocean to rise. Then flood met fire and quenched it. Pele was driven
inland. Her former lover, hastening after her and striving to overcome
her, followed her upward until at last amid clouds of poisonous gases
she went back into her spirit home in the pit of Kilauea.

Then Kamapuaa as a god of the sea gathered the waters together in great
masses and hurled them into the firepit. Violent explosions followed the
inrush of waters. The sides of the great crater were torn to pieces by
fierce earthquakes. Masses of fire expanded the water into steam, and
Pele gathered the forces of the underworld to aid in driving back
Kamapuaa. The lavas rose in many lakes and fountains. Rapidly the
surface was cooled and the fountains checked, but just as rapidly were
new openings made and new streams of fire hurled at the demi-god of

{p. 274}

Oahu. It was a mighty battle of the elements. The legends say that the
hog-man, Kamapuaa, poured water into the crater until its fires were
driven back to their lowest depths and Pele was almost drowned by the
floods. The clouds of the skies had dropped their burden of rain. All
the waters of the sea that Kamapuaa could collect had been poured into
the crater. Fornander gives a part of the prayer of Kamapuaa against
Pele. His appeal was directly to the gods of water for assistance. He
cried for

. . . "The great storm clouds of skie,"

while Pele prayed for

"The bright gods of the under-world,  
The gods thick-clustered for Pele."

It was the duty of the Pele family to stir up volcanic action, create
explosions, hurl lava into the air, make earthquakes, blow out clouds of
flames and smoke and sulphurous-burdened fumes against all enemies of
Pele. Into the conflict against Kamapuaa rushed the gods of Po, the
under-world, armed with spears of flashing fire, and hurling
sling-stones of lava. The storms of bursting gases and falling lavas
were more than Kamapuaa could endure. Gasping for breath and overwhelmed
with heat, he found himself driven back. The legends say that Pele and
her sisters drank the waters, so

{p. 275}

that after a time there was no check against the uprising lava. The pit
was filled and the streams of fire flowed down upon Kamapuaa. He changed
his body into a kind of grass now known as Ku-kae-puaa, and tried to
stop the flow of the lava. Apparently the grass represented the bristles
covering his body when he changed himself into a hog. Kamapuaa has
sometimes been called the Samson of Hawaiian traditions, and it is
possible that a Biblical idea has crept into the modern versions of the
story. Delilah cut Samson's hair and he became weak. The Hawaiian
traditions say that, if Kamapuaa's bristles could be burned off, he
would, lose his power to cope with Pele's forces of fire. When the grass
lay in the pathway of the fire, the lava was turned aside for a time,
but Pele, inspired by the beginning of victory, called anew upon the
gods of the under-world for strong reinforcements.

Out from the pits of Kilauea came vast masses of lava piling up against
the field of grass in its pathway and soon the grass began to bum; then
Kamapuaa assumed again the shape of a man, the hair or bristles on his
body were singed and the smart of many bums began to cause agony. Down
he rushed to the sea, but the lava spread out on either side, cutting
off retreat along the beach. Pele followed close behind,

{p. 276}

striving to overtake him before he could reach the water. The side
streams had reached the sea, and the water was rapidly heated into
tossing, boiling waves. Pele threw great masses of lava at Kamapuaa,
striking and churning the sea into which he leaped midst the swirling
heated mass. Kamapuaa gave up the battle, and, thoroughly defeated,
changed himself into a fish. To that fish he gave the tough pigskin
which he assumed when roaming over the islands as the hog-man. It was
thick enough to stand the boiling waves through which he swam out into
the deep sea. The Hawaiians say that this fish has always been able to
make a noise like the grunting of a small pig. To this fish was given
the name "humu-humu-nuku-nuku-a-puaa."

It was said that Kamapuaa fled to foreign lands, where he married a high
chiefess and lived with his family many years. At last the longing for
his home-land came over him irresistibly and he returned appearing as a
humu-humu in his divine place among the Hawaiian fishes, but never again
taking to himself the form of a man.

Since this conflict with Kamapuaa, Pele has never feared the powers of
the sea. Again and again has she sent her lava streams over the
territory surrounding her firepit in the volcano Kilauea, and has swept
the seashore, even pouring her lavas into the deep sea, but the ocean

{p. 277}

has never retaliated by entering into another conflict to destroy Pele
and her servants. Kamapuaa was the last who poured the sea into the deep
pit. The friends of Lohiau, a prince from the island of Kauai, waged
warfare with Pele, tearing to pieces a part of the crater in which she
dwelt; but it was a conflict of land forces, and in its entirety is one
of the very interesting tales handed down by Hawaiian tradition.

Kamapuaa figured to the last days of Pele-worship in the sacrifices
offered to the fire-goddess. The most acceptable sacrifice to Pele was
supposed to be puaa (a hog). If a hog could not be secured when an
offering was necessary, the priest would take the fish
humu-humu-nuku-nuku-a-puaa and throw it into the pit of fire. If the hog
and the fish both failed, the priest would offer any of the things into
which, it was said in their traditions, Kamapuaa could turn himself.

Note: For more Pele stories see the "Legends of Volcanoes" by the
author.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix. Polynesian Language](hloh30)
