[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index)  [Shiite
Documents](../shi)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hus01)  [Next](hus03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduction

by  
The martyr of Islam and the great thinker  
imam sayid Hasan Al-Shirazi (MMAUH)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
The Goal and The Result of The Revolution of Abi-\`Abdilláh
Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH)

-1-

The fight between goodness and evil is around in every society, as long
as the society is a grouping of humans, among which the fight between
the goodness nature and the evil nature goes on. The fight condensate
inside the humans, and may be apparent on the theatre of the society in
the form of a public struggle, and if the its stages and types were
different according to the circumstances and the needs, however the
factors and the causes that do not accept the truce and the tepidity do
not change, as long as the nature of the human beings do not change,
that nature which goodness and evil are clashing within it.

-2-

And since Allah made this life a place for testing and adversity, the
victory was not made only for the good side over the side of evil, but
the material victory was distributed evenly over the two sides,
according to the level of the material capabilities and according to the
merits that are derived from the material capabilities as well, even
though the victory of the merits is on the side of goodness alone,
always.

-3-

The ignorant society \[society before Islam\] was -like any society- a
theatre for the fight betwen good and evil, with an exception: in the
ignorant society, two main elements have grown up on each side until
they mastered them, and they are the hashimite \[from bani Hashim, the
tribe of the prophet (PUH)\] element, and the umayyad element, so was
the hashimite element mastering the good side while the umayyad element
was mastering the evil side, so the fight between them was natural and
eternal.  
Since the power of goodness was smybolized in an element until it became
a secondary nature for it, and the power of evil was symbolized in
another element until it became a secondary nature for it, the struggle
between them was a true expression about the clash between the powers of
goodness and evil.

-4-

And when the message of heaven was revealed on earth, by the appearance
of Mo<u>h</u>ammed ben \`Abdilláh who was in the core of the hashimite
element, the merits of the hashimite element jumped to higher levels,
which made it undefeatable in front of the umayyad element, or any other
element of evil.  
The umayyad element had no merits in its continuous fight with the
hashimite element except of the internal envy of the evil elements over
the elements of goodness. So, when the level of importance of the
hashimite element got raised up by the message of heaven, the occasional
envy joined the internal envy, and raised the merits of the umayyad,
after it was fighting with the power of envy only before the revelation
of the heavenly message, and after the revelation it began to fight by
the power of envy and anger together.

-5-

Thus, the umayyad element was shocked by the message (of heaven), like
the fighter that goes surprised by his opponent for what he never met
before. The ignorant magnanimity blocked the umayyad element from
holding off the silly racist fights and being humble to study the
message objectively, to evaluate it and evaluate its high spirits, to
know that its (the message) nature is against the defeat so it might
spare itself many losses in the wars that it bore for 13 years, and not
becoming a block in the arabian peninsula on the way of the wide spread
of the message and be the damnation of history forever, and so it may
gain the benefits of the faith, and thus the rule in this life and
happiness in the Hereafter. But its nerves that got concentrated by ego,
were not able to bear any logical thinking about the reality of the
message or even believe in it and being under its rule. So, it (umayyad
element) considered it (the message) since the time when the Messanger
raised his great voice with it and forever, as the hypothesis of
Mo<u>h</u>ammad ben \`Abdilláh for his tribe just to gain victory for
one element over the other. The repetitive calls of Quran that assures
that this message is revealed from Allah to all the people equally and
the Messanger was sent from Allah to be a mercy for all the people, all
of that did not block its way of ego.  
That was the idea of this message for the umayyad element, and by this
wrong idea it decided to fight against the message, and to turn off the
light of Allah on earth however that takes.

-6-

And as long as the stages that the message passed through to stabilize
itself, were all resulted from each other and different from each other,
according to the difference of its reasons and its material capabilities
and the number of the believers that believed in it, although its core
is unique, thus, the umayyad element couldn't fight it by one style
only, because the style that is useful for one stage of the war is not
useful for another stage of it, especially if the other side is
advancing. Thus, the umayyad element changed its own ways according to
the needs of each stage, but it didn't change its mentality about the
message and about evaluating it, thus it continued to run the activity
against the message in one mentality and by one wrong idea all over the
stages.

-7-

Since the message passed through three stages to stabilize itself, the
umayyad element planned for three ways to fight it, and the details of
these three stages are as the following:  
The first stage: the stage of the beginning of the message.. when the
message was establishing its reality and its ideas that were flowing
from heaven like rain drops were forming, to be connected all together
and form a crawling current of a complete message, at the time that
those of the conscious used to go in person or in groups to the court of
the messanger near the holy Mosque (Mecca) just to see the lips of the
prophet wet with inspiration and hear the phrases of Quran when it was
just revealed on its way down to earth and their heart got enlightened
with a light that they awaited for long time, so they believed in it one
after the other. At that time when the believers were few in numbers
ruled by the hand of the disbelievers, and the disbelievers were great
in number and against the believers.  
The style of the umayyad element in fighting the message through this
stage depended on the psychological war which stood on 2 cases:  
The first case: spread the rumors against the message and claim that it
is a type of magic and poetry and the result of priests and crazy
people's talk, and against the messanger claiming that he is a magician
and a poet and also a priest and a crazy man. Also against the believers
claiming that they are low down in status and got swayed away by a
spell.  
The second case: fighting the believers and making some of them
immigrate from Mecca to Abyssinia, and making the others flee Mecca to
the lands of Abu-<u>T</u>álib and also making the plots against the
message and the Messanger and the believers, such plots that were
usually made for earthly powers like magic and poetry, and the magician
and the poet and those that gets swayed away.  
This style of fighting resulted in the annoyance of the prophet from
Mecca and made him leave to Medina.  
The second stage: The concentration of the message, when the message
showed its reality and its ideas were connected and expressed a unqiue
crawling message.  
Since people began to get into Islam in groups and since the believers
formed a strong side in front of the disbelievers, the message got
concentrated by itself and based on a strong base in Medina. The
messanger when left to Medina he was received by An<u>s</u>ár \[people
of Medina\] with great happiness, who joined Al-Mohájireen \[Arabic: the
immigrants. People who immigrated from Mecca\], and swore fealty to him
for no conditions, thus the message gained a strategic base and that is,
Medina. And a solid public base and that is An<u>s</u>ár and
Al-Mohájireen, and an independent side which can protect its own back
against any aggression and that is able to attack any side that plots
against it. The prophet proved his strength in the first year after
immigration (to Medina), when he blocked the way between Mecca and Shám
\[Syria and the surroundings\], and gained control over a caravan of
Qoraysh \[the main tribe of Mecca\] that was on the way, as soon as he
acknowledged that the disbelievers are controlling the fortunes of the
believers that were left in Mecca at the time of the immigration.  
Here, the umayyad element found out that the psychological war which was
used by them against the message in Mecca is not useless. This failure
is supposed to enlighten the minds of the umayyads to look back at their
previous measures which lead them to such a failure and study the
message according to the lights of the previous experiments objectively
away from ego and racism to measure its real powers in reality, but they
never benefited from these experiments and kept fighting it with the
same values that lead them to the failure, but in a different style that
didn't change in the core from the experiments in Mecca, only by the
amount of the difference in the situation of the message in Mecca and
Medina.  
Thus, in this stage, the umayyad element depended on the systematic war,
so it lead wars against the message and involved in wars and encouraged
other sides to fight against the message, and the umayyad element got
severe losses in souls and fortunes and lost all its merits and its
ego.  
The third stage: the stage of the outgoing of the message... these wars
and the break of the treaties that were held between the prophet and the
leaders of the umayyad side, all lead to the opening of Mecca, which
gave the chance to the believers to take over the bases of the
disbelievers and the ratio (of power) was reversed from that which was
before the immigration. Thus, the disbelievers turned out to be a
minority in the hands of the disbelievers, and the believers turned to
be a majority which was able to decide the destiny of the disbelievers,
although the believers did meet the bad with goodness, and although the
disbelievers fought the believers before the immigration, the believers
had the passion over the disbelievers after the opening of Mecca, and
they released all of them and treated them by the spirit of Islam which
showed the message in practice in its real meanings: for all people and
a mercy for the worlds, and not a hypothesis for one man to his tribe to
enforce one element over another.  
Here, the umayyad element knew that it can't destroy the message by
weapons, but didn't realize the mistake of its general mental base in
evaluating the message and measuring its real powers, so it remained
measuring it by its own old measures which lead to failure twice, so now
it prepared to plot for the message in a third style that was not
different much from the previous two styles in the core, except the
apparent difference in the situation of the message before and after the
opening of Mecca.  
Thus, the umayyad style in this stage depended on intrigues.  
In order to achieve this style, the umayyads went under the flag of this
message, as an introduction to get into the leadership, to intrigue from
the inside and to falsify the message from its reality and then destroy
it completely, and return it back to their rule during the age of
ignorance. The prophet foretold their black intends when they entered
into Islam, and foretold again about what shall be the situation of the
caliphate after him, when the family of Al-\`Á<u>s</u> \[one of the
umayyads\] reaches 30 men, and also he assigned the duties of the
believers if ever they saw Mo\`áwiyah \[the first umayyad ruler in the
umayyad dynasty\] on his pulpit.

-8-

The umayyad element went on achieving this way since the day of the
opening (of Mecca), when Abu-Sufyán asked the prophet for some desires,
one of these were to marry his daughter (of Abu-Sufyán) and to accept
his son Mo\`áwiyah as to be one of the writers of the inspiration, and
so the umayyad element went on working on this for the rest of the days
of the prophet, until the death of the prine of the believers (imam
\`Ali ben Abi-<u>T</u>álib) (PUH), but the complete control for the
umayyad element was not available like when it was available when Yazeed
\[Yazid I, second umayyad ruler\] took control over the neck of muslims
by the name of the caliphate, so he started establishing a wide plan to
destroy the message from its heads.  
The umayyad element expressed the take up of such plan in the acts and
sayings of its leaders. Once \`Umar \[second caliph\] got killed and
umayyads got the chance to slip into the leadership, Abu-Sufyán
announced his famous saying: catch it O umayyads like how kids catch a
ball, surely I swear by whatever Abu-Sufyán swears by, there is no
paradise nor hell. Mo\`áwiyah also found the trust that he needs in
Al-Waleed and delivered to him what was going on in his mind when he
said after a long speech ... "and this is Ibn Abi Kabshah (the prophet),
was not satisfied until he joined his name to the name of Allah so it is
shouted with for 5 times a day on the minarets, no by Allah destroyed it
shall be, no by Allah buried it shall be. And Yazeed didn't find an
apparent reason to hit the basic pillar for the message and destroy its
original elements unless he killed the good remain of the prophet's
Household in the battle of Karbala, and then he targeted the good
remains of the prophet's companion in the battle of Al-<u>H</u>arrah
especially those who were involved in the battle of Badr \[the first
battle between the believers and the disbelievers after one year of
immigration\], and didn't spare any of them, and also spread the chaos
in Medina for 3 days and it was the city of the prophet and the main
base for the message by hands of his general Muslim ben \`Uqbah... then
when the circumstances were better for the umayyad element and no one
was left to defend the message, he turned around towards Ka\`bah \[the
holy House in Mecca\] and Quran, and the holy Ka\`bah was hit by
catapults by \`Abdul-Malik ben Marwán by the hands of his viceroy
Al-Hajjáj ben Yousef Al-Thaqafi, and Al-Waleed ben \`Abdul-Malik threw
Quran with arrows until it was torn down.  
This plan showed up in lot of statements and acts of the umayyad
element.

-9-

Quran emphasized on one matter that there is no other way for it, and
that is to follow the Sunna of the prophet which includes his sayings
and his acts and the things that he liked, because Quran did not include
all the details of the teachings that would cover the needs of all of
the believers. Thus, the matters that were not covered by the Quran
clearly were explained by the prophet's Sunna, thus Quran said (And
whatsoever the messenger giveth you, take it. And whatsoever he
forbiddeth, abstain (from it), 59:7) and this reference was explained by
that the prophet doesn't decide by himself but express about Allah by
the way of the inspiration, so it (the Quran) said (Nor doth he speak of
(his own) desire, It is naught save an inspiration that is inspired,
53:3,4). The prophet also assured this when it came to his true
successors who he gave their names. The prophet had to assure this thing
about his sucessors, since not all muslims were expert in all of the
laws (teachings) of the message, because of the short life of the
prophet relative to the new muslims who converted into Islam in the last
years of the prophet's life while people who were expert in the laws
were not abundant and most of them turned to some problems that are not
so much important, or never important at all. Thus, the prophet moved
his wisdom to his successors who he assigned by their names and their
properties and assured that people must get back to them for everything
that a faithful man would not see in the reported acts (Sunna) and Quran
clearly, and he explained this by that his successors do not decide by
themselves but express it by the way of a direct inspiration.  
Thus, the believers followed the Quran in returning back to the prophet
himself and follow his Sunna as long as the Sunna is parallel to Quran
in expressing (the will of) Allah. They also followed the will of the
prophet about returning to his successors and following their Sunna
considering it a parallel line to the original Sunna. Thus, it was
natural -or more even it is a must according to the islamic order- to
take every saying and every act and every satisfaction expressed by one
of the prophet's successor, and be as a third source beside Quran and
Sunna and explain the Quran and Sunna and enter Islam to be fixed
forever beside what is fixed in Quran and Sunna.  
The crowds of the belivers followed their line, and didn't recognize
between whoever the prophet assigned by name and between whoever
assigned himself for the caliphate.  
Thus, the crowds of the believers went on with this wrong basic idea
following everyone who sits on the chair of the caliphate neglecting his
identity and neglecting whether the prophet named that person to be a
caliph or not, and the crowds went along that way which lead to follow
the ways of Mo\`áwiyah and Yazeed, who lead the umayyad element, to
destroy the message completely.

-10-

Imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn was the real successor who was assigned by the
prophet (PUH) and the main person who was responsible -at his time- to
protect the message, and derlivering completely to the one who follows
him as he received it completely from the one who was before him. He
knew this plan clearly, and he saw with his eyes plainly how the crowds
were going on following the ways of Mo\`áwiyah and Yazeed and claiming
that by following them they are following the orders of the prophet
(PUH) which suggests following his successors, and he (Al-<u>H</u>usayn)
felt his responsibility to put down this plan and return the crowds from
following the path in that way which will destroy the message and get
back to the age of ignorance after Islam. So, imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn had
to revolt not to announce that there is a mistake in the idea of the
crowds about the caliph, because announcement alone is not enough in
this field, but also to knock out from the feelings of the crowds of the
believers the roots of the blind imitation for the ways of anyone who
sits on the chair of the caliphate -either by terror and seduction or
not- and to plant in the feelings of the crowds of the believers that
the caliph is the one who was assigned by a command from the prophet
(PUH) to follow his ways only.  
The revolution had to be severe, to take over all the caliphs that took
over the place of the prophet (PUH) without any rights for doing so,
those caliphs that did not think about the benefits of the nation and
the message but rather they thought about their own benefits, thus they
applied all the capabilities of the caliphate to excuse their presence
first of all, and then enforce their position. Thus, imam
Al-<u>H</u>usayn was working to make his revolution on the level of the
great goal that he was trying to achieve, so he gathered all the
capabilities that can be gathered for a revolution, to make it slip
through the feelings of the crowds of the believers by their minds and
their emotions, and thus it would take over the ideas and the souls, and
assign in the life of every single person a similar revolution that
would take control of his will and change whatever of his own
directions.  
For this, imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn did not start the revolution in Medina,
when Al-Waleed ben \`Utbah \[viceroy of Medina at that time\] asked him
to swear fealty, but it was enough for him to move from Medina to Mecca
and remained to watch the perfect time.

-11-

Some similar feelings went through the real believers, those whose
religious measures were not confused in  for the confusion in the
leadership, though the sacred sword and lash were the watchers over the
lips for every single word that comes out against the astraying
leadership.  
But the weakness of Al-Nu\`mán ben Basheer, the viceroy of Yazeed over
Kufa, gave the chance for kufans to express their ideas away from the
sacred sword and the lash, so they sent the messages to imam
Al-<u>H</u>usayn to arrive and be their leader on the way of Allah, and
take Kufa -and it is the second base of caliphate, and the destination
of his father and where his father's tomb is- as a base to defame the
astraying leadership.  
Imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn knew kufans the best, since he lived many years
with them and lived the experiments of his father and his brother with
them, and he knew that they will betray him like how they did with his
father and his brother and he knew that he would be killed if he met
their request, but he answered their request because he insisted on the
revolution before the kufans' invitation, he was only looking for a base
for the revolution and he found it in the invitation of the kufans.

-12-

The invitation of the kufans provided a golden chance for imam
Al-<u>H</u>usayn and it was a beneficial one for him as it was a bad one
for them and imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn benefited from it in the following
way:  
1. Providing a base for the revolution. Imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn insisted
on the revolution however it takes from him, and he announced it -by the
line of events- in Medina when he refused to swear fealty to Yazeed
once, and then moving from Medina to Mecca the other time. But his
revolution was without a base that would make other revolutions follow
it and give repetitive strikes on one target until victory is gained.
Thus, the kufans invitation for imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn provided such a
base for his revolution for it is normal that the murder of imam
Al-<u>H</u>usayn by the hands of the kufans will spark the spirit of
regret in them and make them feel their responsibility about his blood
and make people blame them, thus their natural reaction would be working
on clearing this bad reputation by killing his killers and spark the
revolution against those who drove them to make them kill him. Such
reaction indeed happened in the revolution of Al-Tawwábeen in the
revolution of Al-Mokhtár and the other revolutions that made Kufa a
volcano that carries the fire in its core, which whenever its top is
turned down from one side, another fire would appear in another side, in
another place. The fire that remained in the hearts of the kufans is the
fire of regret, over murdering imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn.  
2. Finding the dimensions of the revolution. If imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn
was to revolt in Medina and get killed there, his revolution would have
only one dimension and that is the mental dimension which is supposed to
stay but only in the minds of the thinkers and it is a narrow thing even
though it can affect history after such a long time but it cannot change
the way of history in a wide form.  
The emotional dimension was not easy to be provided in Medina, for if
imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn was to revolt in Medina, he would be killed with
his companions only and then the rumors will try to defame and misfigure
this revolution until it is out of its original contents into some badly
figured contents that almost have no effects in history. But the killing
of innocent children or their death of thirst.. but the imprisoning of
women of inspiration and those who were grown under the imamate \[C\],
but the killing of Al-<u>H</u>usayn and his companions while he was
supposed to be a guest who was invited and fealty was sworn for him, but
killing him and his companions out of thirst beside the river, all of
that was to be occuring by nature if kufans did not invite him, and
these characteristics that made the revolution of Al-<u>H</u>usayn
unique. That is, the emotional rivers that feeded his revolution to be
in eternity.  
Imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn tried to emphasize this side in his revolution by
sending Muslim ben \`Aqeel \[Al-<u>H</u>usayn's cousin\] before him to
Kufa, to take the swear of fealty from kufans before his arrival to
them.  
3. Explaining the secrets of the treaty of Al-<u>H</u>asan
\[Al-<u>H</u>usayn's elder brother who made a treaty with Mo\`áwiyah\].
Imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn by accepting the invitation of kufans and their
treachery in that cowardly way, exposed to history some factors that
were behind the treaty of Al-<u>H</u>asan and his accept of the treaty
instead of fighting. The treachery of kufans with imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn
showed that if imam Al-<u>H</u>asan refused the treaty he would get
killed by his own companions, and that makes his murder without any
further effects.

-13-

Imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn refused to swear the fealty to Yazeed and
immigrated from Medina to Mecca and by that he announced the revolution
for two times, and in Mecca he received 12 thousands invitations from
kufans, and that proves that imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn did not refuse to
swear fealty and did not immigrate to Mecca asking for the leadership
and he was not swayed away by kufans, but he did what he did for his
duty as a responsible for protecting the message, but he wanted to
emphasize these two facts at the day when he announced in Mecca and
before his travel to Kufa his knowledge about what are the developments
and his intention to revolt which will end up in his martyrdom and also
announced the place of his martyrdom as if he was reading a book, when
he said (like I see my joints amputated by the wolves of the deserts
between Al-Nawáwees and Karbala...) \[Al-Nawáwees: an old village in
Iraq was inhabited by christians\].

-14-

Imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn went out giving his soul on the way of Allah, and
planting patience in himself, so he got killed -like he said- and
succeeded in achieving his goal, because he was able to separate the
false caliphate from Islam and showed the reality of the umayyad
leadership which was an ignorant leadership connecting itself to Islam
as to work on turning off the light of Allah on earth, which was started
at the battle of Badr.  
Thus, people realized the nature of the umayyad government, as a false
rule not related to Islam by any way, and has nothing to do with Islam.
Thus, he saved the reality of Islam from being polluted by the crimes of
the umayyad element which was considered according to the public
something from Islam and should be counted by Islam.  
He proved, forever, that the caliph of Allah and His prophet is not
everyone who takes the throne of ruling, but it is him who was named by
the prophet of Allah and assiged by him, whether he was on the throne or
in the dark jails.  
Under the light of the revolution of imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn, the reality
of everyone who came after imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn or even before him was
exposed, thus no single king from umayyads or abbasids or even ottomans
could claim that his actions or statements which were illegal were part
of Islam, and the islamic public did not recognize it as something from
Islam and was not even claimed to be an innovation, but was considered
merely like the rest of actions of kings who had no relation to
religions.

-15-

The summary is: Islam has an obvious view about the caliph and that is:
the caliph is whoever the prophet assigned by himself. After the prophet
this measure which was emitted from the soul of Islam got confused, so
everyone who took over the throne was named the caliph of Allah and His
prophet. This confusion was in its extreme when Yazeed ben Mo\`áwiyah
became a ruler, when he became the enemy of Islam and called the caliph
of Islam, thus imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn focused the lights of his
revolution on this confusion until he destroyed it completely, and
turned back the islamic public to the right measure about the islamic
leadership which was expressed by the name of: the caliphate. He proved
also that the sucessor of the prophet is the one who is assigned by the
prophet, and whoever rules the muslims is a ruler but not a caliph, and
there is a great difference between the ruler of muslims and the caliph
of muslims.

-16-

Thus, the effects of the revolution of imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn on abbasids
and ottomans were not any lesser than it was on umayyads, because it
showed how false they are all together. Thus, all of them were fighting
against him. Even abbasids who took the throne from the umayyads by the
name of Al-<u>H</u>usayn started to fight Al-<u>H</u>usayn once they
were on the throne, and if they missed him in person, they didn't miss
his grave and the visitors of his grave and his descendants and his
followers, and whenever a building raises up on his grave they would
knock it down, and whenever a flag for the visitors of his grave would
raise up they would chase them around and whenever the mention of his
descendants raises up they would finish them, and whenever a voice for
his followers raises up they would choke it by the sword and the lash.

-17-

The complete revolution of imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn is composed of two
parts:  
First part: his revolution itself, which exploded on the day of Ashurah
and was ended by his martyrdom with all of his Household and his
companions.  
Second part: the capture of his women and children, and touring them in
the lands, from Karbala to Kufa and from Kufa to Shám \[Syria and the
surroundings\] and then their turn back from Shám to Karbala after 40
days, then finally going back to Medina.  
The core of the revolution of imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn was in the first
part which was took care of by the imam himself, but the second part was
not controled by him but he prepared for that when he took the women and
children with him over the deserts to Karbala.  
The second part is considered a completion for the revolution of imam
Al-<u>H</u>usayn from one side, and an explanation for the revolution of
imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn on the other side.  
So it was a completion for the revolution of imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn,
because the capture of the women and the children and touring them from
one land to another deepened the emotional side in the revolution, and
exposed the reality of the umayyad element clearly, and made it appear
like an ignorant element that steps on all the holies of Islam which it
was supposed to rule by its name, and spreaded the killings and the
capture of women among the descendants of the prophet of Allah which are
supposed to be the true caliphs, for taking revenge for what they did to
its ancestors in Badr and <u>H</u>unayn.  
It was also an explanation for the revolution of imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn,
because the revolution at that time was covered with thick veils rumors
that was spread by the umayyad trumpet to get it down and misfigure its
reputation.  
Thus, the hashimite element had to fear over its revolution and save it
from the hands of the speech-falsifiers. This great part was done by
imam Al-Sajjád \[the only survivor son of Al-<u>H</u>usayn and the 4th
imam for shiites. His name was "\`Ali"\] and his sisters and his aunts
while they were captured in chains, so they announced the goal of the
revolution of imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn and showed its features to the
islamic public in a clear way away from the bad reputation and the
falsification.

-18-

This book which is now between your hands -O reader- show you -in brief-
the events of the revolution of imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn with its two
parts, and it was read by the great preacher, the pious pilgrim, sheik
\`Abdul-Zahrá' Falá<u>h</u> Al-Ka\`bee, in two sets that he joined in
Iraq. He read the first part in a public set which was held beside the
radius of imam Al-<u>H</u>usayn's tomb \[called Al-<u>S</u>a<u>h</u>an\]
at the day of Ashurah in every year. He also read the second part in a
public set that was held beside Al-<u>S</u>a<u>h</u>an too on
Al-Arba\`een \[that is, the passage of 40 days after the martyrdom of
Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH)\] in the year 1379 A.H.  
The first part is the one which is broadcasted by the radio of Baghdad
on the morning of Ashurah every year since 1379 A.H. and in the same
year it was broadcasted twice, once at daytime and once at night and
that is because 14 thousands requests by telegrams and by phone reached
the minister of culture and the station's headquarter asking to
broadcast it again. It is also broadcasted in a complete form for years
from the arabic radio station of Ahwáz \[a town on border between Iran
and Iraq\] in every year at the day of Ashurah, and some parts of it are
broadcasted -for two years ago- from the station of Kuwait.  
The second part -which tells what happened after the death of imam
Al-<u>H</u>usayn until his Household turned back to Medina- was
broadcasted from the station of Baghdad on the morning of Al-Arba\`een
in the years 1379 A.H. and 1380 A.H.  
The two parts are completely taken from the tapes into the papers -and
the poetry that was in the local dialect was ommited because it was in
the iraqi dialect, which can be hard to understand for non-iraqis- and
now here it is all between your hand within this book.

<u>H</u>asan Mahdi Al-Shirazi

Holy Karbala

7/2/1388 A.H. \[7th of <u>S</u>afar\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Part](hus03)
