[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index)  [Shiite
Documents](../shi)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hus03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduction

The history kept reviving the rememberance of 40 days passing the
martyrdom of the eternal hero and the first revolutionist in Islam:
Al-<u>H</u>usayn ben \`Ali ben Abi <u>T</u>álib (PUT), and the
rememberance of the turn back of the prisoners of the Household of the
prophet and Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUT) to Karbala, to set the fineral
ceremony over the tomb of Abá \`Abdilláh, Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH).  
In this day, in every year since 14 centuries, Karbala is wearing the
clothes of moruning and get condensed with the crowds and visitors that
came from all around the islamic world to fill the streets and the roads
and the compleces in thousands, for the commemoration of "the fourtieth"
\[C\] of Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) \[In eastern cultures, specifically
islamic ones, the mourning of women with their black clothes remain for
40 days after the death of their man, and it is called mainly
Al-Arba\`een, literally: The Fourtieth, which means the pass of 40
days\].  
Thus, all of Karbala becomes a great place of commemoration that
contains different persons from different islamic identities, so much
that you cannot even pass through the large numbers of crowds and your
eyes won't fall upon anything except of the heads of the crowds with
signs of sadness upon their faces, and only hear the voice of the
mourner and he is telling the story of the martyrdom of Al-<u>H</u>usayn
(PUH) and the adversities of imprisoning the women and children of the
Household of the prophet (PUH), and what happened to them in their
journey from Karbala to Kufa, and from Kufa to Shám (Damascus), and how
the fear of the situation and the fear from the enemies and the hard
adversities that befell them never kept them away from doing their
duties towards the revolution of Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH), and to spread
the noble goals and explain them by those speeches in Kufa and in front
of \`Ubaydilláh ben Ziyád \[the viceroy of Kufa for the Umayyads\], and
in the markets of Damascus and in the court of Yazeed ben Mo\`áwiyah,
which include as well the speeches of Zaynab Al-Kubra \[or Zaynab the
Great, Zynab bent \`Ali (PUH), the sister of Al-<u>H</u>usayn\] and
Um-Kalthoom \[another sister of Al-<u>H</u>usayn\] and \`Ali ben
Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) \[the 4th imam\] in the Umayyad Mosque \[Arabic:
Al-Jámi\` Al-Umawi\].  
Yes, that speech that was out loud and shaked the throne of Yazeed and
awakened the nations that went under the humiliation.  
Here is it, the second part of the epical story of the martyrdom of
Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH), which its first part was broadcasted on the day
of Ashurah, which is kindly narrated here by the preacher of Karbala,
the pilgrim, sheik \`Abdul-Zahrá' Al-Ka\`bee for this occasion:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
\[a long poem comes here first\]  
Al-Sayid Ibn <u>T</u>awoos \[a historian's name\] say: then the crowds
raced through to plunder the houses (tents) of the Household of the
prophet and (the Household of) Fatima, so then the daughters of the
prophet of Allah and the harem went out crying to each other and mourn
for the protectors and the beloved ones.  
<u>H</u>ameed ben Muslim said: and I saw a woman from the tribe of Bakr
ben Wá'il who was with her husband among the fellows of \`Umar ben
Sa\`d, and when she saw the crowds breaking into the tents and
plundering the women of Al-<u>H</u>usayn, she took a sword and headed to
the tents and said: O you tribe of Bakr ben Wá'il! Are the daughters of
the prophet being plundered!? No judge save but Allah!! Alas! The
revenge of the prophet of Allah. Then her husband took her back to the
camp.  
Then they banished the women from the tents and set the fire in them
(the tents), and they (the women) went out unveiled and plundered, and
bare-footed and crying out loud, and they said to the enemies: by the
rights of Allah, show us the place of Al-<u>H</u>usayn, and so they did
and when the women looked at the dead people, they shouted out loud and
slapped their faces. \[a poem\].  
The narrator says: by Allah, I shall never forget Zaynab bent \`Ali
while she was mourning Al-<u>H</u>usayn and calling with a sad voice and
a broken sad heart: Alas! Mo<u>h</u>ammed! The angels of heaven prayed
upon you. This is Al-<u>H</u>usayn covered with his blood, and his parts
are amputated, and his turban and cloak are plundered and your daughters
are hostages. To Allah shall be the complaint and to Mo<u>h</u>ammed the
Chosen, and to \`Ali Al-Mortadhá and to Fatima Al-Zahrá' and to
<u>H</u>amzah the lord of the martyrs. Alas! Mo<u>h</u>ammed! This is
<u>H</u>usayn in the desert, with his head been cut from the back. \[a
short poem\].  
Then, Sokayna bent Al-<u>H</u>usayn asked her aunt (Zaynab): to whom you
are speaking? She answered her: your father Al-<u>H</u>usayn, and then
she dropped down from her place to the body of her father ad hugged his
corpse, and made all the enemies cry, and then \`Umar ben Sa\`d said:
take her away from the body of her father, and then a group of nomads
came and pulled her away from the body of her father, and she went away
with her tears falling down.  
The narrator said: then, \`Umar ben Sa\`d sent the head of
Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) at the day of Ashurah with Khiwallá ben Yazeed
Al-A<u>s</u>ba<u>h</u>i and <u>H</u>ameed ben Muslim to \`Ubaydillah ben
Ziyád, and ordered to bring the heads of the other companions and the
Household (of Al-<u>H</u>usayn), so they were all amputated and he did
it with Shimr ben Ðil-Jawshan and Qays ben Al-Ash\`ath and \`Amr ben
Al-<u>H</u>ajjáj, and they went to Kufa, and \`Umar ben Sa\`d toured
with whoever was left from the children of Al-<u>H</u>usayn and carried
his (Al-<u>H</u>usayn's) women on the backs of the camels and they are
the trusts of the prophets, and toured them like the hostages of turks
and romans (byzantines), with lot of adversities and sadness.  
It is narrated that the heads of the companions of Al-<u>H</u>usayn were
78 heads, and they were divided among the tribes so that may they make
advances to Ibn Ziyád and to Yazeed.  
So, the tribe of Kindah came up with 13 heads and their leader was Qays
ben Al-Ash\`ath, and the tribe of Hawázin came up with 12 heads and
their leader was Shimr ben Ðil-Jawshan. And the tribe of Tameem came up
with 17 heads, and the tribe of Asad came up with 16 heads, and the
tribe of Moð<u>h</u>aj came up with 7 heads, and the rest of the heads
were taken by the the people.  
Then when Ibn Sa\`d left Karbala, some people from the tribe of Asad
came out and prayed upon these purified corpses and buried them as is it
now.  
Then, Ibn Sa\`d toured with the afore mentioned hostages and when he
reached Kufa, the people gathered to take a look at them, and one woman
of the kufans came out and asked: what prisoners are you? And the
daughters of \`Ali replied: we are the prisoners from the Household of
Mo<u>h</u>ammed, so she came down from the roof of her house and
gathered some clothes and veils for them and gave them.  
The roads got stuck in front of the Household by the people and the
people of Kufa started to mourn and cry.  
Then \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) said: you mourn and cry for us?
Then who killed us?  
Basheer ben Khozaym Al-Asadi said: then I took a look at Zaynab bent
\`Ali (PUH) at that day, and I've never seen a shy woman who has an
eloquent speech like her, like if she was talking by the tongue of her
father, the prince of the believers, \`Ali ben Abi <u>T</u>álib (PUH),
and she made a sign with her hand and all the people got silent. So then
the breathes were taken and the bells went silent, and then she said:
praising shall be to Allah, and blessings shall be on my father,
Mo<u>h</u>ammed and his purified and kind Household. And then, O people
of Kufa, O people of treachery and tricks! Do you cry? The tear shall
not be dry and the weeping shall never stop, but the likes of you is
like unto her who unravelleth the thread, after she hath made it strong,
to thin filaments, making your oaths a deceit between you. Verily, is
there anyone among you but the swaggerer and the rude? And the angry and
the behated? And the adulation of maids and the trickery of the enemies,
or like a pasture on the remains, or like a silver on a grave. Verily,
evil is what your souls have given to yourselves to compile the wrath of
Allah upon you, and in the Punishment you shall remain eternal. Do you
cry? Do you weep? yes by Allah, cry a lot and laugh a little, for you've
done its (the life) shame and disgrace, and you shall never wash it
away, and how shall you make yourselves clear from killing the
descendant of the prophet, and the core of the Message, and the lord of
the youth in paradise? The one you are (supposed to) turn to in your
troubles and adversities, and your cause and the applier of your creed?
Verily, evil is what you've done, and far you may be and destroyed!
Verily your efforts were disappointed, and your hands were cut down, and
your deal is a losing one, and you've received the wrath of Allah, and
humiliation shall be forced upon you. Woe to you O people of Kufa, do
you know what a liver for the prophet you have fought against? And what
blood for him you have shed? And what dignified daughter of him you have
exposed? And what sanctity you have violated? You've came to it (life)
with its baldness and stupidity and mis-shaped, like the dust of the
ground and the air of the sky. Are you amazed for the sky to be raining
blood upon you? Verily the punishment of the judgement day is even worse
and more shameful and you shall not be nourished, so do not take the
time left easy, for the revenge is surely to be taken, and your Lord is
waiting for you.  
The narrator said: by Allah, I've saw the people at that day puzzled and
crying and they've put their hands in their mouths, and I saw an old man
standing beside me and crying until his beard became wet and he said:
may my father and my mother become ransom for you! Your old men are the
best of the old and your youth is the best among the young and your
women are best of women, and your lineage is the best of lineage, never
to be ashamed.  
Then, Fatima Al-Soghrá the daughter of Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) stood up
to preach and said: praise be to Allah numbered as much as the sand and
the stones, and like the weight of the Throne to the earth, I shall
praise Him and believe in Him, and depend on Him, and I shal testify
that there is no other god save but Allah, One with no companions, and
verily that Mo<u>h</u>ammed is His slave and His messanger, and that his
children were slain on the bank of Al-Forát for no sin or cause.
Allahoma, verily I take refuge in You if I was lying about You, or to
say something against what You have revealed upon him of covenants for
his viceroy \`Ali ben Abi <u>T</u>álib (PUH), the one whose rights were
taken and was killed for no crime (like his son was killed yesterday) in
a house one of the houses of Allah \[meaning the mosque of Kufa where
imam \`Ali was hit by the sword on his head\], while some people claim
to be muslims were in it. Woe to their heads! Never defended him against
a wrong in his life, nor in his death, until You (Allah) had taken back
his soul with good trace, and known faith. Never stepped away to defend
Your religion, and You've guided him to be a muslim since his young age,
and mentioned his good deeds in his old age. And verily he remained
guiding to Your path and to the path of Your prophet until You've taken
him back to You, while has disinterested in this life and wishing for
the Hereafter, and a fighter for Your path. You've accepted him and
chose him and verily You've guided him to the straight path. And then, O
people of Kufa, O people of treachery and trickery and the pride! Verily
we are a Household that was tested by you, and you were tested by us,
and He made our test leading to goodness and made His knowledge and
wisdom with us. Thus, we are the owners of His wisdom and the container
of His knowledge and wisdom, and His proof in His lands for His bondmen,
and verily we've been dignified with His dignity, and we've been
preferred by His prophet Mo<u>h</u>ammed (PUH) over many of His
creations in an obvious way, but you've lied to us and made us like the
disbelievers, and thought fighting us is allowed and our fortune is to
be plundered, like if we were the children of turks or Kabul, like
you've killed our grandfather in the yesterday, and your swords are
dripping from our blood, the Household, for grudge that was in you since
long time. Your eyes were satisfied with that, and your hearts were glad
with that, lying about Allah and for a trick that you have made, but
Allah is the best who tricks. Verily yourselves would not get scared for
the bloodshed you've made within us, and for what your hands have gotten
from our fortunes, for the great adversities and troubles were destined
in a book before we meet them, and that is easy for Allah, That ye
grieve not for the sake of that which hath escaped you, nor yet exult
because of that which hath been given. Allah loveth not all prideful
boasters. Woe to you! Wait for the damnation and the punishment, it is
as if it had befell, and the aversities had been revealed from the sky
to destroy you with a punishment, and to make you feel the might of each
other, and then all of you shall be in the painful punishment at the
judgement day for what you have done to us, verily the damnation of
Allah is over the wrong folk. Woe to you! Do you know what hand for you
came to stab us? And what soul decided to fight us? Or what leg you've
walked with toward us? You've desired to fight us, by Allah, verily your
hearts have been harsh, and your livers had been thickened, and your
hearings got stamped, and the satan beguiled you and told you what to
do, and made a veil over your eyes and you shall never be guided. Woe to
you! O people of Kufa, what a hate for the prophet of Allah (PUH) you
have, for betraying his brother \`Ali ben Abi <u>T</u>álib (PUH), my
grandfather, and the his children and his Household, the purified, and a
proud man once said about his pride in that:

Verily we have killed \`Ali and the sons of \`Ali  
with indian swords and with spears  
And imprisoned their women like the turks  
and struck them and what a struck it was  
\[indian swords were known for Arabs for the their sharpness and
quality\]

You've drawn your destiny with your jaws O dishonored sayer!! You've
been proud for killing people that Allah had purified and cleansed, so
shut up and sit like a dog like your father did!! Every person will get
in return what his hands do. Did you envy us? Woe to you! For what Allah
preferred us upon you? What is our sin if life got into our raging sea,
and your sea is calm and can't cover even a beetle. That is the favor of
Allah that is given to anyone He desires, and whoever that Allah had
never made a light for him he shall not have a light.  
Then the voices raised out loud with cries and weeping, and they said:
stop O daughter of the purified, you have burned our hearts and set the
fire to our insides. So she went silent.  
Then Um-Kalthoom bent \`Ali (PUH) preached in that day behind her veil
and raised her voice with crying and she said: O people of Kufa, evil to
you, why did you let down <u>H</u>usayn and killed him, and plundered
his fortunes, and imprisoned his women. Woe to you and may Allah destroy
you!! What sin you have commited, and what burden you have taken over
your back, and what blood did you shed, and what a dignified woman
you've targeted and what children you've plundered and what fortune you
have taken. You've killed the best men after the prophet (PUH), and the
mercy was taken out from your hearts, and verily the party of Allah
shall be the winner, and the party of the devil shall be the loser, and
then she said:

You've killed my brother, woe to your mothers  
you shall be rewarded with a blazing hell  
You've shed bloods that Allah prohibited  
and Quran prohibited and then Mo<u>h</u>ammed

Then the people wept out loud and cried, and the women spread their
hairs and put the dust over their heads and scratched their faces and
slapped their cheeks and prayed for the woes and punishments. The men
also cried, and such numbers of mourners was never seen before.  
Then Zaynul-\`Abideen \[\`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn, 4th imam\] made a
sign with his hand to make them silence and they went silent, and then
stood up, and he praised Allah and blessed the prophet (PUH) and then
said: O people, who knew me verily he knew me, and who doesn't know then
I shall identify myself for him, I am \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn ben
\`Ali ben Abi <u>T</u>álib (PUH). I am the son of him whose veil was
broken and his fortunes were plundered, and his money was taken and his
children were imprisoned. I am the son of the one who was slain on the
banks of Al-Forát, for no sin or a crime. I am the son of him who was
killed and was patient, and that is enough for my pride. O people, I ask
you by Allah, do you know that you've written to my father, and then
tricked him, and sworn the fealty to him and made the covenant to him
and then let him down and killed him?? Woe to you then for what you have
done to yourselves, and evil is your thinking! By what eye (look) you
shall look at the prophet of Allah?! When he shall say to you: you've
killed my Household and broken my veils, then verily you are not from my
nation. Then the voices of the people went out loud with cries from all
the directions and they said to each other: Verily you are doomed and
you don't know, and then he (PUH) said: may the mercy of Allah be upon
him who accepts my advice and saved my will for the sake of Allah, and
His prophet, and his Household, verily we have a good example in the
prophet of Allah.  
Then all of them said: we are all, O son of the prophet of Allah,
saviors for you and desire no one but you, so command us with your
orders may Allah have mercy upon you, for verily we are fighters for
those who fight you, and we are peace with whom who make peace with you,
and we shall fight Yazeed and make ourselves free from those who wronged
you and wronged us. Then he (PUH) said: Allah fobids! O you treacherous,
verily there is veil between yourselves and the lusts of yourselves, do
you want to come to me like you did with my fathers before?? No, by the
God of the dancers (the planets), the wound is not yet cured, my father,
may blessings of Allah be upon him, was killed yesterday with his
Household, and I didn't forget how bereaved is the prophet of Allah and
my father and the children of my father, and his sadness is in my mouth
and his bitterness is in my throat and his adversities are running
through my chest. My request shall be that you shall not be with us nor
against us, and then he (PUH) said:

No wonder Al-<u>H</u>usayn got killed, for his father  
was even better than <u>H</u>usayn and more generous  
So O people of Kufa don't be happy  
for what happened to <u>H</u>usayn for that was more awful  
Slain on the banks of the river may my soul be a ransom for him  
may the reward of who killed him shall be the hell

Then he said: we've accepted that from you, a head by a head, thus
nothing for us and nothing for you (of revenge).  
The narrator said: then, Ibn Ziyád sat in the palace and gave a general
permission for the people and the head of Al-<u>H</u>usayn was brought
and was put before him, so he looked at it and smiled and he had a lash
in his hand, so then he began to hit with it the lips of
Al-<u>H</u>usayn and say: verily he had a nice looking mouth. Then he
said: verily the white hair came so fast to you O Abá \`Abdilláh! A day
for the day of Badr, and there was in the court Anas ben Málik who cried
and said: he (Al-<u>H</u>usayn) is the most like the prophet of Allah
(PUH) and verily he was handsome, and beside him there was Zayd ben
Arqam, one of the companions of the prophet of Allah and he was an old
man, and when he saw that he was hitting his lips he said to him: get
your lash away from these two lips, by Allah who there is no other god
but Him, verily I saw the prophet kiss these lips so much. Then he
started to weep, and Ibn Ziyád said to him: may Allah make your eyes
cry, do you cry for the relief of Allah? By Allah, if you were not an
old man with senility, I would order for you to be beheaded, so then
Zayd ben Arqam got up from the court and said: O people, you are the
slaves now after this day, you've killed the son of Fatima and made the
son of Morjánah \[Ibn Ziyád\] a ruler for you, by Allah he shall kill
the good of you and make slaves out of your devilish ones, and far may
he be who accepts the humiliation. Then he said: O Ibn Ziyád, I shall
talk to you such a talk that is harder than this, I've seen the prophet
of Allah (PUH) sitting Al-<u>H</u>asan (PUH) on his right thigh and
<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) on his left thigh and then he put his hand on their
heads and then said: Allahoma, verily I make them deposits for You and
for the rest of the believers. So how was the deposit of the prophet of
Allah with you O Ibn Ziyád?  
Then, the women of Al-<u>H</u>usayn were entered with the children to
the court of Ibn Ziyád, and Zaynab bent \`Ali sat in a corner in a
disguise, and he asked about her and been told that this is Zaynab the
daughter of Fatima, the daughter of the prophet of Allah (PUH), so he
came to her and said: praise be to Allah that He defamed you and killed
you and showed your lies, and Zaynab then said: praise be to Allah who
dignified us with His prophet Mo<u>h</u>ammed (PUH) and cleansed us, it
is but the wrong-doer that shall be defamed and the lies of the unchaste
shall be exposed, and we not those. Then Ibn Ziyád said: how do you see
the deed of Allah with your brother and his Household?? She replied: I
didn't see anything more beautiful, these are people that death was
destined upon them and to their graves they went. And verily Allah well
make both of you meet each other, and the debate shall go on against
you, and wait to see who shall be paralyzed then? May your mother
bereave you O son of Morjánah. The narrator said: then Ibn Ziyád went
mad and almost got her beaten! But \`Amr ben <u>H</u>orayth said to him:
she is a woman and the woman is not to be taken for what she says! Then
Ibn Ziyád said: Allah had cured my heart from your tyrant,
Al-<u>H</u>usayn, and the revolutionists of his Household, and then she
said: by my life, you've killed my old man and cut off my branch, and
knocked off my roots, and if that is your cure then you had it, and then
Ibn Ziyád said: by my life, she's a poet, and her father was too, and
then she said: O Ibn Ziyád, what a woman (like me) has to do with
poetry, verily I have something that keeps me busy away from poetry, but
it is a breath of my chest for what you said.  
Then, Ibn Ziyád looked at \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn and said: who is
this? And they told him that this is \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn, and he
said: did not Allah kill \`Ali? Then \`Ali answered: I had a brother who
was called \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn who was killed by the crowds, he
replied: no but Allah killed him, but \`Ali (PUH) said: Allah receiveth
(men's) souls at the time of their death, and then Ibn Ziyád said: and
you dare to reply back? Take him and behead him, and when his aunt
Zaynab heard that, she hugged him and said: O Ibn Ziyád, stop from our
blood shed for you left no one of us, and if you decided to kill him,
then kill me before him, and then Ibn Ziyád looked at her and him for
some time and then said: I wonder for such tie of kinship, by Allah, I
think she desires to be killed with him, so leave him and I shall decide
later.  
Then \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) said to his aunt: be silent my
aunt until I talk to him, and then he stood before Ibn Ziyád and said:
are you threatening me by killing O Ibn Ziyád? Didn't you know martyrdom
is a habit of ours and Allah favored that for us, and then Ibn Ziyád
ordered to carry \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn to some room beside the
great mosque, and then Zaynab bent \`Ali said: no arabian woman shall
enter before us, unless she was a maid or a slave, for verily they were
taken hostages like us.  
Then Ibn Ziyád ordered to take the head of Al-<u>H</u>usayn and tour it
around in the roads of Kufa.  
Then, Ibn Ziyád went up the pulpit, and praised Allah and said in some
of his speech: praise to Allah who showed the truth and its people, and
nourished the prince of the believers Yazeed and his party, and killed
the liar, the son of the liar and his followers.  
While in that situation, \`Abdulláh ben \`Afeef Al-Azdi stood up, and he
was one of the shiites and a great worshipper, and his left eye was gone
in the battle of Jamal \[battle of imam \`Ali and \`Á'ishah, the wife of
the prophet, after which, imam \`Ali won\], and his right eye was gone
at the day of <u>S</u>iffeen \[a battle of imam \`Ali and Mo\`áwiyah the
father of Yazeed, after which imam \`Ali won\], and he used to remain in
the great mosque and pray there until night time, so he said: O son of
Morjánah, verily the liar is you and your father, and the one who used
you and his father O enemy of Allah! Do you kill the children of the
prophets and talk with such a speech on the pulpits of the muslims??
Then Ibn Ziyád got angry and said: who is that talking to me? He
replied: I am the one who talks O enemy of Allah! Do you kill the
purified Household which Allah cleansed and made clean, and claim that
you are a muslim, Alas! Any helper! Where are the sons of Mohájireen and
An<u>s</u>ár? \[Mohájireen: immigrants from Mecca to Medina,
An<u>s</u>ár: inhabitants of Medina who nourished the prophet when he
immigrated\], they should take the revenge from you and from your
tyrant, the damned the son of the damned, who was damned by the prophet
Mo<u>h</u>ammed (PUH).  
He said (the narrator): the anger of Ibn Ziyád increased until his veins
blowed up and said: get him! And the soldiers came from all directions
to take him, but the nobles of the tribe of Azd of his cousins stood up
and freed him from the soldiers, and got him out from the mosque's door
and took him back to his house, and then Ibn Ziyád said: go to that
blind man, the blind man of Azd, may Allah make his heart blind as well,
and get him for me.  
So they went to him, and when Azd tribe knew about that they gathered
with the tribes of Yemen to protect their man, and Ibn Ziyád got the
tidings about that and he gathered the tribes of Modhar under
Mo<u>h</u>ammed ben Al-Ash\`ath, and he ordered him to fight the people,
and they fought against each other severely, until a group of Arabs got
killed, and the fellows of Ibn Ziyád reached the house of \`Abdulláh ben
\`Afeef, and they broke the door and got into the house, and his
daughter shouted: the people came from where you were afraid! He said:
don't be afraid, get me the sword, and so she did and he started to
defend himself. Then he daughter said: O father how I wish that I was a
man to fight before you against those wicked men, the killers of the
purified Household.  
The people started to rotate around him from all directions, while he
was defending himself, and no one could get him, and whenever they come
to him from one direction, she (his daughter) would say: O father
they're coming from that direction, until they out numbered him and
surrounded him, and his daughter then said: Alas! What humiliation! My
father is surrounded and he has no one to nourish him, so he started to
rotate his sword and say:

 I swear if my eyes only can see  
then you would have no way to me

And they kept on like that until they got him, and then he was carried
and got into the court of Ibn Ziyád, and when he saw him he said: praise
to Allah who disappointed you! \`Abdulláh ben \`Afeef said then: O enemy
of Allah by what did He disappoint me? Then Ibn Ziyád said: O enemy of
Allah, what do you say about \`Uthmán ben \`Affán \[3rd caliph\]? He
replied: O slave of Bani \`Iláj, O son of Morjánah, and he cursed him
and said: what is the matter between you and \`Uthmán?? whether he
sinned or made a favor, and whether he made good or bad, verily Allah is
the Carer for His creation, and He shall judge among them and \`Uthmán
with just and truth. But ask me about your father and you, and about
Yazeed and his father? Then Ibn Ziyád said: by Allah I shall not ask you
about anything else, and you shall taste death severely!  
Then, \`Abdulláh ben \`Afeef said: praise to Allah the God of the
creations, verily I was asking Allah to make me a martyr before your
mother delivered you, and I asked Allah to make that by the most evil
creature and the most behated one by Him, and when my sightness was
taken away I was despaired of being a martyr, and now - praise to Allah
- who made me have it after being despaired about it, and made me know
the answer of my old pray, so then Ibn Ziyád said: behead him, and so
they did and he was crucified in the moorland.  
The narrator said: and \`Ubaydilláh ben Ziyád wrote a letter to Yazeed
ben Mo\`áwiyah telling him about the killing of Al-<u>H</u>uysan (PUH)
with his Household, and when the letter reached Yazeed, he replied back
ordering him to bring the head of Al-<u>H</u>usayn and the heads of
those who got killed him with him, with the children and the women.  
Ibn Al-Jawzi \[a historian\] said: and the people toured them, and
whenever they would settle down in some place they would take the head
out from a chest that was made for it, and put it on a spear and guard
him all night until the time of moving, and then they return it back to
the chest and move, and they settled in some places, and in one of these
places there was an abbey with a monk, so they took the head from the
chest as usual and put it on a spear and got it guarded, and they
supported the spear with the abbey of the christian man, and when it was
midnight, the monk saw a light from the place of the head to the sky, so
he went to the people and said: who are you? They said: we are the
fellows of Ibn Ziyád, then he said: whose head is this? They replied:
this is the head of Al-<u>H</u>usayn ben \`Ali ben Abi <u>T</u>álib, the
son of Fatima the daughter of the prophet, he said: this is the head of
the son of the daughter of your own prophet?! They said: yes, he said:
evil people are you! If the Messiah had a son we would make our eyes a
home for him, and then he said: do you accept some deal? They said: and
what is that? He said: I have 10 thousands Dirham \[currency of that
time\], you shall take it and give me the head to be with me this night
and when you want to leave you shall take it back? They said: no harm
with that!  
So, they gave him the head and he gave them the money, and the monk took
the head and washed it and put perfumes on it and left it with him, and
put it on his thigh, and cried all night, and when the morning appeared,
he said: O head, I have nothing but myself, and verily I testify that
there is no other god but Allah, and your grandfather Mo<u>h</u>ammed is
the messenger of Allah, and I testify that I am one of your followers.
Then he left the abbey and worked on serving the Household (PUT).  
Then the people toured with the head of Al-<u>H</u>usayn and the heads
of his Household, with the prisoners of women and children, and when
they were close to Damascus, Um-Kalthoom got closer to Shimr who was
among them and said to him: I have a request for you!! He said: and what
is your request of daughter of \`Ali?? She said: if you got into the
town then take us in such a road that has less people, and tell them to
get the heads out and away from us, for verily we've been ashamed for
how much they looked at us and we are in such condition, so he ordered
to answer her request and to put the heads on the spears among the
prisoners as to oppose her request and he took a road with lot of people
until they reached the gate of Damascus, and then an old man came and
got closer to the women of Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) and said: praise be to
Allah who killed you and destroyed you and made a relief for the lands
from your men and helped the prince of the believers Yazeed against
you!  
Then \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn said: O old man, did you read Quran? He
replied: yes. Then he said: did you know this phrase "I ask of you no
fee therefor, save lovingkindness among kinsfolk"? The old man replied:
yes, I read that. Then \`Ali (PUH) said: then we are the kinsfolk O old
man. Then, did you read in chapter of Bani Israel \[The Israelites,
chapter 17 of Quran\] "Give the kinsman his due" ?? Then the old man
replied: yes I did read that. Then \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn said: then
verily we are the kinsmen O old man. Did you read "And know that
whatever ye take as spoils, lo! a fifth thereof is for Allah, and for
the messenger and for the kinsman..."? The man replied: yes. Then \`Ali
ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn said: we are the kinsmen. Did you read "Allah's
wish is but to remove uncleanness far from you, O Folk of the Household,
and cleanse you with a thorough cleansing"? The old man said: I read
that. Then \`Ali (PUH) said: we are the Household that was mentioned in
the phrase of purification. Then the old man remained regret for what he
said, and then looked at Zaynul-\`Abideen (\`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn)
and said: by Allah, you are them??  
The imam said: we are verily them with no doubt, by the rights of our
grandfather the messenger of Allah verily we are them, and then the old
man started to cry and he threw his turban away and raised his head to
the sky and said: Allahoma verily we make ourselves free from the enemy
of the Household of Mo<u>h</u>ammed, whether it was a human or Djinn.
Then he said: is there a way to repent? He (\`Ali) replied: yes, if you
repented, then Allah shall forgive you and you are with us! He said: I
am repenting. The tidings of the old man then reached Yazeed ben
Mo\`áwiyah, and he ordered for him to be killed.  
Sahl ben Sa\`d Al-Sá\`idi said: I was out for the holy house (in
Jerusalem) and when I reached the middle of Shám \[Damascus\], I found
out a city with rivers going through it and many trees and the curtains
were hanged and the people were happy and their women played the
tambourines and the drums. So I said to myself: there is no single
festival for the people of Damascus that we don't know. Then, I saw some
people talking to each other so I said: O people, do you have in
Damascus a festival that we don't know?? They replied: O old man, verily
we see you a nomad and a stranger (from here), so I said: I am Sahl ben
Sa\`d, and I've seen the prophet of Allah (PUH), they replied: O Sahl,
you don't wonder for the sky that it doesn't rain blood and the earth
doesn't sink with its people?!! I said: and why is that?! They replied:
this is the head of Al-<u>H</u>usayn, the Household of Mo<u>h</u>ammed
(PUH) is being driven from the lands of Iraq!! I said: Alas! what a
wonder! The head of Al-<u>H</u>usayn is being gifted and the people are
happy? I asked then: from what gate shall they pass? And they pointed
out to a gate that is called Bábul-Sá\`át \[The gate (door) of hours, so
called for the many hours that the Household spent there many hours to
get into the court of Yazeed\]. And in that situation, I saw the banners
follow each other, and then I saw a knight with a flag that has no top
and on the top of it was there a head that looked almost similar to the
face of the prophet of Allah (PUH). Then after that I saw women riding
camels with no saddles, so I got closer to one of their children and
said: O maid, who are you? She said: I am Sokaynah the daughter of
Al-<u>H</u>usayn. Then I said to her: do you need anything? I am Sahl
ben Sa\`d, one of those who saw your grandfather the prophet of Allah
(PUH) and heard his speech. She said: O Sahl, tell the carrier of the
head to put the head in front of us, so the people would get busy
looking at it instead of looking at the daughters of the prophet of
Allah (PUH).  
He said: then I got closer to the carrier and said to him: would you do
me a favor for 400 dinars? He said: and what is that? I said then: make
the head in front of the harem, and so he did and I paid him what I've
promised.  
Al-Zohari said: and when the heads arrived, and Yazeed at that time was
on a watch-tower over Jayroon, and he heard a crow's sound, and said to
himself:

When those carried ones appeared and raised  
those suns on the hills of Jayroon  
The crow cried so I said be right or not  
for verily I've got my debts from my opponent

Then, the Household of Al-<u>H</u>usayn and the women were entered to
the court of Yazeed ben Mo\`áwiyah and they were tied with robes, and
when they all got in there, and in that situation, \`Ali ben
Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) said: by Allah O Yazeed, what do you think the
prophet of Allah would say if he saw us in this situation?  
Then Yazeed ordered to cut off the robes and he asked for a file and
started to file the cuffs that were on the neck of imam Zaynul-\`Ábideen
\[\`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn\] (PUH).  
When they removed the cuffs from his neck, the blood gushed out from his
neck. Ibn Al-Atheer \[a historian\] said in his book Al-Kámil: and a
syrian man (who was in the court) looked at Fatima the daughter
Al-<u>H</u>uysan and said to Yazeed: give me this maid, and Fatima said
(later on): at that time I got shocked and I thought this is allowed for
them, and I took the clothes of my aunt Zaynab and said: Alas! my aunt!
I was made an orphan and now to be used?? Then Zaynab said: no, and this
wicked has no dignity. She knew that this will never happen, so she
looked to the syrian man and said: by Allah you've lied and been wicked,
and by Allah this is not to be for you or for him \[meaning Yazeed\].
Then Yazeed got angry and said: by Allah you've lied, I am able to do so
if I wanted to!!  
She said: no by Allah, Allah did not make that for you unless you've
been out from this religion, and then Yazeed got angry even more and
said: do you talk to me in that way? Verily who got out from this
religion is your father and your brother, and Zaynab said: by the
religion of Allah, and the religion of my father, and the religion of my
brother, you've been guided with your grandfather and your father, if
you were a muslim!!  
He said: you've lied O enemy of Allah, and she replied: you are a prince
that curse with unjust and succeed with your might, then as if he was
embarrased and went silent.  
Then the syrian man got back again to his request and Yazeed then said
to him: stop it, may Allah give you a mortal fate. Then the syrian man
asked: who is this maid? Yazeed said: this is Fatima the daughter of
Al-<u>H</u>uysan and that is Zaynab the daughter of \`Ali ben Abi
<u>T</u>álib (PUH). The syrian man then said: Al-<u>H</u>usayn the son
of Fatima? And \`Ali ben Abi <u>T</u>álib?!! He replied: yes, and then
the syrian man said: may Allah damn you O yazeed, do you kill the
Household of your prophet and imprison their children, by Allah I
thought they are from the romans, then Yazeed said: by Allah I shall
make you follow them, and then he ordered to behead him.  
Then Yazeed ordered to bring the head of Al-<u>H</u>usayn, and he put it
in front of him in a tub made of gold, and the women were behind him,
then Sokaynah and Fatima tried to get a sight of the head and Yazeed was
covering it away from them, and when they saw it they shouted out loud
and cried.  
Then Yazeed gave a general permission for the people to come into the
court, and Yazeed took his rod and started to hit the lips of
Al-<u>H</u>usayn and say: a day for the day of Badr, and then said:

Our people denied to be just with us  
so rods in our faith full of blood were just  
Courage of men that were mighty for us  
was shut off and they were the most unjust

Then, Ya<u>h</u>yá ben Al-<u>H</u>akam -the brother of Marwán- who was
sitting there said:

Verily, the head beside the river's bank is more close in relation  
rather than Ibn Ziyád, the slave of the dirty lineage  
Somayyah now is has a lineage in many numbers  
and today the Household of the Chosen has no lineage

Then Yazeed struck him on his chest and said: shut up, may you have no
mother.  
And as for Zaynab, when she saw the head of her brother, she took her
pocket and torn it and then called with a sad voice that shaked the
hearts: Alas! <u>H</u>usayn! O beloved of the prophet, O son of Mecca
and Miná \[a village around Mecca\], O son of Fatima Al-Zahrá'.  
Then Yazeed started to sing and say:

Wish if my ancestors in Badr testified  
the fear of Khazraj from the swords' beats  
Verily they would be glad and happy  
then say O Yazeed don't ever stop  
We've killed the bravest of their masters  
and made it equal to Badr's day and it was  
Verily I am not from the tribe of Khondof  
if I didn't take revenge from A<u>h</u>mad for what he did  
Háshim played with the throne and thus,  
no tidings were brought and nor inspiration  
\[A<u>h</u>mad is another version of Mo<u>h</u>ammed\]

And while he was singing this poem, suddenly the voice of Zaynab shocked
his hearings, for she didn't see anyone who would answer Yazeed ben
Mo\`áwiyah, so she stood up and said: praise to Allah the God of the
worlds, and blessings of Allah on His prophet and his Household. Truely
Allah had said: Then evil was the consequence to those who dealt in
evil, because they denied the revelations of Allah and made a mock of
them. O Yazeed, did you think, when you've turned the corners of the
earth and the horizons of the sky over us and made hostages driven like
the prisoners of war, did you think that we are behated by Allah and He
liked you, and that was for how dangerous you are in His eyes, so you
raised your nose and looked at the tip of your cloak (with pride) in
happiness, when you saw the life is assured for you and the matters are
done good for you, and when our fortune and might been away from your
way. Just wait, did you forget Allah's saying: And let not those who
disbelieve imagine that the rein We give them bodeth good unto their
souls. We only give them rein that they may grow in sinfulness. And
theirs will be a shameful doom. Is it fair O son of <u>T</u>olaqá'
\[<u>T</u>olaqá' : freed men, a group of men got captured in the day of
Badr and the prophet released them, and Yazeed's ancestors were among
them\], is it fair that you put your harem behind the veils while you
drive the daughters of the prophet like prisoners, and you've broken
their veils and showed their faces, and the enemies got them toured from
one town to another, and people talk about them, while their faces are
looked at by the near and the far, and the mean and the noble, with no
man from their household, and no protector. How it is possible to look
at him who chewed the livers of the faithful and his meat grown up with
the blood of the martyrs?  And how is it possible that he wouldn't hate
us severely, the Household, who looked at us with the eyes of envy and
hatred, and then you say as easy as it could be:

Verily they would be glad and happy  
then say O Yazeed don't ever stop

while you bend on the lips of Abá \`Abdilláh, the lord of youth of
paradise, and you hit it with your rod. How come you don't say that? And
you've severed the wound and knocked off the origins by shedding the
bloods of the Household of Mo<u>h</u>ammed (PUH), and the stars of
earth, from the Household of \`Abdul-Mo<u>tt</u>alib \[the grandfather
of the prophet\], and you call your ancestors as if you were calling
them, and verily you shall follow them soon, and then you will wish if
you've been paralyzed and muted, and never said what you've said and
never did what you've done. Allahoma, take our rights, and take revenge
from those who wronged us, and let Your wrath befall upon those who shed
our bloods and killed our protectors. By Allah, you've severed your skin
only, and you've cut your own meat, and you shall meet the prophet of
Allah (PUH) with what you've put on your back of the blood of his
Household and of what veils you've broken for his daughters, after Allah
gathers them all together and take their rights. Think not of those, who
are slain in the way of Allah, as dead. Nay, they are living. With their
Lord they have provision, and Allah is enough Judge, and Mo<u>h</u>ammed
(PUH) is enough for an opponent, and Gabriel is enough for being a
support, and he who advised you with evil and made you rule of the
muslims' necks how evil is to be for the wrong-doers and whoever shall
be in an evil place and with the weakest army. And though destiny made
me talk to you, verily I see you small in my eyes and not worthy even to
my rebuke, but the eyes are full of tears and the chests are full of
agony. Alas! What a wonder for killing the party of Allah the Chosen, by
the party of satan the free, and these are the hands, they are dropping
from our bloods, and these are the mouths, they are getting from our
meats, and these are the purified corpses, they are visited by the
wolves and hyenas, and if you stood against us you shall find us a
fierce enemy, at a time when you only see what you've done by your own
hands, and verily your God is not an unjust for His bondmen. Thus, to
Allah shall be the complaint, and He shall help. Then, trick your
tricks, and walk along your path, and do your best, by Allah you shall
never erase our mention, and never kill our inspiration, and never reach
our level, and its shame shall never leave you, and what is your opinion
but to doom? And what are your days but numbers? And what are your
gatherings (men) but to be separated? At the day when the caller shall
call and say: may the damnation of Allah befall upon the wrong-doers.
Then praise to Allah the Lord of the worlds who judged for our first
with happiness and forgiveness, and to our last with martyrdom and
mercy, and we shall ask Allah to complete their rewards and add more for
them, and make it easy for us verily He is Merciful and Beloved, and
Allah is our Judge and He is Dependable.  
Then Yazeed said:

O cry that praise the criers  
death is easy for the mourners

Then, a christian man who was a messenger from caesar to Yazeed looked
around and said: we have in some islands, the trace of the hoof of the
donkey that Jesus used to ride and we make pilgrimage there every year
from all around the lands and the vows are made there, and we glorify it
like you glorify your own books, and verily I testify that you are
wrong-doers.  
Then Yazeed got angry for this saying and ordered to kill him, so he
stood up and went to the head and kissed it and said the two testimonies
\[the two testimonies required to enter into Islam\].  
Then Yazeed took our the head from the court and hanged it on the gate
of the palace for 3 days, and when Hind bent \`Amr, Yazeed's wife, heard
about that, she went to him uncovering her head with bare feet and with
no veils, to the court of Yazeed, and she said: O Yazeed, the head of
the son of the daughter of the prophet is on our gate? Then Yazeed went
to her and covered her and said to her: O Hind, he is the scream of the
hashimites!! Ibn Ziyád just got him.  
Then Yazeed ben Mo\`áwiyah went to the mosque and ordered the preacher
to go up the pulpit and curse \`Ali and Al-<u>H</u>usayn while \`Ali ben
Al-<u>H</u>usayn was attendant, and the preacher did that, and then
\`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn: woe to you O preacher! you've bought the
satisfaction of the created with the wrath of the Creator, so prepare
your seat that is made of fire.  
Then, \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn said to Yazeed: do you allow me to go
up those sticks (the pulpit) and talk some words that gets the
satisfaction of Allah and for these people the rewards? But Yazeed
denied to allow him, and the people said then: allow him to go on the
pulpit so that we may hear something from him, and he replied: if he
went up there he wouldn't come down unless with my defame and the defame
of Abu-Sufyán's household!! They said: and what can this kid say? He
said: he is from a household that was given the wisdom!! But they
insisted and insisted until he allowed him to go up the pulpit, so then
he (\`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn) praised Allah and blessed the prophet of
Allah, and he said a speech that made the eyes go on with tears and
filled the hearts with fear, and he said: O people, I warn you against
this life and what is in it, for it is a vanishing place and a moving
one, that moves with its people from one situation to another. Verily,
the passing old centuries have vanished the old nations who were longer
in lives more than you and made more traces than you did; they were all
vanished by the hands of time, and conquered by the snakes and the
worms, all of them were destroyed by this life like if they were not its
people. The dust have eaten their meat, and removed their beauty and
wasted their organs and changed their colors, and they were grinded by
the hands of time. Do you wish to live after them? Allah forbids!!
Verily you shall follow them, so chase after what is left of your ages
with the good deeds, like I can see you moving from your palaces to your
graves filled with unhappiness, and how many by Allah there was a dead
man that got his regret in complete, when there is no help for those who
regret and those who wrong. They found what they did, and what they had
was presented, and what they did was in front of their eyes and your
Lord do not wrong anyone. They are verily in the homes of the
adversities sleeping, and in the camps of the deads are laying, and
waiting for the cry of the judgement day, and the falling of the great
events day "that He may reward those who do evil with that which they
have done, and reward those who do good with goodness."  
Then he said: O people, we are given six and preferred by seven: we are
given the wisdom and clemency and forgiveness and eloquence and bravery
and the love in the hearts of the believers. And we are preferred by:
from us the prophet of Allah, and from us the Righteous \[imam \`Ali\]
and Al-<u>T</u>ayyár \[<u>T</u>ayyár: the flying man, a title for
Ja\`far the brother of imam \`Ali, because he lost his both hands in
war\], and from us the lion of Allah and His prophet \[<u>H</u>amzah the
prophet's uncle\], and from us the two septs of this nation \[the
grandsons of the prophet\], and from us shall be the Guider of this
nation \[imam Al-Mahdi, the last imam for twelvers shiites\].  
Who knew me then he knew me, and who did not know me then I shall tell
him my lineage and ancestry: O people, I am the son of Mecca and Miná, I
am the son of Zamzam and <u>S</u>afá \[Zamzam is a spring in Mecca and
<u>S</u>afá is a mountain there\], I am the son of him who took the
Zakat by the edges of his cloak, I am the son of the best man who wore
clothes, I am the son of the best man who wore sandals and walked with
bare feet, I am the son of the best man who toured and walked (in
pilgrimage), I am the son of the best man who did pilgrimage, I am the
son of him who was carried by Al-Boráq in the air \[Al-Boráq: a creature
that carried the prophet in his ascending to heavens\], I am the son of
him who was carried by night from the Holy Mosque (Mecca) to the
Aq<u>s</u>á mosque (Jerusalem), I am the son of him who Gabriel carried
him to lote-tree of the utmost boundary, I am the son of him who drew
nigh and came down till he was (distant) two bows' length or even
nearer, I am the son of him who prayed with the angels of heaven two
bows, I am the son of him who got the inspiration of The Glorified, I am
the son of Mo<u>h</u>ammed the Chosen.  
I am the son of \`Ali Al-Mortadhá, I am the son of him who struck the
noses of the creations until they said no other god save but Allah, I am
the son of him who struck with two swords before the prophet of Allah,
and stabbed with two spears, and immigrated the two immigrations, and
sworn fealty for two times, and fought in Badr and <u>H</u>unayn, and
never disbelieved in Allah for a blink of an eye.  
I am the son of the best of the faithful men, and the heir of the
prophets, and the fighter of the disbelievers, and the bee of the
believers, and the light of the Mojáhideen (fighters), and the crown of
the criers and the best of the worshippers and the most patient one, and
the best of prayers from the Household of <u>T</u>áhá and Y<u>a</u>seen,
that is the prophet of the Lord of the worlds.  
I am the son of him who is supported by Gabriel, that is nourished by
Michael, I am the son of him the protector of the muslims, and the
killer of the heretics and those who break the oaths and the unjust, and
the fighter for those who took his rights by force, and the most proud
one who walked from the whole of Qoraysh, and the first one to answer
Allah and His prophet from the believers, and the first one (in
worshipping), and the breaker of the aggressors, and the terminator of
the disbelievers, and the arrow of Allah against the hypocrites, and the
tongue of wisdom of the worshippers, and the nourisher of the religion
of Allah and the viceroy of the commands of Allah, and the garden of
wisdom of Allah and the holder of His sciences (wisdoms).  
Forgiver and with bright face, gatherer of goodness and purified, mighty
and satisfied, brave with courage, patient and fasting, the cutter of
the lineages and the terminator of the parties (of the disbelievers).  
The most brave, and with the firmest feet, and with the strongest will
and with the hardest power, a brave lion, that grinds them in the war
when the swords are raised and the reins are close, a grinding like the
stone mill and threw them away like the winds do to the grains, the lion
of <u>H</u>ijáz, and the ram of Iraq.  
From Mecca and Medina, fought in Badr and U<u>h</u>ud, an immigrant (to
Medina), from Arabs he is their master and in the war he is the lion,
and the father of the two septs (grandsons), Al-<u>H</u>asan and
Al-<u>H</u>usayn, that is my grandfather \`Ali ben Abi <u>T</u>álib.  
Then he said: I am the son of Fatima Al-Zahrá', I am the son of the lady
of the women, I am the son of Khadeejah Al-Kobrá \[the prophet's
wife\].  
I am the son of him who was killed with unjust  
I am the son of him whose head was cut from its back  
I am the son of him who died of thirst  
I am the son of him who was laid down in Karbala  
I am the son of him whose cloak and turban were stolen  
I am the son of him whom the angels of heaven cried upon  
I am the son of him whom the djinn cried upon on earth and the birds as
well in air  
I am the son of him whose head is presented on the tops of spears  
I am the son of him whose harem are toured from Iraq to Damascus  
So he kept saying I am, I am, until the people went on crying and
weeping and Yazeed afraid that will lead to riot so he ordered the
caller for the prayer to call. Thus, when the caller said: Allahu Akbar
\[Allah is Greater\], \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn said: nothing is
greater than Allah, you've made great a Great One who is not to be
measured. When the caller said: Ash-hado an lá iláha illá Allah \[verily
I testify there is no other god but Allah\], \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn
then said: my hair and my skin and my bones and meat and my blood all
testified with it. When the caller said: Ash-hado anna Mo<u>h</u>ammadan
rasool Allah \[verily I testify that Mo<u>h</u>ammed is the prophet of
Allah\], here he looked from the pulpit to Yazeed and said: this
Mo<u>h</u>ammed, is he my or your grandfather O Yazeed? If you claimed
he is your grandfather then verily you've lied, and if you said he is my
grandfather then why did you kill his Household?  
Then Zaynul-\`Ábideen got down from the pulpit, and all of those who
were in the mosque departed and gathered around Zaynul-\`Ábideen.  
Then, when Yazeed got afraid of the riot and the reversal of the matter,
he ordered to fasten the exit of imam Zaynul-\`Ábideen and the children
from Damascus to their homeland and did what they wanted, and ordered
Al-No\`mán ben Basheer and other folks to go along with them to Medina
with easiness.  
When Zaynul-\`Ábideen knew about the acceptance of Yazeed, he asked from
Yazeed to give him back all of the heads to bury them in their own
places, and Yazeed didn't dare to refuse, so he gave him back the head
of Al-<u>H</u>usayn with the rest of the heads of his Household and
companions, and he buried them with the bodies (as it is mentioned in
the book of <u>H</u>abeeb Al-Siyar).  
The narrator said: and when they went out of Damascus to Medina, they
made their way passing through the lands of Iraq, and when they got
closer, they said to the guide: pass us through to the land of
Karbala.  
When they reached the location, they found Jábir ben \`Abdulláh
Al-An<u>s</u>ári and some folk from the hashimite, and some men from the
Household of the prophet and they all came to visit the grave of
Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH), and they all came at one time and the met each
other the cries and weeping and slapping the faces and they made a
mourning for some days.  
As reported from \`A<u>t</u>iyyah Al-\`Oofi that he said: I went out
with Jábir ben \`Abdulláh Al-An<u>s</u>ári to visit the grave of
Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH), and when we arrived at Karbala, Jábir went to
the bank of Al-Forát and made a wash and then wear a cloth around his
waist, and wore another cloth, and then opened a pocket with some
perfume and got some of it on his body, and then he walked to the holy
grave with bare feet, and didn't step one step without mentioning the
name of Allah, and when he reached the grave he said: make me touch it
\[he was a blind man\]. \`A<u>t</u>iyyah said: then I made him touch the
grave, and then he fell down on the grave and went in a coma, so I
sprankled some water on him, and when he woke up, he said: O
<u>H</u>usayn -three times- and then said: a beloved one that doesn't
answer his lover!! Then he said: and how shall you answer?? With your
blood of the neck dropping down on your back, and your head was
separated from your body. Verily I testify that you are the son of the
best of the prophets, and the son of the master of viceroys, and the son
of him who is the ally to faithfulness and the son of the guidance, and
the fifth of the people of the cover (cloak) \[the story of the cover, a
story in which the prophet Mo<u>h</u>ammed gathered his daughter and
\`Ali and their sons under one cloak and he was one of them and the
prophet prayed for them\], and the son of the master of the virtuous and
the son of Fatima the lady of the women.  
Why you shouldn't be like this? While you were feeded by the master of
the prophets and grown in the laps of the virtuous, and sucked from the
breast of faith, and weaned by Islam.  
So, purified you are alive and purified you are in death, but the hearts
of the believers are not good about your death, and not doubtful about
your living. Thus, may the peace of Allah and His blessings be upon you,
and I testify that you've gone on the path of your brother, Ya<u>h</u>yá
ben Zakariyyá \[John the son of Zachary, Zacharias\].  
Then he looked around the grave and said: peace upon you O souls that
gathered around Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) and settled in his place. Verily
I testify that you've done the prayers, and gave the Zakat, and ordered
with goodness and prohibited the evil (deeds) and fought against the
disbelievers and worshipped Allah until the truth had been showed for
you. By Him who sent Mo<u>h</u>ammed (PUH) with the truth, we've been
with you in what you've been through.  
\`A<u>t</u>iyyah said: then I said to Jábir: and how is that? and we
didn't go into a single valley, and didn't go on the top of a single
mountain, and we didn't hit with a single sword, and the people had
their heads separated from their bodies and the children were made
orphans and their wives were made widows?? Then he said to me: O
\`A<u>t</u>iyyah, I've heard my beloved the prophet of Allah (PUH)
saying once: he who loved some people he shall be gathered with them,
and he who loved the deeds of some people he shall be gathered with
them. By Him who sent Mo<u>h</u>ammed (PUH) with the truth, my will and
the wills of my companions was to go after what Al-<u>H</u>usayn was
after with his companions.  
\`A<u>t</u>iyyah said: and while we were talking in that situation, we
saw blackness that arrived at us from the direction of Damascus, and
then I said: O Jábir, I see a great blackness that is coming to us from
Damascus, then Jábir looked to his slave and said to him: go and see
what is this blackness? If they were the fellows of \`Ubaydilláh ben
Ziyád then get back to us so that we may find a shelter, and if that was
my lord and master Zaynul-\`Ábideen then you are free for the sake of
Allah.  
Then the slave went and came back in a hurry and slapping his slave and
say: stand up O Jábir and receive the harem of the prophet of Allah,
this is my master and my lord \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) had
arrived with his aunts and his sisters, then Jábir stood up and walked
with bare feet and uncovering his head and got closer to
Zaynul-\`Ábideen, and the imam said: are you Jábir? He replied: yes, O
son of the prophet of Allah. Then he said: O Jábir, verily here our men
were killed, and our children were slain, and our women were taken
prisoners and our tents were burnt. And like I can hear Zaynab saying:

O settlers in Karbala do you have the tidings  
about our dead people and what are their banners  
What is the condition of a corpse of a dead man in your lands  
that remained for three days with no single visitor  
By Allah have you buried it in the ground  
and did its remains got into the grave?

Then she went to the grave of her brother Abá \`Abdilláh
Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) weeping and crying, while the daughters of the
prophet were moving from the grave of Abá \`Abdilláh to the grave of
Abul-Fadhl Al-\`Abbás (PUH).  
Then the household remained for 3 days in the land Karbala, and after
that they headed to Medina. And when they got closer to Medina, they
settled down there and imam Zaynul-\`Ábideen looked at Bishr ben
<u>H</u>aðlam and said to him: O Bishr, may Allah have mercy upon your
father, verily he was a poet, so are you able to say some? He replied:
yes O son of the prophet of Allah, I am verily a poet, and he (PUH)
said: then go to Medina and mourn Abá \`Abdilláh Al-<u>H</u>usayn.  
Bishr said: then I tode my horse, and ran until I got into Medina, and
when I reached the mosque of the prophet of Allah, I raised my voice
with weeping and said:

O people of Yathrib \[Medina\] no settling for you in it  
Al-<u>H</u>usayn had been killed so cry in abundance  
The body is in Karbala covered with blood  
and his head on the spears go on circles

Then I said: O people of Medina, this is \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn with
his aunts and sisters got into your vicinity and settled down in your
space and I am his messenger to you to let you know his place.  
He (Bishr) said: and no single noble woman stayed in her home, and all
of them went out slapping their faces and praying for the punishment,
and I've seen criers as much as it was in that day, and no bitter day
more than that day after the death of the prophet (PUH), and I heard a
maid crying for Al-<u>H</u>usayn and say:

Mourner mourned my master and hurt me  
and made me sick a moruner who mourned him and shocked me  
Thus, my eyes, cry a lot and pour the tears  
and be generous with the tears after your tears altogether  
Over the son of the prophet of Allah and the son of his viceroy  
though even he is far in lands that are far away from us

Then she said: O mourner, you've renewed our sadness about Abá
\`Abdilláh (PUH) and hurt our wounds that were never healed, so who are
you may Allah have mercy upon you, so I said: I am Bishr ben
<u>H</u>alðam, came from my lord \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) and he
settled down in that location, with the children of Abá \`Abdilláh
Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH) and his women. He continued: then they left me
and went to meet him so I struck my horse to get back to them, and I've
found the people taken seats along the roads and the streets, so I got
down from my horse and passed through the necks of people until I got
closer to the tent and \`Ali ben Al-<u>H</u>usayn was inside, then he
went out holding a kerchief wiping his tears, and behind him was his
servant with a chair. So, he put it down for him, and he sat down and
couldn't hold his tears, and the people raised their voices with tears
and cries and gave solace from every corner, and that spot got condensed
with the noise, and then he signed with his hand to let them go silence,
and so they did, then he said: Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds,
Master of the Day of Judgment, the Initiator of the whole creations, who
got far and raised up in high heavens, and got closer and knew the
secrets, we shall praise Him for the great adversities and the troubles
of time, and pains of disasters and for the bitterness of matters and
the greatness of the troubles. O people, verily Allah had -and praise to
Him- tested us with great troubles, and a hole in Islam that is great,
Abá \`Abdilláh was killed with his Household, and his women were
imprisoned with his children, and his head was toured around the lands
over the pikes, and this is the trouble that nothing is like it. O
people, who of your men will be glad after killing him, or what heart
shall not be sad for him, or what eye shall keep the tear from falling??
Verily, the seven heavens cried for his death, and seas cried with its
waves, and the heavens with its corners, and the earth with its lands,
and the trees with its branches, and the whales in the depth of the sea,
and the closer angels, and the rest of the folks of heavens. O people,
what heart wouldn't be broken for his death? Or what heart doesn't miss
him, or what hearing that doesn't go deaf after hearing about such hole
in Islam? O people, we've became banished and scattered in all lands
like the children of turks or Kabul, for no crime we did, and no mistake
we committed and no change in laws of Islam we did, and we've never
heard about such a thing amont our ancestors, verily this is only an
innovation. By Allah, if the prophet of Allah (PUH) went to fight them
as much as he advised them about us, they wouldn't do much more than
this. Verily we are to Allah and we shall be back to Him. What a great
adversity, and what painful one is it, and what a horrible one is it,
and we shall depend on Allah for what befell us, verily He is Great and
a revenge Taker.  
Then Zaynul-\`Abideen went to Medina and found it like ghosts town and
its people mourning, and found the houses of his family empty, and
mourning about its inhabitants.  
As for the daughters of the prophet (PUH), they went to the house of Abá
\`Abdilláh Al-<u>H</u>usayn (PUH). Then Um-Kalthoom called and said:

City of our grandfather don't accept us  
verily we came with sadness and losses  
We've been out from you in numbers  
and came back with no men or sons
