[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](qm01)  [Next](qm03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1602062145/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I630CY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Quimby Manuscripts*, Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, ed. by Horatio W.
Dresser \[1921\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

### Editor's Preface to the Second Edition

FOR many years a mass of documents of interest to Christian Scientists
and to their critics as well, has been withheld from publication,
although earnestly sought. These documents were written by Dr. P. P.
Quimby, of Portland, Maine, and contain his views regarding mental and
spiritual healing. They became familiar to Mrs. Mary Baker Eddy when she
visited Dr. Quimby as a patient, and it has been charged by her critics
that many of the ideas later promulgated in her teachings were born of
the Quimby theories.

In order to set this controversy at rest, many attempts have been made
to gain access to the Quimby manuscripts, but heretofore without success
except in piecemeal or disjointed form. The present editor, however, has
been fortunate in securing from Mrs. George A. Quimby, owner of the
manuscripts, permission to print the documents in full. Many of them now
see the light of the printed page for the first time. Others give a full
and authentic version of material from which only short extracts have
previously appeared.

The editor's point of view is that of the expositor, never critical save
as the author of the manuscripts might have criticized his own work. All
subject-matter in brackets is by the editor, also all footnotes. Italics
and quotation-marks have been introduced to a slight extent. Scriptural
quotations have not been corrected, because Dr. Quimby was in the habit
of paraphrasing in order to show how he interpreted the Bible. Some of
the articles have been condensed to avoid repetition, but no material
changes have been made. The terms Science, Truth, Wisdom, have been
capitalized throughout in conformity with the usage in some of the
articles in which these words are synonyms for Christ, or God. The same
is true of the general terms for Quimby's theory, the Science of Health,
the Science of Life and Happiness. The term Christian Science is used
with reference to the growth of the original teaching of Jesus.

In this edition several errors have been corrected and Chapter twelve
has been re-written.

<span class="small">H. W. DRESSER</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](qm03)
