[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](qm11)  [Next](qm13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1602062145/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I630CY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Quimby Manuscripts*, Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, ed. by Horatio W.
Dresser \[1921\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

### 9

### Letters from Patients

NORTH VASSALBORO, May, 26th, 1850.

*Dr. P. P. Quimby*,

DEAR SIR: I shall address you as the good Samaritan who came along and
took me by the hand and opened my understanding, and took my disease
from me in so remarkable a manner that I can say, Blessed be the name of
the Lord for raising up such a servant as you are. It seems to me as
though you took my disease, for it has never returned. But still I have
many bad feelings to contend with, even to wrestling all day to the
going down of the sun. I am still able to come out victorious over all
bad feelings, for my health has been improving ever since you came to
our house. I am now ten times as well as any living man could have
supposed. I am able to walk over a mile a day without much
inconvenience. \[I have\] only to think for a moment of the good
Samaritan taking me by the hand and putting me on the road to health. .
.. Only to think of my being almost four years a bed-keeper and now so
well! Why, it is nothing short of a miracle. You can imagine how I am
enjoying everything, sun, moon, earth, every living thing, never looked
so grand, so beautiful or sublime. . . .

Your fame is still sounding as on the wings of the wind. Many
questioners are asking about you. . . . I am saying it is the only true
way whereby man can be healed. I am daily preaching your doctrines to
the children of men. . . . I hope by strict attention to your rules to
remain well. \[The letter concludes with references to sick people in
the neighborhood who need Quimby's treatment. The writer describes the
maladies he labored under for years and the difficulties he encountered
in travelling about and overworking. His statements indicate that he is
a man well along in years, and that he has now taken a new start in
life, with the realization that he is in possession of an intelligible
principle to live by.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

Quimby early began the practice of treating silently at a distance. The
following extract is with regard to a woman who was clairvoyant enough
to see Quimby in the case of one of his mental visits.\]

Last Friday evening, Oct. 3rd, between 7 and 10 o'clock, mother and a
niece of hers, who is here on a visit, were sitting together talking,
and this lady says she saw you standing by mother, about to lay your
hand on her head. Just at that moment mother left the room, before her
friend had told her what she saw, so your visit was interrupted. What
was quite strange was that this lady described some of your
characteristics, in looks and appearance, very accurately, although you
have never been described to her. Mother wishes to know if you were
really here in spirit at that time.

\[Fortunately, a letter was preserved in which Quimby, under date of
Oct. 3rd, wrote to the patient in question that he would visit her on
that day, the day he was seen by the stranger. This letter was not sent
and the patient did not therefore know that Mr. Quimby expected to visit
her in spirit at that time. But it is evidence that the visit was real
on Quimby's part, and that it coincided with the time his presence was
perceived by the stranger. In a letter written five days later,
responding to the above, Quimby makes another appointment, adding, "If
that lady is still with you, I will try to make myself appear to her
eyes next Sunday, between 7 and 8 o'clock." This was in the days when it
was still important to prove beyond all doubt that a person's presence
could actually be perceived in this way, at an appointed time. Some
would regard the instance in which Quimby was seen by a stranger without
prearrangement as more significant than in the case of his plan to make
himself "seen" at an appointed time.

The impression produced by some of Quimby's more remarkable cures is
indicated by a letter dated, Exeter, Feb. 18, 1858, in which the writer,
David Barker, speaks of the case of a Mrs. Crane, who is described as
"perfectly happy and free from all pain and care." The writer goes on to
say that the house is thronged by people anxious to witness a miracle,
for a greater miracle was never performed since Christ raised Lazarus."
A few days later, writing to Dr. Quimby, Mr. Barker says:\]

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

Whether by accident or not, you performed as great a miracle in my
mother's case as in Mrs. Crane's. You will remember stopping there with
my brother two weeks ago to-morrow night and examining her ankle, which
was so badly broken eleven years ago. She has only stepped on her toes
since, and that with the aid of crutches. Her foot was nearly straight
on a line with her ankle. Immediately after you left she found that the
contracted cords in her foot were all relaxed, and that she could put
her foot square upon the floor and walk well without the aid of crutch
or cane. She was at my house to-day, and although nearly seventy years
old she convinced me that you had given her the use of her foot by
dancing a regular "pigeon's wing." The whole country is crazy to have
you visit us again.

\[Several letters were written to substantiate the case of Maria Towne,
of Lancaster, N. H. The first is from her father and bears the date of
March 18th, 1860:\]

My daughter was attacked with lameness and unable to walk, nine years
last December. The physicians called it a disease of the hip, and
treated her for the same. She partially recovered in six months. In ten
or twelve months she appeared to be quite firm. Five years last
September she had another attack in the hips and limbs that has given
her severe pain up to this time, and baffled the skill of our
physicians. . .. She has constantly been under the care of the best
medical aid.

Last August she was attacked with a weakness in the eyes, and unable to
see; had been kept in a dark room since the twenty-fifth of August. She
has subsisted for the last six months on the value of from four to two
teacups full of milk in twenty-four hours. She has not walked any for
the last five and a half years, with the exception of a few steps five
years ago this winter.

Through the solicitation of a friend, we sent for Dr. P. P. Quimby of
Portland, who came to her Saturday evening, March 17, at 9 o'clock. The
next day at one P. M., she got up from her chair alone and walked ten
feet without assistance. She can now bear some light in the room, and
begins to see quite well. She walked from her room to the dining-room
with very little help this evening, to tea, and ate quite a hearty meal
without causing her any pain.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

\[The second letter, signed Harriet F. Towne, is apparently from the
mother, and is dated March 21, 1860.\]

*Dr. Quimby:*

Thinking you would like to hear from Maria by this time, I hasten to
inform you that she is in fine spirits, can have a little more light in
the room; but cannot hold her eyes open any longer than when you were
here. . . . .She is all courage and walks a little every day, and enjoys
her food very much. Maria wants to hear from you soon. Please write if
that lady in Wayne walked last Monday, and if you come here often. Maria
imagines you do. <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28)

\[The third letter is from the father, under date of April 1, 1860:\]

*Dr. Quimby*,

Dear Sir: Maria gains strength a little every day. She has gained in one
week ending last Thursday two and a half pounds in weight. She walks
across the room six or eight times in a day with a little help. Her
appetite is good. Her eyes grow stronger, she can have considerable
light in the room. . . . There are several here that are anxious for you
to see them. One man that is very much troubled with the phthsic wanted
me to ask if you had any control over that disease. . . .

\[Then follows a letter from the patient herself who, after a visit to
Dr. Quimby in Portland, writes concerning the one trouble now remaining,
her eye-trouble, which she says is extremely obstinate. She finds that
the eyes are better only when she is under Quimby's direct influence.
Feeling entirely dependent upon her restorer for health and happiness,
she is eager for more help from him. It was Quimby's endeavor to put his
patients in possession of the healing principle so that they would not
depend upon the "influence" they felt while sitting by him or receiving
absent help; but

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

this was a question of time, especially in the case of trouble with the
eyes.

A patient who had been restored to health in a remarkably short time
after years of invalidism in which she had been unable to Walk, writes
as follows after returning from Portland:\]

HILL, N. H., Oct. 27, 1860.

*My dear Doctor:*

How I *do* want to see you. I am *well* and happy. You can't imagine how
the people *stare* at me here at the Water Cure. Dr. Vail thinks he will
come and see you. I talk as much of your Science to him as I know how
to. I wish I *knew more*. I want you to prove to me mind is matter, so I
can to them. . .  <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) I went to see one
of the old-school doctors. He is coming to see you and see if he can
learn your way. He . . . greatly rejoices with me. . . . I can't make
the religious part go. I can't understand it. It doesn't seem to suit
me. I go to church, though the preaching does not always suit me, to
prayer meetings, and I pray as I used to. What do you think of me? <span
id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30)

My uncle and brother, doctors in Lowell, were so anxious and had so many
fears for me that I had to get out on the street soon as I could and go
off on a walk four miles long. I went just as fast as I could, some of
the time running, until all the *fears* were gone. They make my back
feel strangely (the fears), and I can't seem to sit as erect.

I will send all I can to you. I will start some from this vicinity. I am
a *great sight* to the people. . . . There are many more people ready to
receive this theory than I had supposed. My uncle and brother did not
seem to get any clue to it, and said they did not know what to think of
it. . . .

It does seem *good* to walk, and my heart is *full of gratitude to you
and God*. I am *so glad* I went to see you. I can't express it.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

\[Nearly a year later, writing from Wilmington, Ills. this patient
expresses the thought that her restorer has helped her since she left
home, although she has had little to meet save homesickness. She says in
part:\]

I wish you would take away that longing for the East, at those times
when I feel I would give *all* to see Dr. Quimby. I try to think you are
not far away. I like to think of that place by you which is *mine*. I
laugh over the "sittings" I had with you, don't you? when I think how
dreadfully distressed I was lest you were wanting to cast me out of the
way to give room for new friends. How funny that you should know how I
felt all the while. How you can understand the feelings *hidden within*
others are entirely ignorant of, appears to me quite mysterious. When I
consider what you have done for me and others, and that you are
continually doing greater and greater cures, I conclude I cannot tell
what may *not* be done, and that you possess a knowledge far superior to
any other person I have known or heard of. I am *glad* I ever came to
you, almost glad I was sick to need your assistance, that I might know
and *feel* these things. When one is raised from a long illness to
perfect health, as it were instantly, do you not realize what a healthy
person cannot? Would they want to help feeling *glad*, and that the man
who did such a *splendid* thing for them was the *nicest*, *best* man in
the world?

It does me good to know the Science is being appreciated, that you are
successful. . . . I want to know if a knowledge of mind acting on mind
will enable one to control an ungovernable child without using any means
of punishment, and what you do in the next world with profane, drunken,
stealing, murdering men—people commonly sent into eternal punishment?

I wish I could tell you how I feel. But it is the same as when I sat
with you: an undefinable longing for something.

\[Another letter of the same year begins by raising a problem:\]

I wonder if everything that occurs through life that makes me *sad* has
got to make me sick. Can't you tell me something about it, and give me
some good fatherly advice? Something quite unpleasant has occurred since
I was in

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Chicago that gave
me a great deal of trouble night and day, and I find myself out of fix.
. . .

Doctor, I often get your picture and I imagine I have regular sittings
with you. They do me good, I do believe. But the picture is not equal to
the live man. . .. You know the gratitude of my heart better than I can
express it.

\[Other letters written from time to time indicate that the cure was
permanent, although there are slight matters requiring her healer's
advice. Writing from her old New England home four years after she was
cured, Miss X. says that everybody remarks how strange it is that she is
so well. She also says:\]

I have never lost a moment from sickness since I have been in school,
nearly two years. I. walk six and eight miles in a day, very often.. I
feel so thankful I am well. If it had not been for you \~I would have
been in my grave or much worse off long before now. I cannot tell you,
Dr. Quimby, how much I think of you, and love you for what you have done
for me. . .. When I went to school in Chicago my friends said in less
than three months I should be sick. I wrote you and you said you would
not let me, and I have not been. Now I want that knee of mine cured up.
. . . <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31)

\[Another series of letters, dating from 1860 to December 25, 1864,
begins with the description of the patient's case, a fibrous tumor about
to be operated upon and other conditions as diagnosed by competent
physicians, and traces the results from time to time, as the patient
reports her progress. She, too, experiences difficulty in avoiding the
recurrence of old symptoms, for her case was well known, the doctors are
sceptical, sometimes angry, and she must maintain her faith against
opposition. At times she can hardly call herself well, and so writes to
Dr. Quimby to express her difficulties and receive his advice or help.
The following letter is typical of those written to express gratitude:\]

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

PLYMOUTH, Oct. 17th, 1858.

*Dr. Quimby*,

MY PRESERVER AND FRIEND: With feelings of gratitude and kind respect, I
will write you, and inform you that I am able to walk as well as ever I
could, a pleasure which I could not have enjoyed had it not been through
your unceasing and untiring care and treatment. Words will not express
my thankfulness to you, kind Dr., for the pleasures I am permitted to
enjoy. When I contemplate my past helplessness, and know that to you I
am indebted for all I do now enjoy, my heart is ready to burst in
gratefulness.

I continue to improve in walking day by day, as you told me \[I would\],
and now I can run up and down stairs (not as fast as you can, because
you are so spry) but as well as most any one else. My friends receive me
with wonder depicted upon their countenances, I assure you, to see me
walking all by myself, was a joy to them indescribable, and believe me
their whole tribute of praise is tendered to you.

With all love and respect, I remain,

Your young friend, E. C.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[112:1](qm12.htm#fr_28) The "lady in Wayne" was
one whom Quimby treated absently while in Lancaster attending Miss
Towne. Such cases were interesting to patients as well as to onlookers,
because they gave evidence of the great healer's power to make himself
felt at a distance, and this was a new phenomenon in those days.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[113:1](qm12.htm#fr_29) That is, prove that mind
is susceptible to opinions, leading to changes in the body, as Quimby
explains in his writings.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[113:2](qm12.htm#fr_30) This is typical of
people who tried to return to their old ways after coming in touch with
Quimby and sensing his religious spirit. Quimby's emphasis was on good
works, not on doctrine, and he directed attention to the Divine presence
with all men as guiding Wisdom.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[115:1](qm12.htm#fr_31) These letters indicate
that the chief difficulty encountered by former patients who depended
solely on the new Science was in avoiding old fears and other mental
associations readily called up when meeting sceptical friends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. Letters to Patients](qm13)
