[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](qm13)  [Next](qm15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1602062145/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002I630CY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Quimby Manuscripts*, Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, ed. by Horatio W.
Dresser \[1921\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

### 11

### Letters to Patients and Inquirers <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41.md)

PORTLAND, Dec. 7th, 1861.     

*Miss L*.

Your letter was safely received, but my engagements have been such. that
I have not had time to give my attention to your case until now.
Although we have lived side by side ever since we were children, we were
ignorant of that power or Science that is necessary to smooth our
ruffled path as we travel along the road to Wisdom, whence no child of
Science returns to his former home of ignorance and superstition, You
and I have a power called the inner man by the ignorant, but its true
name is Wisdom or progression. This is the child of God, and although at
first almost without an identity this little wisdom implanted in this
earthly man or idea is held in ignorance till some higher wisdom frees
it from its prison.

You remember when your little pupils would stand by your side looking up
to you for wisdom to satisfy their desires. You with your power like
Moses went before them leading them through the sea of ignorance, they
following your light as a pillar of fire, and in the clouds of darkness
your light sprang up. As you traveled along, they murmuring and
complaining, you like Moses fed them with the bread of Science and
eternal life. You smote the rock of wisdom that followed them and they
drank of the waters that came out of your teaching and this rock or
Wisdom was Christ. You have a Teacher as well as I that goes before us
teaching us Science. We become the child of the one we obey. You, like
Moses, held up the serpent of ignorance before your little pupils and
all who looked upon your explanation and understood were healed of their
disease or ignorance; but the murmuring of your pupils would make you
nervous and although you, like Moses on Mount Pisgah,

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

could see the promised land, your heart failed you and you sank down in
despair. In your discontented state of mind you call, as Job did, but no
answer returns from your comforters, your doctors or spiritual advisers,
who being blind guides find you . . . and fall upon you and rob you of
all your wisdom. So here you are a stranger among thieves, cast into
prison by the very ones you have always taken for your leaders on the
road to health; you are bound with bands, sick and with no hope of ever
being set at liberty.

Now your belief is like a bark and your wisdom attached to it, on the
water of this world, for water is an emblem of error, so that the
medical wisdom or ocean is where your bark seems to be moored. Here you
are tossed to and fro, sometimes expecting to be lost, while the winds
of spiritualism are whistling in your ear till they shake the bark to
which your wisdom is attached. So the heavens are dark and the light of
wisdom is extinguished in the opinions or waves of medical science.

As you are lying tossing to and fro you see me coming. When I say "me" I
mean Science in P. P. Q., not the P. P. Q. that you used to see, but
Wisdom in a body, not of flesh and blood, but a body such as Wisdom
gives it; for Wisdom gives to every one a body as it pleases and to
every science its own body. Your body or bark is of this world and your
wisdom is in it, and I have come through your wisdom to get you clear of
your enemies. So you may look out of the window of your bark while
reading this and you will see me coming on the water of your life saying
to spiritualism and the waves of the medical faculty. "Be still, and I
will come on board of your bark, \[quiet\] your fears and return you
once more to your own house whence you have been decoyed by these blind
guides."

As disease is in accordance with the laws of man, a penalty is attached
to every act so that every one found guilty must be punished by the law.
As you are accused of a great many transgressions your punishment is
greater than you can bear. So you sink under your trouble. I appear in
your behalf to have you tried by the laws of your own country, not by
the laws of these barbarians. So I will read over the indictment that
stands against you. Here it is: You are accused of dyspepsia, liver
complaint, nervousness, sleepless nights, weak stomach, palpitation,
neuralgia, rheumatism,

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

pains through your back and hips, lameness and soreness, want of action
in the stomach. What say you to this indictment: are you guilty or not
guilty? You say "guilty." But as I appear in your behalf I deny that you
are guilty of the evils which cause this punishment. I want you to have
a fair trail before the judge of truth, and if you have disobeyed any
law of God or Science you must answer to Science, not to man. I will
call on the hypocrite or doctor who goes around devouring widows'
houses, and for a few dollars has got the people into trouble from which
they cannot get out. He says you have all the above diseases.

On cross-examination when asked how he knows, his answer is \[that\] you
told him. This is all the proof that he or any other doctor can bring.
So by their false testimony you have been condemned for believing a lie,
that you might be sick. Now as your case is one of a thousand I have, I
have only to say a few words to your wisdom as judge. All disease is
only the effect of our belief. The belief is of man and as Science sees
through man's belief it destroys the belief and sets the soul or wisdom
free.

I will now sum up the evidence. You have listened to the opinions of the
doctors, who are blind guides crying peace, peace, till you have
embraced all their wisdom. This has produced a stagnation in your system
and what their ignorance has not done the spiritualists have tried to
do. So between them both you are a prisoner, and in the same state as
the people were in the days of Jesus when he said to them, "Beware of
the doctrines of the Scribes and Pharisees; for they say and do not,
they bind burdens on you that they cannot explain."

This keeps you nervous. So awake from your lethargy and come to the
light of Wisdom, that will teach you that man's happiness is in himself,
that his life is eternal, this life is Wisdom and as Wisdom is
progression, its enemy is ignorance. So seek Wisdom and believe no man's
opinion, for these opinions make you nervous. This causes a heat to go
to your head making your head feel heavy and producing a dullness over
your eyes. In fact \[this opinion\] causes all your bad feelings.

So if I can lift your wisdom above the error or mind then you will be
free. But now this nervous heat is all through

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

you and comes to the surface. When the cold strikes you it chills you.
This you take for a low state of the blood. But it is a stagnation of
your own self, not able to explain the phenomena that you are affected
by. As you read this it will excite you to understand it. This is like a
little leaven that is put into your bread or belief. It will work till
it affects the lump and causes you to feel as though you had a very bad
cold. Then it will work upon your system and affect your bowels.

Then you may know that your cure is at hand. So do not despair, only
remember the signs of the times and pray that your flight may not be in
the night nor on the Sabbath day when you are at meeting. So keep on the
lookout and I think you will be better. If so let me know. When you read
this letter I will be with you and you will not think it strange, for it
will produce some strange sensations, sometimes joy and sometimes grief.
But it is all for the best. So keep up good courage and I will lead you
through the dark valley of the shadow of death and land you safe in that
world of Science where disease never comes.

I will stop at this time. But remember as long as you read this and
drink in these words. For this is my \[wisdom\] and to drink it is to
understand. Do this in remembrance of me, not P. P. Q., but Science,
till your health comes. I will leave you now and come again and lead you
till you can go alone. If you will see fit to show this to Julia H.,
when you read it we shall all be together. You know what this Truth
says: that when two or three are gathered together in Science, Wisdom
will be there and bless and explain to them.

P. P. Q.

PORTLAND, December 16th, 1861.    

*Miss B:*

Yours of the 7th is received containing $2.00 as a fee for my services
on yourself. As you have shown a spirit of sympathy that I never have
received before, I certainly shall not prove myself one who will not
return to another as I would that another should do to me. So I receive
your two dollars sent in hope of a relief and return your money,
believing it came from one who is as ready to give as to receive. I
believe if two persons agree in one thing sincerely, independent of
self, it will be granted.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

I will now use my skill as far as I am able to correct your mind in
regard to your trouble. The heat you speak of is not a rush of blood to
the head but it is caused by a sensation on your mind like some trouble.
This causes a weakness at times at the pit of your stomach. The heat in
the second stomach causes a pressure on the aorta which makes the heart
beat very rapidly at times. This you take for palpitation and it causes
a flash or heat, which of course you take for a rush of blood to the
head. But it is not so; it is in the fluids. As the clouds in the skies
change when the wind blows, so the fluids under the skin change at every
excitement. The skin being transparent reveals the color; this annoys
you and the false idea that \[the cause\] is the blood that keeps up the
fire. Now just take into your mind the \[idea of the\] spine as a
combined lever of three parts, and you will see how to correct your
\[thought\] so as to ease the pressure. . . . Now imagine yourself
sitting in a chair with the lower lever or spine at right angles with
your limbs. This \[will\] relieve the stomach, take the pressure from
the aorta and put out the fire so there can be no heat. This will
produce a change in your feelings and the change is the cure.

If you will sit down on Sunday evening I will try to straighten you up
so as to relieve that feeling. \[When\] I succeed, if you feel that I am
entitled to anything in the shape of a gift, it will be received if ever
so trifling. Your sincerity towards me interests my sympathy in you, and
if I relieve you I shall be very glad. You have taken the way to make m6
try my best. This is true sympathy to sympathize with those who wake the
first sacrifice. It is of no consequence if it be one cent or one
hundred: the sacrifice is all. It shows your faith, and according to
your faith so shall your cure be. This being a new experiment, let me
know how I succeed and if I change your mind, the change is the cure. I
send you one of my circulars which will tell you more of my treatment.
It is easier to cure than to explain to a patient at a distance. But I
am sure of the principle and feel confident that I shall cure at a
distance. For distance is nothing but an error that truth will sometime
explode. If my faith and your hope mingle, the cure will be the result,
so I will give my attention to you as far as my faith goes and shall
like to hear how I succeed.

P. P. QUIMBY.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

*Miss B:*

Yours of the 7th is received and I am glad to learn that I have relieved
your mind by "my power," as you call it. But you misunderstand my power.
It is not power but Wisdom. If you knew as much as I do about yourself
you could feel another's feelings; but here is the trouble. What people
call "power" I call Wisdom. Now if my wisdom is more than yours then I
can help you, but this I must prove to you, and if I tell you about
yourself what you cannot tell me, then you must acknowledge that my
wisdom is superior to yours and become a pupil instead of a patient.

I will now sit down by you and tell your feelings. You may give your
attention to me by \[mentally\] giving me your hand. I will write down
the conversation that I hold with you while sitting by you. You have a
sort of dizzy feeling in your head and a pain in the back part of the
neck. This affects the front part of the head causing a heaviness over
the eyes. The lightness about the head causes it to incline forward,
bringing a pressure on your neck, just below the base of the brain, so
that you often find yourself throwing your head up, to ease that part of
the head. This makes it heavy so it bears on the shoulders, cramps the
neck, numbs the chest, so that you give way at the pit of the stomach
and feel as though you wanted something to hold you up. This cramps the
stomach, giving you a "gone feeling" at the pit of the stomach. Now
these symptoms taken of themselves are nothing. But you have had medical
advice, or have got from some one else an answer to all these feelings.
You are nervous. You think you have the heart complaint. Your blood
rushes to the head. . . . \[If\] all these symptoms together would not
make your face red, what would?

Listen to me and I will give an explanation of all the above feelings. I
must go back to the first cause, say some years ago. I will not
undertake to tell just the cause but I will give you an illustration.
Suppose I (the natural man) were sitting by you, and we were alone. If I
should go and fasten the door, and go towards you and attempt to seize
hold of you, and if you asked me what I intended to do and I should say,
"keep still, or I will blow your brains out," you would see that this
would frighten you. I think your heart would beat as fast as it ever
did. This explanation I do not say is true. For I suppose a case, \[but
a shock or\] start contracts the

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

stomach, the fright or excitement \[generates\] heat, \[and the
pressure\] sets your heart beating, and throws the heat to your head,
this heat tries to escape out of the nose causing a tickling in your
nose and. you often rub it because it itches and feels hot. It then
tries to escape through the passage to the ears making your cheeks red
and burn and causes a noise in your ears sometimes. This after a while
subsides, the stomach relaxes and the heat passes down from the stomach
into the bowels. . . .

Now follow the directions in the last letter and relieve the pressure on
the aorta. This will check the nervous heat and relieve the excitement
and then the heat will subside. The color is in the surface of the skin
and has nothing to do with any humor or disease: it is nothing but
excitement. As I told you in my last, I will be with you when you read
the letters and you will feel a warm sensation pass over you, like a
breath. This will open the pores of the skin and the heat will escape.

I send back the five dollars till the cure is performed. I don't like to
be outdone in generosity and I am willing to risk as much as any one in
such a cause as this. If I come off conqueror then it will be time
enough for you to offer up a sacrifice. Till then if I accept a gift it
is without an equivalent on my part. I feel as certain Of success as you
do, so I feel as though I run no risk. All I look for is the cure. You
ask if I give any medicine. The only medicine I ever give is my
explanation and that is the cure. In about a week let me know how the
medicine works. Hoping to hear good news when next I hear from you, I
remain,

Your friend,         

P. P. QUIMBY.     

PORTLAND, ME., Jan. 2nd, 1861.     

*To Mr. H:*

In response to your letter I must say, that it is out of my power to
visit your place in person at this time, from the fact that I have some
thirty or more patients here on my hands, but if there comes a slack
time I will come and let you know beforehand so you can meet me in
Bangor.

Now a word or two to your wife. I will try my best while sitting by you
while writing this letter to produce an effect on your stomach. I want
you to take a tumbler of pure water

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

while I write this and now and then take a little. I am with you now
seeing you. Do not be in a hurry when you read this, but be calm and you
will in a short time feel the heat start from your left side and run
down like water; then your head will be relieved and you will have an
inclination to rise. Be slow in your movements so that your head will
not swim round. I will take you by the hand at first and steady you till
you can walk alone. Now remember what I say to you. I am in this letter
and as often as you read this and listen to it you listen to me. So let
me know the effect one week from now. I will be with you every time you
read this. Take about one half hour to devote to reading and listening
to my counsel and I assure you you will be better. Now do not forget.

Yours, etc.,         

P. P. Q.     

PORTLAND, ME., Dec. 30, 1860.     

*To Mr. J:*

As your wife is about leaving for her home, I take this way of
expressing my ideas of the trouble she is laboring under, thinking you
would like my opinion of her case. I think her friends are not aware of
her true state. Hers is one of a very peculiar kind. She is not deaf in
the strict sense of the word, but her condition has been brought about
by trouble of long standing. When I say "trouble" I do not confine it to
any neglect on the part of her friends, but trouble when young which
made her nervous. This caused her to become low spirited till it has
changed her system so that she is not the same person she was twelve
years ago. I have given my attention to her general health, not to her
deafness; for I think if she should come right in her mental or physical
condition as she used to be, she would be well. You can see and judge of
her appearance and buoyancy of mind. . . .

P. P. QUIMBY.

PORTLAND, ME., December 27th, 1860.     

*To Miss G. F:*

Your letter was received, and now I sit down to use my power to affect
you. I will commence by telling you to sit upright and not give way at
the pit of the stomach. If I felt that you saw me as plainly while I am
talking to you as I see you, then there would be no use in writing; for
you are

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

as plain before my eyes as you were when I was talking to the shadow in
Portland. For the shadow came with the substance, and that which I am
talking to now is the substance. If I make an impression on it, it may
throw forth a shadow of a young lady upright without that "gone place"
at the pit of the stomach. . . . Remember that when I see you sitting or
standing in the position I saw you in at Portland I shall just
straighten you up. If you complain of the back, you may lay it to me and
I will be a little more gentle. You may expect me once in a while in the
evening. So keep on the lookout. See that you have your lamp trimmed and
burning, so that when the Truth comes it shall not find you sleeping,
but up straight, ready to receive the bridegroom. It seems that you
understand this as I tell it to you. But for fear you will not explain
it to the shadow, or natural man, I. will try to make you understand so
it may come to the senses of the natural man. If I succeed, let my
natural man know by a letter. <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md)

Yours, etc.,          

P. P. Q.     

*To Mrs. A. C .B:*

In answer to your letter I will say that it is impossible to give an
opinion of a case till I know something about it \[apart from\] my
natural senses. If I myself cannot take another's feelings, my opinion
is nothing. When I sit by a patient their feelings affect me and the
sensation I receive from the mind is independent of the senses, for they
\[the senses\] do not know that they communicate any intelligence to me.
This I feel, and it contains the cause of the trouble, and my Wisdom
explains the trouble, and the explanation is the cure. You must trust in
that Wisdom that is able to unlock any error.

P. P. Q.

January 11, 1861.     

*To Miss G*.

Your letter to Miss W. was handed to me for perusal to see what course I
thought best to take. So I will sit down by you as I used to do and
commence operations. Excitement

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

contracts the stomach, not from fright but from being overjoyed at your
recovery. . .. The food digests slowly and it will make you feel a
little sluggish at times. But it will soon act upon your system and
relieve you of your trouble, for that is only nervous, and has nothing
to do with the kidneys. . . . I will repeat the same till you are all
right. Remember that I am with you when you read this and every time you
read this you will feel my influence. . . .

P. P. QUIMBY.

PORTLAND, January 25, 1861.     

*To Mrs. Ware:*

By the request of E. and S. I sit down by you to see if I can amuse you
by my explanation of disease. You know I often talk to persons about
religion and you often look as though you would rather have me talk
about anything else. Perhaps it would be better if you knew the cause of
every sensation, but you would not want a physician.

Now you will want me to tell you how you feel, and if you will give me
your attention I will try to explain. This heavy feeling that you have,
accompanied with a desire to lie down and a sort of indifference how
things go, comes from a quiet state of your system that prevents your
food from digesting as readily as it did. But it will act upon you like
an emetic or cathartic. Either way is right. So give no care to what you
shall eat or drink, for Wisdom will cause all things to work for the
best. If you want to eat, consult your own feelings and take no one's
opinion. Remember that He who made us knows our wants better than man.
So keep yourself quiet and I will reverse the action from your head, and
you will feel it passing out of your stomach. Then do not forget to sit
up as I used to tell you and remember not to believe what the blind
guides say. They will come to you, and if your throat is a little sore,
they will merely ask if you think this sore throat is the
[diphtheria](errata.htm#22.md), looking as wise as though they had
discovered the philosopher's stone. . . .

Remember what I tell you about this disease. For these hypocrites or
blind guides are working in the minds of the people like the demagogues
of the South. I do not say that you will be troubled by them. But I have
kept on their track for twenty years and have not the slightest
confidence in anything they say.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

I hear you now for the first time asking me if I believe in another
world. Yes, but not in the sense of the clergy. I will try to explain my
two worlds. You live in Chicago and I in Portland, and if it will not be
blasphemy to call your place heaven, we will suppose you are in heaven
and I in Portland. Now, if I am here sitting and talking with you I must
leave the earth and matter and come to you. If I am with you, what is it
that has left the body? It cannot be matter in a visible form, yet it is
something. Listen, and I will tell you.

You read that God made all living things that had life out of the earth,
so that dead matter cannot produce living life nor anything else. As all
matter decomposes, the dust or odor that arises from it was the matter
that \[the natural man\] is formed of. As the child is of living matter,
not wisdom, when it grows to a certain age it is ready to receive the
breath of eternal life. The child was not eternal life. Eternal life is
Wisdom as much above human life as Science is above ignorance. . . .
Eternal life is Christ or Science, this teaches us that matter is a mere
shadow of a substance which the natural man never saw nor can see, for
it is never changed, is the same today and forever. This substance is
the essence of Wisdom and is in every living form. Like a seed in the
earth, it grows or develops in matter, and is as much under the control
of the mother's Wisdom as the gold which is dissolved and held in
solution is under that of the chemist. If the mother's Wisdom is of this
world, the spiritual child is not under her earthly care. Nevertheless
it is held in the bosom of its eternal Wisdom that will cherish it till
it is developed to receive the science of Eternal Wisdom. Eternal Wisdom
and eternal life are not the same. Eternal Wisdom cannot change but acts
on eternal life, changes its form and identity. Eternal Wisdom teaches
us that all matter is in itself a shadow and is no barrier. Matter is
dense darkness. Spirit is light. If you are wise your body or wisdom is
light, and just as you sink into error you become dense or dark.
Therefore let your light shine, so that when this wind comes blowing
round in the form of an opinion you may know it is merely the noise of a
demagogue. Believe not, .and you will live and flourish. If you can
understand this you have the basis of my belief.

For fear I have not made my two worlds clear to your

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

mind, I will say a few words more. The two worlds may be divided in this
way: one opinions, the other Science. Opinions are matter or the shadow
of Science. One is limited in its sphere, and the other has no limits.
One can be seen by the natural eyes: the other is an endless
progression. The one is today, and tomorrow is not. The other is an
endless progression. One is always changing, the other is always
progressing. The natural man never will know this truth, for he cannot
see Wisdom and live; Wisdom is the natural man's death. So he looks upon
it as an enemy, prays to it, pays tribute to it as though Wisdom were a
man. He often uses it as a balance to weigh his ignorance in but never
to weigh the difference of his opinions. He often quotes it, talking as
though it were his intimate friend, while he to Wisdom is only known as
a servant or shadow, all an imitation. Science is of another character.
Science rises above all narrow ideas. He who is scientific in regard to
health and happiness is his own law, and is not subject to the laws of
man except as he is deceived or ignorant. No one after he knows a
scientific fact can ignorantly disobey it. So with Science the
punishment is in the act. With man's laws it is different; the penalty
may follow the act or come after. With Wisdom the laws are science. To
know Science is to know Wisdom, and how can a man work a mathematical
problem intelligently and at the same time say he is not aware of the
fact?

If we know the true meaning of every word or thought we should know what
will follow. So a person cannot scientifically act amiss. But being
misled by public opinion, we believe a lie and suffer.

I have gone so far that I have reduced certain states to their causes as
certain as ever a chemist saw the effect of a chemical change. For
instance, take consumption. I know the character of every sensation. Its
father or author is a hypocrite and deceiver. I look upon it as the most
vile of all characters. It comes to a person under a most flattering
form, with the kindest words, always very polite, ready to lend its aid
in any way where it can get a hold.

I will illustrate this prince of hypocrites. I will come in the form of
a lady, for it has many faces and characters. I enter as a neighbor with
the customary salutations and you reply that you seem very well. "Oh, I
am very glad, for by

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

what I had heard I was expecting to find you abed. But you can't tell
anything by gossip. You do not seem quite so well as when I saw you
last." "Oh, yes, fully as well," you say. "Well, you know there are
diseases which always flatter the patient. I suppose you have heard of
the death of Mr. ——" "No, when did he die?" "He died yesterday but was
sick a long time. Sometimes he thought he was getting better, but I knew
all the time he was running down. But you must not get discouraged
because you are like him, for it is not always certain that a person in
the same condition you are in has consumption."

Here I make you nervous and you are glad when I leave. Knowing I am not
welcome in that form I assume another character. I must now appear as a
doctor. I sit down and count your pulse, look at your tongue, take a
stick and examine the phlegm that you have raised. Then leaning back in
the chair draw a long sigh, and ask if you have a pain in your left
side.

The doctor is like a dog that wags his tail while you feed him but when
your back is turned will bite you. If superstition is to be put down by
scientific facts, it is useless to mince matters. If a person is aiding
an enemy, he is as guilty as the thief. I want you to know that every
word that is spoken is either matter or Wisdom. Opinions are condensed
into a belief. So, if I \[as a typical doctor\] tell you that you have
congestion of the lungs I impart my belief to you by a deposit of matter
in the form of words. As you eat my belief it goes to form a disease
like its author, my belief grows, comes forth, and at last takes form as
a pressure across the chest. The doctor comes to get rid of the enemy
and by his remedies creates another disease in the bowels. He begins to
talk about inflammation of the bowels. This frightens you. The fright
contracts the stomach so the heat cannot escape, and causes a flush in
the face which you call a rush of blood to the head. It makes you feel
sleepy and weak; you lie down; then the stomach relaxes and the heat
passes down into the bowels, this causes pains. You call it
"inflammation."

All this is very simple when you know what caused it.

This letter is an essay for you to read, so good-night. Let me know how
it works.

P. P. QUIMBY.     

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

#### IN REPLY TO A YOUNG PHYSICIAN <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md)

*Dear Sir:*

Yours of the 5th is received, and in answer I would say that it is
easier to ask a question than to answer it. But I will answer your
question partly by asking another, and partly by coming at it by a
parable. For to answer any question with regard to my mode of treatment
would be like asking a physician how he knows a patient has the typhoid
fever by feeling the pulse, and requesting the answer direct so that the
person asking the question could sit down and be sure to define the
disease from the answer.

My mode of treatment is not decided in that way, and to give a definite
answer to your inquiry would be as much out of place as to ask you to
tell me all you know about medical practice so that I could put it into
practice for the curing of disease, with no further knowledge \[apart
from what\] I might get from you. You see the absurdity of that request.

If it were in my power to give to the world the benefit of twenty years’
hard study in one short or long letter, it would have been before the
people long before this. The people ask they know not what. You might as
well ask a man to tell you how to talk Greek without studying it, as to
ask me to tell you how I test the true pathology of disease, or how I
test the true diagnosis of disease, etc. All of these questions would be
very easily answered if I assumed a standard, and then tested all
disease by that standard.

The old mode of determining the diagnosis of disease is made up of
opinions of diseased persons, in their right mind and out of it, all
mixed up together, and set down accompanied by a certain state of pulse.
In this dark chaos of error \[the doctors\] come to certain results like
this: If you see a man going towards the water, he is going in swimming;
for people go in swimming. But if he is running with his hat and coat
off, he is either going to drown himself, or some one is drowning, and
soon. This is the old way. Mine is this.

If I see a man, I know it, and if I feel the cold I know it. But to see
a person going towards the water is no sign that I know what he is going
to do. He may be going to bathe, or may be going to drown himself. Now.
here is the difference between the physician and myself, and this may
give you some idea of how I define disease.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

The regular \[physician\] and I sit down by a patient. He takes her by
the hand, and so do I. He feels the pulse to ascertain the peculiar
vibration and number of beats in a given time. This to him is knowledge.
To me it is all quackery or ignorance. He looks at the tongue as though
it contained information.

To me this is all folly and ignorance. He then begins to ask questions,
which contain nothing to me, because \[this questioning\] is of no
force. All this is shaken up in his head, and comes forth in the form of
a disease, which is all error to me, and I will give you the diagnosis
of this error.

The feeling of the pulse is to affect the patient so he will listen to
the doctor. Examining the tongue is all for effect. The peculiar cast of
the doctor's head is the same. The questions, accompanied by certain
looks and gestures, are all to get control of the patient's mind so as
to produce an impression. Then he looks very wise, and so on. All the
symptoms put together show no knowledge, but a lack of wisdom, and the
general credulity of mankind rendering \[people\] liable to be humbugged
by any person however ignorant he may be, if he has the reputation of
possessing all medical knowledge.

Now, sir, this is the field you are about to enter, and you will find
the hardest stumbling block from diplomas. Greek and Latin, and the like
are all of no consequence to the sick. It is impossible to give you even
a mere shadow of twenty years’ experience. But I may be of some use to
you. I will say a word or two on the old practice, (not taking much
time,) that will answer all your questions on the old school; for the
less you know the better.

Watch the popular physician. See his shrewdness. Watch the sick patient:
nervous and trembling like a person in the hands of a magistrate who has
him in his power, and whose real object is to deceive him. See the two
together, one perfectly honest, and the other, if honest, perfectly
ignorant, \[the physician\] undertaking blindfolded to lead the patients
through the dark valley of the shadow of death, the patient being born
\[mentally\] blind. Then you see them going along, and at last they both
fall into the ditch.

Now, like the latter, do not deceive your patients. Try to instruct
them, and correct their errors. Use all the wisdom you have, and expose
the hypocrisy of the profession in any one. Never deceive your patients
behind their backs. Always

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

remember that as you feel about your patients, just so they feel towards
you. If you deceive them, they lose confidence in you. Just as you prove
yourself superior to them, they give you credit mentally. If you pursue
this course you cannot help succeeding. Be charitable to the poor. Keep
the health of your patient in view, and if money comes, all well; but do
not let that get the lead.

With all this advice, I leave you to your fate, trusting that the True
Wisdom will guide you—not in the path of your predecessors. Shun evil
and learn to do good.

|                           |          |
|---------------------------|----------|
| PORTLAND, Sept. 16, 1860. | P. P. Q. |

#### A LETTER REGARDING A PATIENT

*Dear Sir:*

Yours of Aug. 27th was received, after a long journey through the state
of Maine. I will give you all the information that I am aware I possess.

If certain conditions of mind exist, certain effects will surely follow.
For instance, if two persons agree as touching one thing, it will be
granted. But if one agrees and the other knows not the thing desired,
then the thing will not be accomplished.

For example, the lady in question wishes my services to restore her to
health. Now her health is the thing she desires. Her faith is the
substance of her hope. Her hope is her desire, it is founded on public
opinion, and in this is her haven, the anchor to her desire, public
opinion the ocean on which her barque or belief floats. Reports of me
are the wind that either presses her along to the haven of health or
down to despair. The tide of public opinion is either against her or in
her favor. Now, as she lies moored on the sea, with her desire or cable
attached to her anchor of hope, tossed to and fro in the gale of
disease, if she can see me or my power walking on the water, saying to
her aches and pains, "Be still," then I have no doubt that she will get
better. The sea will then be calm, and she will get that which she hoped
for: her faith or cure. For her faith is her cure. . . . This is the
commencement of her cure. I, like Jesus, will stand at her heart and
knock. If she hears my voice or feels my influence, and opens the door
of her belief, I will come in and talk, and help her out of her trouble.

|                             |          |
|-----------------------------|----------|
| PORTLAND, Sept. 17th, 1860. | P. P. Q. |

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

#### TO A GENTLEMAN REQUESTING HELP WITHOUT A PERSONAL INTERVIEW

*Dear Sir:*

In answer to your inquiry, I would say that, owing to the scepticism of
the world I do not feel inclined to assure you of any benefit which you
may receive from my influence while away from you, as your belief would
probably keep me from helping you. But it will not cost me much time nor
expense to make the trial. So if I stand at your door and knock, land
you know my voice or influence and receive me, you may be benefited. If
you do receive any benefit, give it to the Principle, not to me as a
man, but to that Wisdom which is able to break the bonds of the
prisoner, set him free from the errors of the doctors, and restore him
to health. This I will try to do with pleasure. But if this fails and
your case is one which requires my seeing you, then my opinion is of no
use.

Yours, etc.       
P. P. Q.

      Portland, Oct. 20th, 1860.

#### TO A CLERGYMAN <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md)

Oct. 28th, 1860.     

*Dear Sir:*

Your letter of the eighteenth was received, but owing to a press of
business I neglected answering it. I will try to give you the wisdom you
ask. So far as giving an opinion is concerned, it is out of my power as
a physician, though as man I might. But it would be of no service, for
it would contain no wisdom except of this world.

My practice is not of the wisdom of man, so my opinion as a man is of no
value. Jesus said, "If I judge of myself, my judgment is not true: but
if I judge of God, it is right," for that contains no opinion. So if I
judge as a man it is an opinion, and you can get plenty of them
anywhere.

You inquire if I have ever cured any cases of chronic rheumatism. I
answer, "Yes." But there are as many cases of chronic rheumatism as
there are of spinal complaint, so that I cannot decide your case by
another. You cannot be saved by pinning your faith on another's sleeve.
Every one must answer for his own sins or belief. Our beliefs are the
cause of our misery. Our happiness and misery are what

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

follow our belief. So as we measure out to another, it will be measured
to us again.

You ask me if I ascribe my cures to spiritual influence. Not after the
\[manner of\] Rochester rappings, nor after Dr. Newton's way of curing.
I think I know how he cures, though he does not. I gather by those I
have seen who have been treated by him that he thinks it is through the
imagination of the patient's belief. So he and I have no sympathy. If he
cures disease, that is good for the one cured. But the world is not any
wiser.

You ask if my practice belongs to any known science. My answer is, "No,"
it belongs to Wisdom that is above man as man. The Science that I try to
practice is the Science that was taught eighteen hundred years ago, and
has never had a place in the heart of man since; but is in the world,
and the world knows it not. To narrow it down to man's wisdom, I sit
down by the patient and take his feelings, and as the rest will be a
long story I will send you one of my circulars, so that you may read for
yourself.

Hoping this may limber the cords of your neck, I remain,

Yours, etc.,           
P. P. QUIMBY

\[The circular reprinted below is the one referred to in this letter. It
was in circulation for some years before Dr. Quimby began to practise in
Portland, and had blank spaces to be filled in by the name of the town
and the location of Quimby's office.\]

#### TO THE SICK <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md)

Dr. P. P. QUIMBY would respectfully announce to the citizens of
................................ and vicinity, that he will be at the
................................ where he will attend to those wishing
to consult him iii regard to their health, and, as his practice is
unlike all other medical practice, it is necessary to say that *he gives
no medicines and makes no outward applications*, but simply sits down by
the patients, tells them their feelings and what they think is their
disease. If the patients admit that he tells them their feelings, &c.,
then his explanation is the cure; and, if he succeeds in correcting
their error, he changes the fluids of the system and establishes

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

the truth, or health. *The Truth is the Cure*. This mode of practice
applies to all cases. If no explanation is given, no charge is made, for
no effect is produced. His opinion without an explanation is useless,
for it contains no knowledge, and would be like other medical opinions,
worse than none. This error gives rise to all kinds of quackery, not
only among regular physicians, but those whose aim is to deceive people
by pretending to cure all diseases. The sick are anxious to get well,
and they apply to these persons supposing them to be honest and
friendly, whereas they are made to believe they are very sick and
something must be done ere it is too late. Five or ten dollars is then
paid, for the cure of some disease they never had, nor ever would have
had but for the wrong [impressions](errata.htm#23.md) received from these
quacks or robbers, (as they might be called,) for it is the worst kind
of robbery, tho’ sanctioned by law. Now, if they will only look at the
true secret of this description, they will find it is for their own
selfish objects—to sell their medicines. Herein consists their
shrewdness!—to impress patients with a wrong idea, namely—that they have
some disease. This makes them nervous and creates in their minds a
disease that otherwise would never have been thought of. Wherefore he
says to such, never consult a quack: you not only lose your money, but
your health.

He gives no opinion, therefore you lose nothing. If patients feel pain
they know it, and if he describes their pain he feels it, and in his
explanation lies the cure. Patients, of course, have some opinion as to
what causes pain—he has none, therefore the disagreement lies not in the
pain, but in the cause of the pain. He has the advantage of patients,
for it is very easy to convince them that he had no pain before he sat
down by them. After this it becomes his duty to prove to them the cause
of their trouble. This can only be explained to patients, for which
explanation his charge is ......... dollars. If necessary to see them
more than once, .......... dollars. This has been his mode of practice
for the last seventeen years.

There are many who pretend to practice as he does, but when a person
while in "a trance," claims any power from the spirits of the departed,
and recommends any kind of medicine to be taken internally or applied
externally beware! believe them not, "for by their fruits ye shall know
them."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[133:1](qm14.htm#fr_41.md) These letters have been
somewhat condensed to avoid repetitions.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[141:1](qm14.htm#fr_42.md) This letter shows how
emphatically Quimby directed attention to "the scientific man" or real
self, the self that already possesses the Truth or Science implicitly.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[146:1](qm14.htm#fr_43.md) Published in part in
"Health and the Inner Life," p 61.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[149:1](qm14.htm#fr_44.md) Printed in part in
"Health and the Inner Life," p. 60.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[150:1](qm14.htm#fr_45.md) Published in part in
"The True History of Mental Science."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. Mrs. Eddy 1862-1875](qm15.md)
