[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0846)  [Next](sbe0848) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XX

Ar*g*una said:

Be pleased to explain to me the Brahman which is the highest object of
knowledge; for by your favour my mind is much interested in (these)
subtle <span id="fr_1490"></span>[4](#fn_1485) (subjects).

Vâsudeva said:

On this, too, they relate an ancient story (in the shape of) a dialogue,
connected with final emancipation, between a preceptor and a pupil. A
talented

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

pupil, O terror of your foes! asked a Brâhma*n*a preceptor of rigid
vows, (when he was) seated, something about the highest good. 'I' (he
said), 'whose goal is the highest good, am come to you (who are)
venerable; I pray of you with (bowed) head, O Brâhma*n*a! that you
should explain to me what I ask.' The preceptor, O son of P*ri*thâ! said
to the pupil who spoke thus: 'I will explain to you everything, O
twice-born one! on which you verily have any doubt.' Thus addressed by
the preceptor, O best of the Kauravas! he who was devoted to the
preceptor, put (his) questions with joined bands. Listen to that, O you
of great intelligence!

The pupil said:

Whence am I <span id="fr_1491"></span>[1](#fn_1486), and whence are you?
Explain that which is the highest truth. From what were the movable and
immovable entities born? By what do entities live, and what is the limit
of their life? What is truth, what penance, O Brâhma*n*a? What are
called the qualities by the good? And what paths are happy? What is
pleasure, and what sin? These questions of mine, O venerable Brâhma*n*a
sage! O you of excellent vows! do you be pleased to explain <span
id="fr_1492"></span>[2](#fn_1487) correctly, truly, and accurately.
There is none else here who can explain these questions. Speak, O best
of those who understand piety! I feel the highest curiosity (in this
matter). You are celebrated in the worlds as skilled in topics connected
with the piety (required for) final emancipation. And there exists none
else but you who can destroy all

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

doubts. And we <span id="fr_1493"></span>[1](#fn_1488), likewise, are
afraid of worldly life, and also desirous of final emancipation.

Vâsudeva said:

That talented preceptor, who preserved (all) vows, O son of P*ri*thâ! O
chief of the family of the Kauravas! O restrainer of foes! duly
explained all those questions to that pupil, who had approached him (for
instruction), who put (his) questions properly, who was possessed of
(the necessary) qualifications, who was tranquil, who conducted himself
in an agreeable manner, who was like (his) shadow <span
id="fr_1494"></span>[2](#fn_1489), and who was a self-restrained ascetic
and a Brahma*k*ârin.

The preceptor said:

All this, which is connected with the knowledge of the Vedas <span
id="fr_1495"></span>[3](#fn_1490) and involves a consideration of the
real entity, and which is cultivated by the chief sages, was declared by
Brahman. We consider knowledge only as the highest thing; and
renunciation <span id="fr_1496"></span>[4](#fn_1491) as the best
penance. And he who understands determinately the true object of
knowledge which is inexpugnable <span
id="fr_1497"></span>[5](#fn_1492)--the self abiding in all entities--and
who can move about anywhere <span id="fr_1498"></span>[6](#fn_1493), is
esteemed highest. The learned man who perceives the abiding
together <span id="fr_1499"></span>[7](#fn_1494),

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

and the severance also, and likewise unity and variety <span
id="fr_1500"></span>[1](#fn_1495), is released from misery. He who does
not desire anything, and has no egoism about anything, becomes eligible
for assimilation with the Brahman, even while dwelling in this
world <span id="fr_1501"></span>[2](#fn_1496). He who knows the truth
about the qualities of nature, who understands the creation of all
entities, who is devoid of (the thought that this or that is) mine, and
who is devoid of egoism, is emancipated; there is no doubt of that.
Accurately understanding the great (tree) of which the unperceived <span
id="fr_1502"></span>[3](#fn_1497) is the sprout from the seed, which
consists of the understanding as its trunk, the branches of which are
the great egoism, in the holes of which are the sprouts, namely, the
senses, of which the great elements are the flower-bunches <span
id="fr_1503"></span>[4](#fn_1498), the gross elements the smaller
boughs, which is always possessed of leaves, always possessed of
flowers, and from which pleasant fruits are always produced, on which
all entities subsist, which is eternal, and the seed of which is the
Brahman; and cutting it with that excellent sword-knowledge-one attains
immortality, and casts off birth and death <span
id="fr_1504"></span>[5](#fn_1499). I will state to you to-day, O highly

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

talented one! the true conclusion <span
id="fr_1505"></span>[1](#fn_1500) about the past, the present, the
future, and so forth, and piety, desire, and wealth <span
id="fr_1506"></span>[2](#fn_1501), which is understood by the multitudes
of Siddhas, which belongs to olden times, and is eternal, which ought to
be apprehended, and understanding which talented men have here attained
perfection. Formerly <span id="fr_1507"></span>[3](#fn_1502), the sages,
B*ri*haspati, Bharadvâ*g*a, Gautama, and likewise Bhârgava, Vasish*th*a,
and also Kâ*s*yapa, and Vi*s*vâmitra, and Atri also, desiring knowledge,
met each other, after having travelled over all paths <span
id="fr_1508"></span>[4](#fn_1503), and becoming wearied of their own
actions. And those twice-born (sages), giving the lead to the old sage
Â<u>n</u>girasa, saw Brahman, from whom (all) sin has departed, in
Brahman's mansion. Having saluted that high-souled one who was sitting
at ease, the great sages, full of humility, asked him this momentous
(question) concerning the highest good: 'How should one perform good
action? how is one released from sin? what paths are happy for us? what
is truth and what vice? By what action are the two paths southern and
northern obtained <span id="fr_1509"></span>[5](#fn_1504)? (and what is)
destruction <span id="fr_1510"></span>[6](#fn_1505) and emancipation,
the birth and death of entities?' What the grandsire said conformably to
the scriptures <span id="fr_1511"></span>[7](#fn_1506),

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

when thus spoken to by the sages, I will state to you. Listen (to that)
O pupil!

Brahman said:

From the truth were the entities movable and immovable produced. They
live by penance <span id="fr_1512"></span>[1](#fn_1507). Understand
that, O you of excellent vows! By their own action they remain
transcending their own source <span id="fr_1513"></span>[2](#fn_1508).
For the truth joined with the qualities is invariably of five varieties.
The Brahman <span id="fr_1514"></span>[3](#fn_1509) is the truth;
penance is the truth; Pra*g*âpati also is truth; the entities are born
from the truth; the universe consisting of (all) creatures is the truth.
Therefore Brâhma*n*as whose final goal is always concentration of mind,
from whom anger and vexation have departed, and who are invariably
devoting themselves to piety, are full of the truth. I will speak about
those (Brâhma*n*as) who are restrained by one another <span
id="fr_1515"></span>[4](#fn_1510), who are possessed of knowledge, who
are the establishers of the bridge of piety, and who are the constant
creators of the people <span id="fr_1516"></span>[5](#fn_1511). I will
speak of the four (branches of knowledge, and likewise of the castes,
and of the four orders, distinctly. The wise always speak of piety as
one, (but) having

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

four quarters. I will speak to you, O twice-born ones! of the happy
path, which is productive of pleasure, and which has been invariably
travelled over. by talented men in old days for (obtaining) assimilation
with the Brahman. Learn, O noble ones! from me, now speaking
exhaustively, of that highest path which is difficult to understand, and
of the highest seat. The first step is said to be the order of
Brahma*k*ârins; the second is that of householders; next after that is
that of foresters; and next after that too, the highest step must be
understood to be that relating to the Adhyâtma <span
id="fr_1517"></span>[1](#fn_1512). Light <span
id="fr_1518"></span>[2](#fn_1513), space, sun, air, Indra, Pra*g*âpati,
one sees not these, while one does not attain to the Adhyâtma <span
id="fr_1519"></span>[3](#fn_1514). I will subsequently state the means
to that, which you should understand. The order of foresters, (the
order) of the sages who dwell in forests and live on fruits roots and
air, is prescribed for the three twice-born (castes). The order of
householders is prescribed for all castes. The talented ones speak of
piety as having faith for its characteristic. Thus have I described to
you the paths leading to the gods <span
id="fr_1520"></span>[4](#fn_1515), which are occupied by good and
talented men by means of their actions, and which are bridges of piety.
He who, rigid in his vows, takes up any one of these modes of piety
separately, always comes in time to perceive the production and
dissolution of

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

(all) entities <span id="fr_1521"></span>[1](sbe0848.htm#fn_1516). Now I
shall state with accuracy and with reasons, all the elements which abide
in parts in all objects. The great self <span
id="fr_1522"></span>[2](sbe0848.htm#fn_1517), the unperceived <span
id="fr_1523"></span>[3](sbe0848.htm#fn_1518) likewise, and likewise also
egoism, the ten senses and the one <span
id="fr_1524"></span>[4](sbe0848.htm#fn_1519) (sense), and the five great
elements, and the specific characteristics of the five elements <span
id="fr_1525"></span>[5](sbe0848.htm#fn_1520), such is the eternal
creation. The number of the elements is celebrated as being twenty-four
plus one. And the talented man who understands the production and
dissolution of (all) elements, he, of all beings, never comes by
delusion. He who accurately understand the elements, the whole of the
qualities <span id="fr_1526"></span>[6](sbe0848.htm#fn_1521), and also
all the deities <span id="fr_1527"></span>[7](sbe0848.htm#fn_1522),
casting aside sin, and getting rid of all bonds, attains to all the
spotless worlds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[310:1](sbe0846.htm#fr_1487) I. e. after the
identification of the individual self with the universal self, when the
individual ceases to be perceived as such. Cf. *S*ânti Parvan (Moksha),
chap. 187, st. 23.

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[310:2](sbe0846.htm#fr_1488) That beyond
Kshetra*g*ñas = the absolute supreme self. Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
206](sbe0827.htm#page_206).

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[310:3](sbe0846.htm#fr_1489) The substance of
this speech, says Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra, is that the mind and understanding
devoted to the supreme lead to final emancipation.

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[310:4](sbe0847.htm#fr_1490) See [p.
296](sbe0841.htm#page_296) supra. The last chapter closes what in some
of the MSS. is called the Brahma Gîtâ, or Brâhma*n*a Gîtâ contained in
the Anugîtâ Parvan. See further as to this our Introduction, where the
point is further dwelt on.

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[311:1](sbe0847.htm#fr_1491) Compare the
questions at the beginning of the *S*vetâ*s*vatara-upanishad.

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[311:2](sbe0847.htm#fr_1492) A similar
expression to that in the Sanatsu*g*âtîya, [p.
149](sbe0822.htm#page_149), and elsewhere.

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[312:1](sbe0847.htm#fr_1493) It is not easy to
account for the change here from the singular to the plural.

<span id="fn_1489"></span>[312:2](sbe0847.htm#fr_1494) I. e. always
attended on the preceptor. Cf. generally, Mu*n*daka, p. 283.

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[312:3](sbe0847.htm#fr_1495) The question was
not quite from his own imagination, says Nîlaka*nth*a. Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra
has a different reading, which he interprets to mean 'that on which the
Vedas are all at one.'

<span id="fn_1491"></span>[312:4](sbe0847.htm#fr_1496) Of the fruit of
action, Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra.

<span id="fn_1492"></span>[312:5](sbe0847.htm#fr_1497) I. e. not such as
to require modification by any other knowledge, as knowledge of the
world does.

<span id="fn_1493"></span>[312:6](sbe0847.htm#fr_1498) Nîlaka*nth*a
compares *Kh*ândogya, pp. 523-553.

<span id="fn_1494"></span>[312:7](sbe0847.htm#fr_1499) I. e. of K*i*t
and *G*a*d*a, says Nîlaka*nth*a; of Brahman and its manifestations, as
alluded to, inter alia, at pp. [105](sbe0815.htm#page_105),
[106](sbe0815.htm#page_106), [191](sbe0826.htm#page_191) supra.

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[313:1](sbe0847.htm#fr_1500) I. e. that
variety is only in this world, but that the unity of everything is the
true proposition. Cf. inter alia Gîtâ, [p. 104](sbe0815.htm#page_104).

<span id="fn_1496"></span>[313:2](sbe0847.htm#fr_1501) Cf.
B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, p. 858, and Gîtâ, [p. 65](sbe0807.htm#page_65).

<span id="fn_1497"></span>[313:3](sbe0847.htm#fr_1502) I. e. the
Prak*ri*ti of the Sânkhyas.

<span id="fn_1498"></span>[313:4](sbe0847.htm#fr_1503) The great
elements are the five tanmâtras of earth, water, fire, air, and space,
which afterwards produce what we have called the gross elements in the
text, namely, the earth &c. which we perceive.

<span id="fn_1499"></span>[313:5](sbe0847.htm#fr_1504) The tree typifies
worldly life. Cf. pp.
[111](sbe0817.htm#page_111)-[189](sbe0826.htm#page_189) supra. The
leaves and flowers, Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra says, stand for volition and
action; and Nîlaka*nth*a seems to agree. The tree is called eternal, as
worldly life is supposed to have had no beginning. Cf. Sârîraka Bhâshya,
p. 494, 'sprout from the seed,' this rendering is necessitated by
Brahman being described as the seed. Cf. Mundaka, p. 288;
*S*vetâ*s*vatara, p. 362; Ka*th*a, pp. 143, 144.

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[314:1](sbe0847.htm#fr_1505) I. e. the means
of arriving at it, Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra.

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[314:2](sbe0847.htm#fr_1506) The triad, the
acquisition of which worldly men aspire to.

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[314:3](sbe0847.htm#fr_1507) He explains how
the doctrine belongs to olden times.

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[314:4](sbe0847.htm#fr_1508) I.e. paths of
action, Nîlaka*nth*a. See Sanatsu*g*âtîya, [p.
165](sbe0824.htm#page_165).

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[314:5](sbe0847.htm#fr_1509) Namely, the
Pit*ri*yâna and Devayâna (Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra), as to which see
*Kh*ândogya, p. 341, Kaushîtaki, p. 13, and B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, p. 1034.

<span id="fn_1505"></span>[314:6](sbe0847.htm#fr_1510) Nîlaka*nth*a
seems to interpret this to mean the temporary and final dissolutions of
the worlds, on which see, inter alia, Vedânta Paribhâshâ, p. 48.

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[314:7](sbe0847.htm#fr_1511) So Nîlaka*nth*a.
May it not be 'according to the received tradition?'

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[315:1](sbe0847.htm#fr_1512) I. e. by action,
Nîlaka*nth*a. Cf. Mu*nd*aka, p. 280, and see [p.
166](sbe0824.htm#page_166) supra, note .

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[315:2](sbe0847.htm#fr_1513) I. e. they remain
apart from the Brahman, being engaged in action. This answers some of
the questions put by the pupil to the preceptor. As to 'the truth,' see
[p. 162](sbe0823.htm#page_162), note  [2](sbe0824.htm#fn_706) supra.

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[315:3](sbe0847.htm#fr_1514) I. e. Î*s*vara,
or god; penance = piety; Pra*g*âpati = the individual soul,
Nîlaka*nth*a. Brahman = 'that' (but how is 'that' 'joined with
qualities?'); Pra*g*âpati = Brahman, Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra. They agree about
penance and entities (which they take to mean the gross elements) and
creatures. Brahman and Pra*g*âpati = Virâ*g* and Hira*n*yagarbha (?),
[p. 186](sbe0826.htm#page_186) supra. Cf. Sânti Parvan (Moksha), chap.
190, st. 1.

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[315:4](sbe0847.htm#fr_1515) I. e. who commit
no breach of piety through fear of one another, Nîlaka*nth*a.

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[315:5](sbe0847.htm#fr_1516) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
86](sbe0811.htm#page_86).

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[316:1](sbe0847.htm#fr_1517) That is to say,
that of the ascetic, who specially devotes himself to the acquisition of
knowledge about the relation of the supreme and individual self
(Adhyâtma).

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[316:2](sbe0847.htm#fr_1518) The deity
presiding over the bright fortnight, says Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra. The words
space and sun and air must be similarly interpreted.

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[316:3](sbe0847.htm#fr_1519) Nîlaka*nth*a says
'one sees these only while one has not had a perception of the self.' He
takes light &c. to mean the 'universe.'

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[316:4](sbe0847.htm#fr_1520) I. e. the means
of reaching the Devayâna path (mentioned at [p. 314](#page_314) note
 [5](#fn_1504)), Nîlaka*nth*a. Cf. also Mu*nd*aka. p. 312.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](sbe0848)
