[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0827)  [Next](sbe0829) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

# ANUGÎTA.

## CHAPTER I.

Ganame*g*aya <span id="fr_1032"></span>[1](#fn_1027) said:

What conversation, O twice-born one <span
id="fr_1033"></span>[2](#fn_1028) I took place between the high-souled
Kesava and Ar*g*una, while they dwelt in that palace  <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[3](#fn_1029) after slaying their enemies?

Vai*s*ampâyana said:

The son of P*ri*thâ, after becoming possessed of his kingdom (in an)
undisturbed (state), enjoyed himself in the company of K*ri*sh*n*a, full
of delight in that heavenly palace. And once, O king! they happened to
go, surrounded by their people, and rejoicing, to a certain portion of
the palace which resembled heaven. Then Ar*g*una, the son of Pâ*nd*u,
having surveyed with delight that lovely palace, in the company of
K*ri*sh*n*a, spoke these words: 'O you of mighty arms! O you whose
mother is Devakî <span id="fr_1035"></span>[4](#fn_1030)! when the
battle was about to commence, I became aware of your greatness, and that
divine

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

form of yours <span id="fr_1036"></span>[1](#fn_1031). But that, O
Kesava! which through affection (for me) you explained before <span
id="fr_1037"></span>[2](#fn_1032), has all disappeared, O tiger-like
man! from my degenerate mind. Again and again, however, I feel a
curiosity about those topics. But (now), O Mâdhava! you will be going at
no distant date to Dvârakâ.

Vai*s*ampâyana said

Thus addressed, that best of speakers, K*ri*sh*n*a, possessed of great
glory, replied in these words after embracing Ar*g*una.

Vâsudeva said:

From me, O son of Prithâ! you heard a mystery, and learnt about the
eternal <span id="fr_1038"></span>[3](#fn_1033) (principle), about piety
in (its true) form, and about all the everlasting worlds <span
id="fr_1039"></span>[4](#fn_1034). It is excessively disagreeable to me,
that you should not have grasped it through want of intelligence. And
the recollection (of it) now again is not possible (to me). Really, O
son of Pându! you are devoid of faith and of a bad intellect. And, O
Dhanañ*g*aya! it is not possible for me to repeat in full (what I said
before). For that doctrine was perfectly adequate for understanding the
seat, <span id="fr_1040"></span>[5](#fn_1035) of the Brahman. It is not
possible for me to state it again in full in that way. For then
accompanied by my mystic power <span id="fr_1041"></span>[6](#fn_1036),
I declared to you the Supreme Brahman. But I shall relate an ancient
story upon

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

that subject, so that adhering to this knowledge, you may attain the
highest goal. O best of the supporters of piety! listen to all that I
say. (Once), O restrainer of foes! there came from the heavenly world
and the world of Brahman <span id="fr_1042"></span>[1](#fn_1037), a
Brâhma*n*a difficult to withstand <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[2](#fn_1038), and he was (duly) honoured by us.
(Now) listen, without entertaining any misgivings, O chief of the
descendants of Bharata! O son of P*ri*thâ! to what he said on being
interrogated by us according to heavenly rules <span
id="fr_1044"></span>[3](#fn_1039).

The Brâhma*n*a said:

O K*ri*sh*n*a! O destroyer of Madhu! I will explain to you accurately
what you, out of compassion for (all) beings <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[4](#fn_1040), have asked me touching the duties (to
be Performed) for final emancipation. It is destructive of delusion, O
Lord! Listen to me with attention <span
id="fr_1046"></span>[5](#fn_1041), as I relate it, O Mâdhava! A certain
Brâhma*n*a named Kâ*s*yapa, who had performed (much) penance, and who
best understood piety, approached a certain twice-born. (person) who had
learnt the Scriptures relating to (all) duties <span
id="fr_1047"></span>[6](#fn_1042), having heard (of him, as one) who had
over and over again gone through all knowledge and experience about
coming and going <span id="fr_1048"></span>[7](#fn_1043), who was well
versed in the true nature of all worlds <span
id="fr_1049"></span>[8](#fn_1044),

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

who knew about happiness and misery <span
id="fr_1050"></span>[1](#fn_1045), who knew the truth about birth and
death <span id="fr_1051"></span>[2](#fn_1046), who was conversant with
merit and sin, who perceived the migrations of embodied (souls) of high
and low (degrees) in consequence of (their) actions, who moved about
like an emancipated being, who had reached perfection <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[3](#fn_1047), who was tranquil, whose senses were
restrained, who was illumined with the Brahmic splendour <span
id="fr_1053"></span>[4](#fn_1048), who moved about in every direction,
who understood concealed movements <span
id="fr_1054"></span>[5](#fn_1049), who was going in company of invisible
Siddhas and celestial singers <span id="fr_1055"></span>[6](#fn_1050),
and conversing and sitting together (with them) in secluded (places),
who went about as he pleased, and was unattached (anywhere) like the
wind. Having approached him, that talented ascetic possessed of
concentration (of mind), that best of the twice-born, wishing to acquire
piety, fell at his feet, after seeing that great marvel. And amazed on
seeing that marvellous man, the best of the twice-born, Kâ*s*yapa,
pleased the preceptor by his great devotion. That was all
appropriate <span id="fr_1056"></span>[7](#fn_1051), (being) joined to
sacred learning and correct conduct. And, O terror of your foes! he
pleased that (being) by (his purity of) heart and behaviour (suitable)
towards a preceptor <span id="fr_1057"></span>[8](#fn_1052). Then being
satisfied and pleased, he spoke to the pupil these words, referring to
the

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

highest perfection: Hear (them) from me, O *G*anârdana!

The Siddha said:

Mortals, O dear friend <span id="fr_1058"></span>[1](#fn_1053)! by their
actions which are (of) mixed (character), or which are meritorious and
pure, attain to this world as the goal, or to residence in the world of
the gods <span id="fr_1059"></span>[2](#fn_1054). Nowhere is there
everlasting happiness; nowhere eternal residence <span
id="fr_1060"></span>[3](#fn_1055). Over and over again is there a
downfall from a high position attained with difficulty. Overcome by lust
and anger, and deluded by desire, I fell into uncomfortable and
harassing states (of life), in-consequence of (my) committing sin. Again
and again death, and again and again birth <span
id="fr_1061"></span>[4](#fn_1056). I ate numerous (kinds of) food,
sucked at various breasts, saw various mothers, and fathers of different
sorts; and, O sinless one! (I saw) strange pleasures and miseries.
Frequently (I suffered) separation from those I loved, association with
those I did not love. Loss of wealth also came on me, after I had
acquired that wealth with difficulty; ignominies full of affliction from
princes and likewise from kinsmen; excessively poignant pain, mental and
bodily. I also underwent frightful indignities, and fierce deaths and
captivities; (I had a) fall into hell, and torments in the house of
Yama <span id="fr_1062"></span>[5](#fn_1057). I also suffered much from
old age, continual ailments, and numerous misfortunes flowing from the
pairs of opposites <span id="fr_1063"></span>[6](#fn_1058). Then on one
occasion, being much afflicted with misery, I abandoned the whole

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

course of worldly life, through indifference (to worldly objects), al,
taking refuge with the formless (principle) <span
id="fr_1064"></span>[1](#fn_1059). Having learnt about this path in this
world, I exercised myself (in it), and hence, through favour of the
self <span id="fr_1065"></span>[2](#fn_1060), have I acquired this
perfection <span id="fr_1066"></span>[3](#fn_1061). I shall not come
here again <span id="fr_1067"></span>[4](#fn_1062); I am surveying the
worlds, and the happy migrations <span id="fr_1068"></span>[5](#fn_1063)
of (my) self from the creation of beings to (my attaining) perfection.
Thus, O best of the twice-born! have I obtained this highest perfection.
From here I go to the next <span id="fr_1069"></span>[6](#fn_1064)
(world), and from there again to the still higher (world)--the
imperceptible seat of the Brahman. Have no doubt on that, O terror of
your foes <span id="fr_1070"></span>[7](#fn_1065)! I shall not come back
to this mortal world. I am pleased with you, O you of great
intelligence! Say, what can I do for you? The time is now come for that
which you desired in coming to me. I know for what you have come to me.
But I shall be going away in a short time, hence have I given

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

this hint to you. I am exceedingly pleased, O clever one! with your good
conduct. Put (your) questions without uneasiness, I will tell (you)
whatever you desire. I highly esteem your intelligence, and greatly
respect it, inasmuch as you have made me out <span
id="fr_1071"></span>[1](sbe0829.htm#fn_1066); for, O Kâ*s*yapa! you are
(a) talented (man).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[229:1](sbe0828.htm#fr_1032) This is the
prince to whom the Mahâbhârata, as we have it, purports to have been
related.

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[229:2](sbe0828.htm#fr_1033) I. e.
Vai*s*ampâyana, who relates the Mahâbhârata to *G*aname*g*aya.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[229:3](sbe0828.htm#fr_1034) This appears to
have been situated at Indraprastha, and to have been the one built for
the Pâ*nd*avas by the demon Maya, as related in the Sabhâ Parvan.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[229:4](sbe0828.htm#fr_1035) This is a rather
unusual form of address.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[230:1](sbe0828.htm#fr_1036) Cf. Bhagavadgîtâ,
chapters X and XI passim.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[230:2](sbe0828.htm#fr_1037) I. e. in the
Bhagavadgîtâ.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[230:3](sbe0828.htm#fr_1038) This may also be
taken with piety thus: 'and learnt about the eternal piety in (its true)
form.'

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[230:4](sbe0828.htm#fr_1039) As to the plural,
see *S*a<u>n</u>kara on Mu*nd*aka, p. 320.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[230:5](sbe0828.htm#fr_1040) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
78](sbe0810.htm#page_78). For 'understanding' here we might, perhaps,
substitute 'attaining.' The original word means both understanding and
attaining.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[230:6](sbe0828.htm#fr_1041) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
182](sbe0825.htm#page_182).

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[231:1](sbe0828.htm#fr_1042) This seems to
mean not the Supreme Brahman, but the Creator.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[231:2](sbe0828.htm#fr_1043) Cf.
Sanatsu*g*âtîya, [p. 161](sbe0823.htm#page_161), 'not to be shaken.'

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[231:3](sbe0828.htm#fr_1044) I suppose this to
mean according to the forms proper in the case of such a being as the
one in question. Cf. Gîtâ, [p. 62](sbe0806.htm#page_62), and note there.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[231:4](sbe0828.htm#fr_1045) This is not easy
to understand. Perhaps the allusion is to the doctrine at Gîtâ, pp.
[54](sbe0805.htm#page_54), [55](sbe0805.htm#page_55).

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[231:5](sbe0828.htm#fr_1046) Cf.
B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, p. 447.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[231:6](sbe0828.htm#fr_1047) I. e. all
prescribed acts of piety.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[231:7](sbe0828.htm#fr_1048) As to knowledge
and experience, cf. Gîtâ, [p. 57](sbe0805.htm#page_57); and as to coming
and going, cf. ibid. [p. 84](sbe0811.htm#page_84).

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[231:8](sbe0828.htm#fr_1049) I. e. as stated,
for instance, at Gîtâ, [p. 79](sbe0810.htm#page_79), B*ri*hadâra*ny*aka,
p. 613.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[232:1](sbe0828.htm#fr_1050) Cf. infra, [p.
245](sbe0830.htm#page_245).

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[232:2](sbe0828.htm#fr_1051) Cf. Gîtâ, pp.
[48](sbe0804.htm#page_48), [103](sbe0815.htm#page_103).

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[232:3](sbe0828.htm#fr_1052) Cf. Gîtâ, passim.

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[232:4](sbe0828.htm#fr_1053) Cf.
Sanatsugâtîya, [p. 162](sbe0823.htm#page_162).

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[232:5](sbe0828.htm#fr_1054) I. e. moving
about so as not to be seen by everybody.

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[232:6](sbe0828.htm#fr_1055) Literally,
'holders of wheels,' which Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra interprets to mean
'*K*âra*n*as.' At *S*ânti Parvan (Moksha Dharma) CCXLIV, 26 Nîlaka*nth*a
renders *K*akradhara by *K*akravartin or Emperor.

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[232:7](sbe0828.htm#fr_1056) I. e. as
Kâ*s*yapa was possessed of Vedic lore, and behaved as he ought to behave
in his capacity of pupil, it was natural that the other should be
pleased.

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[232:8](sbe0828.htm#fr_1057) See [p.
176](sbe0825.htm#page_176) seq. supra.

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[233:1](sbe0828.htm#fr_1058) The same word as
at Gîtâ, [p. 72](sbe0808.htm#page_72).

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[233:2](sbe0828.htm#fr_1059) Cf.
*Kh*ândogya-upanishad, pp. 356-359, and Gîtâ, [p.
84](sbe0811.htm#page_84).

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[233:3](sbe0828.htm#fr_1060) See Gîtâ, [p.
76](sbe0809.htm#page_76), and cf. Ka*th*a, p. 90.

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[233:4](sbe0828.htm#fr_1061) For the whole of
this passage, c.f.; Maitrî-upanishad, p. 8.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[233:5](sbe0828.htm#fr_1062) See Manu VI, 61.

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[233:6](sbe0828.htm#fr_1063) See Gîtâ, [p.
48](sbe0804.htm#page_48).

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[234:1](sbe0828.htm#fr_1064) Taking refuge,
says Nîlaka*nth*a, in the belief of my being identical with the Brahman,
which is to be comprehended by means of the profound contemplation
called Asampra*g*ñâta Samâdhi.

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[234:2](sbe0828.htm#fr_1065) I. e., says
Nîlakan*th*a, the mind, and he cites Maitrî, p. 179. Cf. Ka*th*a, p.
108. The rendering at [p. 192](sbe0826.htm#page_192) supra will also
suit (through the self becoming placid). This placidity is defined at
*S*ânti Parvan (Moksha Dharma) CCXLVII, 11, with which cf. Gîtâ, [p.
69](sbe0808.htm#page_69). See Gîtâ, [p. 51](sbe0804.htm#page_51).

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[234:3](sbe0828.htm#fr_1066) As above
described.

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[234:4](sbe0828.htm#fr_1067) Cf. *Kh*ândogya,
p. 628; see also ibid. p. 282.

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[234:5](sbe0828.htm#fr_1068) He calls them
happy because they have ended happily, I presume. 'Surveying the worlds'
Nîlaka*nth*a takes to be an index of omniscience. Cf. Sanatsu*g*âtîya,
[p. 174](sbe0824.htm#page_174). See also Yoga-sûtras III, 25, and
commentary there.

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[234:6](sbe0828.htm#fr_1069) I. e. the world
of Brahman, or the Satyaloka; and the next step is assimilation into the
Brahman.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[234:7](sbe0828.htm#fr_1070) So read all the
copies I have seen, though Kâ*s*yapa is the person addressed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](sbe0829)
