[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0853)  [Next](sbe0855) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

# CHAPTER XXVII.

Brahman said:

From egoism, verily, were the five great elements born--earth, air,
space, water, and light as the fifth. In these five great elements, in
the operations of (perceiving) sound, touch, colour, taste, and smell,
creatures are deluded <span id="fr_1638"></span>[1](#fn_1631). When, at
the termination of the destruction of the great elements, the final
dissolution approaches, O talented one! a great danger for all living
beings arises <span id="fr_1639"></span>[2](#fn_1632). Every entity is
dissolved into that from which it is produced. They are born one from
the other, and are dissolved in the reverse order <span
id="fr_1640"></span>[3](#fn_1633). Then when every entity, movable or
immovable, has been dissolved, the talented men who possess a (good)
memory <span id="fr_1641"></span>[4](#fn_1634) are not dissolved at all.
Sound, touch, and likewise colour, taste, and smell as the fifth; the
operations (connected with these) have causes <span
id="fr_1642"></span>[5](#fn_1635), and are inconstant, and their name is
delusion. Caused by the production of avarice <span
id="fr_1643"></span>[6](#fn_1636), not different from one another <span
id="fr_1644"></span>[7](#fn_1637), and insignificant <span
id="fr_1645"></span>[8](#fn_1638), connected with flesh and blood, and
depending upon one another,

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

excluded from the self <span id="fr_1646"></span>[1](#fn_1639), these
are helpless and powerless. The Prâ*n*a and the Apâna, the Udâna, the
Samâna, and the Vyâna also, these five winds are also joined to the
inner self <span id="fr_1647"></span>[2](#fn_1640), and together with
speech, mind, and understanding make the eight constituents of the
universe <span id="fr_1648"></span>[3](#fn_1641). He whose skin, nose,
ear, eye, tongue, and speech are restrained, and whose mind is pure, and
understanding unswerving <span id="fr_1649"></span>[4](#fn_1642), and
whose mind is never burnt by these eight fires <span
id="fr_1650"></span>[5](#fn_1643), he attains to that holy Brahman than
which nothing greater exists. And the eleven organs, which are stated as
having been produced from egoism--these, O twice-born ones! I will
describe specifically. The ear, the skin, the two eyes, the tongue, the
nose also as the fifth, the two feet, the organ of excretion, and the
organ of generation, the two hands, and speech as the tenth; such is the
group of organs, the mind is the eleventh. This group one should subdue
first, then the Brahman shines (before him). Five (of these) are called
the organs of perception, and five the

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

organs of action. The five beginning with the ear are truly said to be
connected with knowledge. And all the rest are without distinction
connected with action. The mind should be understood to be among
both <span id="fr_1651"></span>[1](#fn_1644), and the understanding is
the twelfth. Thus have been stated the eleven organs in order.
Understanding these <span id="fr_1652"></span>[2](#fn_1645), learned men
think they have accomplished (everything). I will now proceed to state
all the various organs. Space <span id="fr_1653"></span>[3](#fn_1646) is
the first entity; as connected with the self it is called the ear;
likewise as connected with objects (it is) sound; and the presiding
deity there is the quarters. The second entity is air; it is known as
the skin as connected with the self; as connected with objects (it is)
the object of touch; and the presiding deity there is lightning. The
third (entity) is said to be light; as connected with the self it is
called the eye; next as connected with objects (it is) colour; and the
presiding deity there is the sun. The fourth (entity) should be
understood to be water; as connected with the self it is called the
tongue; as connected with objects it is taste; and the presiding deity
there is Soma. The fifth entity is earth; as connected with the self it
is the nose; as connected with objects likewise it is smell; and the
presiding deity there is the wind. Thus are the five entities stated to
be divided among the three <span id="fr_1654"></span>[4](#fn_1647). I
will now proceed to state all the various organs.

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

\[paragraph continues\] As connected with the self, the feet are
mentioned by Brâhma*n*as, who perceive the truth; as connected with
objects it is motion; the presiding deity there is Vish*n*u. The Apâna
wind, the motion of which is downward, as connected with the self, is
called the organ of excretion; as connected with objects it is
excretion <span id="fr_1655"></span>[1](#fn_1648); and the presiding
deity there is Mitra. As connected with the self the generative organ is
mentioned, the producer of all beings; as connected with objects it is
the semen; and the presiding deity there is Pra*g*âpati. Men who
understand the Adhyâtma speak of the two hands as connected with the
self; as connected with objects it is actions; and the presiding deity
there is Indra. Then first, as connected with the self, is speech which
relates to all the gods; as connected with objects it is what is spoken;
and the presiding deity there is fire. As connected with the self they
mention the mind, which follows after the five entities <span
id="fr_1656"></span>[2](#fn_1649); as connected with objects it is the
mental operation; the presiding deity there is the- moon. Likewise
(there is) egoism, the cause of the whole course of worldly life, as
connected with the self; as connected with objects, self-consciousness;
the presiding deity there is Rudra. As connected with the self, they
mention the understanding impelling the six senses <span
id="fr_1657"></span>[3](#fn_1650);

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

as connected with objects that which is to be understood; and the
presiding deity there is Brahman. There are three seats for all
entities--a fourth is not possible--land, water, and space. And the
(mode of) birth is fourfold. Those born from eggs, those born from
germs, those born from perspiration, and those born from wombs-such is
the fourfold (mode of) birth of the group of living beings <span
id="fr_1658"></span>[1](#fn_1651). Now there are the inferior beings and
likewise those moving in the air. Those should be understood to be born
from eggs, as also all reptiles. Insects are said to be born from
perspiration; and worms of the like description. This is said to be the
second (mode of) birth, and inferior. Those beings, however, which are
born after the lapse of some time, bursting through the earth, are said
to be born from germs, O best of the twice-born! Beings of two feet or
more than two feet, and those which move crookedly, are the beings born
from wombs. Understand about them also, O best of men! The eternal seat
(where) the Brahman <span id="fr_1659"></span>[2](#fn_1652) (is to be
attained) should be understood to be twofold-penance <span
id="fr_1660"></span>[3](#fn_1653) and meritorious action. Such is the
doctrine of the learned. Action should be understood to be of
various <span id="fr_1661"></span>[4](#fn_1654)

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

descriptions, (namely) sacrifice, gift at a sacrifice, and sacred
study <span id="fr_1662"></span>[1](#fn_1655), for (every one) who is
born <span id="fr_1663"></span>[2](#fn_1656). Such is the teaching of
the ancients. He who duly understands this, becomes possessed of
concentration of mind, O chief of the twice-born! and know, too, that he
is released from all sins. Space <span id="fr_1664"></span>[3](#fn_1657)
is the first entity; as connected with the (individual) self it is
called the ear; as connected with objects likewise it is called sound;
and the presiding deity there is the quarters. The second entity is air;
as connected with the (individual) self it is called the skin; as
connected with objects it is the object of touch; and the presiding
deity there is the lightning. The third is called light; as connected
with the (individual) self it is laid down to be the eye; next as
connected with objects it is colour; the presiding deity there is the
sun. The fourth should be understood to be water; as connected with the
(individual) self it is stated to be the tongue; as connected with
objects it should be understood to be taste; the presiding deity there
is Soma. The fifth element is earth; as connected with the (individual)
self it is called the nose; as connected with objects likewise it is
called smell; the presiding deity there is Vâyu. Thus have I

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

accurately described to you the creation <span
id="fr_1665"></span>[1](#fn_1658) as connected with the (individual)
self. A knowledge of this, O ye who understand piety! is here obtained
by those who possess knowledge. One should place all these together,
(viz.) the senses, the objects of the senses, and the five great
elements, and hold them by the mind <span
id="fr_1666"></span>[2](#fn_1659). When everything is absorbed into the
mind, the pleasures of (worldly) life <span
id="fr_1667"></span>[3](#fn_1660) are not esteemed. The learned (men)
whose understandings are possessed of knowledge esteem the pleasure
derived from that <span id="fr_1668"></span>[4](#fn_1661). Now <span
id="fr_1669"></span>[5](#fn_1662) I shall proceed to describe that
discarding of all entities by (means) gentle and hard <span
id="fr_1670"></span>[6](#fn_1663), which produces attachment to
subtle <span id="fr_1671"></span>[7](#fn_1664) (topics), and is
sanctifying. The (mode of) conduct in which qualities are not (treated
as) qualities <span id="fr_1672"></span>[8](#fn_1665), which is free
from attachment, in which one lives alone <span
id="fr_1673"></span>[9](#fn_1666), which is uninterrupted <span
id="fr_1674"></span>[10](#fn_1667), and which is full of the
Brahman <span id="fr_1675"></span>[11](#fn_1668), is called happiness
(dwelling) in one aggregate <span id="fr_1676"></span>[12](#fn_1669).

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

The learned man who absorbs objects of desire from all sides, as a
tortoise (draws in) his limbs <span id="fr_1677"></span>[1](#fn_1670),
and who is devoid of passion, and released from everything <span
id="fr_1678"></span>[2](#fn_1671), is ever happy. Restraining objects of
desire within the self <span id="fr_1679"></span>[3](#fn_1672), he
becomes fit for assimilation with the Brahman <span
id="fr_1680"></span>[4](#fn_1673), having his cravings destroyed, and
being concentrated in mind, and friendly and affectionate <span
id="fr_1681"></span>[5](#fn_1674) to all beings. The fire of the
Adhyâtma <span id="fr_1682"></span>[6](#fn_1675) is kindled in a sage by
his abandoning the country <span id="fr_1683"></span>[7](#fn_1676), and
by the restraint of all the senses which hanker after objects of sense.
As fire kindled with fuel shines forth with a great blaze, so the great
self <span id="fr_1684"></span>[8](#fn_1677) shines forth through the
restraint of the senses. When one with a tranquil self perceives all
entities in one's own heart. then being self-illumined <span
id="fr_1685"></span>[9](#fn_1678), one attains to that which is subtler
than (the most) subtle (thing) <span id="fr_1686"></span>[10](#fn_1679),
and than which there is nothing higher. It is settled, that the body in
which the colour <span id="fr_1687"></span>[11](#fn_1680) is fire, the
flowing <span id="fr_1688"></span>[12](#fn_1681)

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

(element) water, and the feeling of touch is air, the hideous holder of
the mud <span id="fr_1689"></span>[1](#fn_1682) is earth, and likewise
the sound is space; which is pervaded by disease and sorrow; which is
surrounded by the five currents <span id="fr_1690"></span>[2](#fn_1683);
which is made up of the five elements; which has nine passages <span
id="fr_1691"></span>[3](#fn_1684) and two deities <span
id="fr_1692"></span>[4](#fn_1685); which is full of passion; unfit to be
seen <span id="fr_1693"></span>[5](#fn_1686); made up of three qualities
and of three constituent elements <span
id="fr_1694"></span>[6](#fn_1687); pleased with contacts <span
id="fr_1695"></span>[7](#fn_1688); and full of delusion <span
id="fr_1696"></span>[8](#fn_1689); this same (body), which is difficult
to move in this mortal world, and which rests on the real (entity) <span
id="fr_1697"></span>[9](#fn_1690), is the very wheel of time which
rotates in this world <span id="fr_1698"></span>[10](#fn_1691). It is a
great ocean, fearful and unfathomable, and is named <span
id="fr_1699"></span>[11](#fn_1692) delusion. The world, together with
the immortals, should cast it aside, curtail it,

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

and restrain it <span id="fr_1700"></span>[1](#fn_1693). Desire, wrath,
fear, avarice, treachery, and falsehood also, (all these), which are
difficult to get rid of, the good do get rid of by restraint of the
senses <span id="fr_1701"></span>[2](#fn_1694). And he who in this world
has vanquished the three qualities and the five constituent
elements <span id="fr_1702"></span>[3](#fn_1695), obtains the
highest <span id="fr_1703"></span>[4](#fn_1696)--the infinite-seat in
heaven. Crossing the river of which the five senses are the lofty banks,
the agitation of mind <span id="fr_1704"></span>[5](#fn_1697) the mighty
waters, and delusion the reservoir <span
id="fr_1705"></span>[6](#fn_1698), one should vanquish both desire and
wrath. Freed from all sins, he, then perceives that highest (principle),
concentrating the mind within the mind <span
id="fr_1706"></span>[7](#fn_1699), and seeing the self within the
self <span id="fr_1707"></span>[8](#fn_1700). Understanding everything,
he sees the self with the self in all entities as one <span
id="fr_1708"></span>[9](#fn_1701), and also as various,

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

changing from time to time <span
id="fr_1709"></span>[1](sbe0855.htm#fn_1702). He can always perceive
(numerous) bodies like a hundred lights from one light. He verily is
Vish*n*u, and Mitra, and Varuna, Agni, and Pra*g*âpati. He is the
supporter, and the creator. He is the lord whose faces ale in all
directions <span id="fr_1710"></span>[2](sbe0855.htm#fn_1703). (In him)
the great self--the heart of all beings--is resplendent. Him, all
companies of Brâhma*n*as, and also gods, and demons, and Yakshas, and
Pisâ*k*as, and Pit*ri*s, and birds, and the bands of Rakshases, and the
bands of Bhûtas <span id="fr_1711"></span>[3](sbe0855.htm#fn_1704), and
also all the great sages, ever extol.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1631"></span>[335:1](sbe0854.htm#fr_1638) The contact of
the objects of sense with the senses is the source of delusion.

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[335:2](sbe0854.htm#fr_1639) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
107](sbe0816.htm#page_107), and note  [1](sbe0816.htm#fn_444) there.

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[335:3](sbe0854.htm#fr_1640) Cf.
Sâ<u>n</u>khya-sûtra I, 121, and [p. 387](sbe0863.htm#page_387) infra.

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[335:4](sbe0854.htm#fr_1641) I.e. knowledge of
the truth, Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra.

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[335:5](sbe0854.htm#fr_1642) Hence, as they
have a beginning, they also must have an end and hence they are
inconstant.

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[335:6](sbe0854.htm#fr_1643) This and
following epithets expand the idea of inconstancy.

<span id="fn_1637"></span>[335:7](sbe0854.htm#fr_1644) Being all in
substance connected with the Prak*ri*ti, the material world, so to say.

<span id="fn_1638"></span>[335:8](sbe0854.htm#fr_1645) Containing no
reality, Nîlaka*nth*a.

<span id="fn_1639"></span>[336:1](sbe0854.htm#fr_1646) Nîlaka*nth*a
apparently takes the original here to mean of gross nature, not, subtle,
such as anything connected with the self would be. They are helpless and
powerless without support from other principles, and mainly the self.

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[336:2](sbe0854.htm#fr_1647) He here states
what is more closely connected with the self, and, as Nîlaka*nth*a puts
it, accompanies the self till final emancipation. The inner self
Nîlaka*nth*a takes to mean the self associated with egoism or
self-consciousness.

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[336:3](sbe0854.htm#fr_1648) Nîlaka*nth*a
cites certain texts to show that the perceptive senses work only through
the mind, and that the objects of the senses are produced from the
senses, and hence the universe, he says, is constituted of the eight
enumerated above.

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[336:4](sbe0854.htm#fr_1649) I. e. from the
truth.

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[336:5](sbe0854.htm#fr_1650) I. e. vexed by
the operations of any of these.

<span id="fn_1644"></span>[337:1](sbe0854.htm#fr_1651) Cf.
Sâ<u>n</u>khya-kârikâ 2 7; Sâ<u>n</u>khya-sâra, p. 17.

<span id="fn_1645"></span>[337:2](sbe0854.htm#fr_1652) Cf. Ka*th*a, p.
148.

<span id="fn_1646"></span>[337:3](sbe0854.htm#fr_1653) Cf. Lalita
Vistara (translated by Dr. R. Mitra), p. 11.

<span id="fn_1647"></span>[337:4](sbe0854.htm#fr_1654) The above
sentences show the entities in the three different aspects mentioned,
which correspond to each other; the ear is the sense, that which is
connected with the self; sound is the object of that sense, as connected
with the external world; and the <span id="page_338">p. 338</span>
quarters, Dik, are the deities presiding over the senses; as to this cf.
Sâ<u>n</u>khya-sâra, p. 17, and Vedânta Paribhâshâ, p. 45, which show
some discrepancies. The distinctions of Adhyâtma &c. are to be found in
the Upanishads; cf. inter alia, *Kh*ândogya, p. 227, and cf. Gîtâ, [p.
77](sbe0809.htm#page_77).

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[338:1](sbe0854.htm#fr_1655) As to the
original word, cf. inter alia, *S*vetâ*s*vatara, pp. 197-202.

<span id="fn_1649"></span>[338:2](sbe0854.htm#fr_1656) This probably
means the five senses which can perceive only when associated with the
mind. See [p. 268](sbe0834.htm#page_268) supra.

<span id="fn_1650"></span>[338:3](sbe0854.htm#fr_1657) The understanding
is called the charioteer at Ka*th*a, p. 111.

<span id="fn_1651"></span>[339:1](sbe0854.htm#fr_1658) Cf. *Kh*ândogya,
pp. 404-406, and glosses; Aitareya, p. 243; Vedânta Paribhâshâ, p. 47;
Sâ<u>n</u>khya-sûtra V, 111; Manu. I, 43; Max Müller's note at p. 94 of
his *Kh*ândogya in this series.

<span id="fn_1652"></span>[339:2](sbe0854.htm#fr_1659) So Nîlaka*nth*a,
but he also adds that this means birth as a Brâhma*n*a, which seems to
be quite wrong. Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra's 'means of acquiring Brahman' is
right. See [p. 369](sbe0859.htm#page_369) infra.

<span id="fn_1653"></span>[339:3](sbe0854.htm#fr_1660) I. e., I presume,
'knowledge.' *S*a<u>n</u>kara has so interpreted the word at Mu*nd*aka,
p. 270, and Ka*th*a, p. 127, and elsewhere; and see Sanatsu*g*âtîya, [p.
166](sbe0824.htm#page_166) supra.

<span id="fn_1654"></span>[339:4](sbe0854.htm#fr_1661) Another reading
is 'of two kinds.' But I prefer this, as three kinds are mentioned
further on.

<span id="fn_1655"></span>[340:1](sbe0854.htm#fr_1662) Cf. as to this
*Kh*ândogya, p. 136, which justifies our rendering, though the
commentator Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra seems to understand the passage
differently.

<span id="fn_1656"></span>[340:2](sbe0854.htm#fr_1663) Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra
seems to understand this to mean 'twice-born.'

<span id="fn_1657"></span>[340:3](sbe0854.htm#fr_1664) This is a
repetition of what occurs at [p. 337](#page_337), and apparently is
spurious. But two of the MSS., both those containing commentaries,
contain the passage twice. One of the other MSS. omits the passage where
it occurs before, and has it here. I think that the passage is in its
place before, and probably interpolated here.

<span id="fn_1658"></span>[341:1](sbe0854.htm#fr_1665) I am not quite
sure that this is a correct rendering. But I can think of none better,
and the commentators afford no help.

<span id="fn_1659"></span>[341:2](sbe0854.htm#fr_1666) Nîlaka*nth*a
says, 'Thinking that the great elements are not distinct from the
senses, one should hold them absorbed in the mind.' Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra
says, 'In the mind as their seat they should be placed,' as being not
distinct from the mind, I presume. Cf. Ka*th*a, p. 148.

<span id="fn_1660"></span>[341:3](sbe0854.htm#fr_1667) Literally,'
birth.'

<span id="fn_1661"></span>[341:4](sbe0854.htm#fr_1668) From knowledge, I
presume. The commentators afford no help.

<span id="fn_1662"></span>[341:5](sbe0854.htm#fr_1669) Ar*g*una
Mi*s*ra's text appears to commence a new chapter here.

<span id="fn_1663"></span>[341:6](sbe0854.htm#fr_1670) Such as
meditation or upâsana, and prâ*n*âyama or restraint of life-winds
respectively, Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra.

<span id="fn_1664"></span>[341:7](sbe0854.htm#fr_1671) Cf. [p.
310](sbe0846.htm#page_310) supra.

<span id="fn_1665"></span>[341:8](sbe0854.htm#fr_1672) I. e. bravery,
learning, &c. are treated as not being merits, as they cause pride, &c.,
Nîlaka*nth*a.

<span id="fn_1666"></span>[341:9](sbe0854.htm#fr_1673) I. e. in
solitude, Nîlaka*nth*a; devoting oneself to the self\` only, Ar*g*una
Mi*s*ra. Cf. also [p. 284](sbe0838.htm#page_284) supra, note
 [4](sbe0839.htm#fn_1364).

<span id="fn_1667"></span>[341:10](sbe0854.htm#fr_1674) Or, says
Nîlaka*nth*a, free from any belief in distinctions.

<span id="fn_1668"></span>[341:11](sbe0854.htm#fr_1675) Another reading
would mean 'which exists among Brâhma*n*as.'

<span id="fn_1669"></span>[341:12](sbe0854.htm#fr_1676) I. e. all
collected together, I presume.

<span id="fn_1670"></span>[342:1](sbe0854.htm#fr_1677) Cf. Gîtâ, pp.
[50](sbe0804.htm#page_50), [51](sbe0804.htm#page_51), and *S*ânti Parvan
(Moksha Dharma) I, 51, where the phrase is precisely the same as here.

<span id="fn_1671"></span>[342:2](sbe0854.htm#fr_1678) I. e. from all
bonds, I suppose. See [p. 292](sbe0840.htm#page_292) supra.

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[342:3](sbe0854.htm#fr_1679) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
51](sbe0804.htm#page_51).

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[342:4](sbe0854.htm#fr_1680) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
110](sbe0816.htm#page_110).

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[342:5](sbe0854.htm#fr_1681) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
68](sbe0808.htm#page_68).

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[342:6](sbe0854.htm#fr_1682) I. e. experience,
Nîlaka*nth*a. It means direct perception of the relations between the
supreme and individual self, Cf. Gîtâ, [p. 111](sbe0817.htm#page_111).

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[342:7](sbe0854.htm#fr_1683) As opposed to
forests. See Sanatsu*g*âtîya, [p. 159](sbe0823.htm#page_159), note 9.

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[342:8](sbe0854.htm#fr_1684) This must mean
here the supreme self, apparently.

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[342:9](sbe0854.htm#fr_1685) I. e. being
devoted to the self only, Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra. The ordinary meaning of the
word, however, is one who has direct experience or perception without
the aid of senses, &c. Cf. B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, p. 765, and *S*ârîraka
Bhâshya, pp. 648, 784, &c.

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[342:10](sbe0854.htm#fr_1686) Nîlaka*nth*a
says, 'The supreme Brahman which is subtler than the Brahman within the
lotus-like heart.'

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[342:11](sbe0854.htm#fr_1687) I. e. that which
perceives colour, viz. the sense, Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra. This applies to the
analogous words coming further on.

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[342:12](sbe0854.htm#fr_1688) I. e. taste,
says Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra, which seems to be more correct than
Nîlaka*nth*a's blood and such other liquid elements of the body.

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[343:1](sbe0854.htm#fr_1689) I. e. the flesh,
bone, and so forth, Nîlaka*nth*a; the mucus in the nose, Ar*g*una
Mi*s*ra.

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[343:2](sbe0854.htm#fr_1690) I. e. the senses.
Cf. [p. 238](sbe0829.htm#page_238) supra, note
 [7](sbe0829.htm#fn_1090).

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[343:3](sbe0854.htm#fr_1691) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
65](sbe0807.htm#page_65).

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[343:4](sbe0854.htm#fr_1692) See
Sanatsu*g*âtîya, [p. 187](sbe0826.htm#page_187) supra.

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[343:5](sbe0854.htm#fr_1693) As being unholy,
Nîlaka*nth*a; as the bodies of Kâ*nd*âlas &c, when seen are productive
of sin, Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra. See [p. 155](sbe0823.htm#page_155) supra.

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[343:6](sbe0854.htm#fr_1694) Viz. vâta, pitta,
*s*leshma, or wind, bile,, and phlegm. The dhâtus are sometimes spoken
of as seven. See Yoga-sûtras, p. 192; Taitt. Âr. p. 874, commentary, and
[p. 246](sbe0831.htm#page_246) supra. See, too, however,
*S*vetâ*s*vatara, commentary, p. 287.

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[343:7](sbe0854.htm#fr_1695) Which is
delighted only by contact with food and so forth, not otherwise,
Nîlaka*nth*a.

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[343:8](sbe0854.htm#fr_1696) I. e. cause of
delusion. The original word for 'it is settled' at the beginning of this
sentence is otherwise rendered by Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra. He takes it to mean
in this light (namely, as above stated) 'should one contemplate the
body.' The other rendering is Nîlaka*nth*a's.

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[343:9](sbe0854.htm#fr_1697) I. e. the self,
Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra; the understanding, Nîlaka*nth*a difficult to move =
difficult to adjust if attacked by disease, &c., Nîlaka*nth*a.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[343:10](sbe0854.htm#fr_1698) It is owing to
this body that the self becomes limited by time, Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra.
Nîlaka*nth*a's gloss I do not follow. Cf. [p. 187](sbe0826.htm#page_187)
supra, and [p. 355](sbe0856.htm#page_355) infra.

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[343:11](sbe0854.htm#fr_1699) I. e.,
Characterised by delusion, Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra.

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[344:1](sbe0854.htm#fr_1700) I am not sure
about the meaning here. Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra says, (reading vi*s*riget,
'send forth,' for vikshipet, 'cast aside,') 'send forth at the creation,
curtail at the dissolution, and restrain at the final emancipation.' The
commentary reads rodhayet, which we have adopted above. The text in the
same copy, however, is bodhayet. Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra adds, as far as I can
make out from an incorrect copy: 'as in this life everything is
accomplished by these actions' (namely, I suppose, the casting aside,
&c.) Nîlaka*nth*a says, 'This same thing is the cause of creation,
destruction, and knowledge,' reading bodhayet.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[344:2](sbe0854.htm#fr_1701) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
57](sbe0805.htm#page_57).

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[344:3](sbe0854.htm#fr_1702) I. e. the five
great elements, as stated in Williams' Dictionary, citing Yâgñavalkya
III, 145. See Sânti Parvan (Moksha), chap. 182, st. 16; chap. 184, st.
1.

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[344:4](sbe0854.htm#fr_1703) I. e. the seat of
the Brahman, Nîlaka*nth*a.

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[344:5](sbe0854.htm#fr_1704) See Gîtâ, [p.
66](sbe0807.htm#page_66), where the word is the same, viz. vega.

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[344:6](sbe0854.htm#fr_1705) From which,
namely, the river issues. Cf. for the whole figure, *S*ânti Parvan
(Moksha), chap. 251, st. 12.

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[344:7](sbe0854.htm#fr_1706) The mind = the
lotus-like heart, Nîlaka*nth*a. Cf. Gîtâ, [p. 79](sbe0810.htm#page_79).
Concentrating = withdrawing from external objects, &c.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[344:8](sbe0854.htm#fr_1707) I. e. in the
body, Nîlaka*nth*a. See [p. 248](sbe0831.htm#page_248).

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[344:9](sbe0854.htm#fr_1708) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
83](sbe0811.htm#page_83), and note  [4](sbe0811.htm#fn_323) there.
Nîlaka*nth*a says, 'as one, i. e. by direct perception of the unity of
the individual and supreme, and as various, i. e. in the
all-comprehending form.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](sbe0855)
