[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0805)  [Next](sbe0807) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IV.

The Deity said:

This everlasting <span id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_184) (system of)
devotion I declared to the sun, the sun declared it to Manu <span
id="fr_186"></span>[2](#fn_185), and Manu communicated it to Ikshvâku.
Coming thus by steps, it became known to royal sages. But, O terror of
(your) foes! that devotion was lost to the world by long (lapse of)
time. That same primeval devotion I have declared to you to-day, seeing.
that you are my devotee and friend, for it is the highest mystery.

Ar*g*una said:

Later is your birth the birth of the sun is prior. How then shall I
understand that you declared (this) first?

The Deity said:

I have passed through many births, O Ar*g*una I and you also. I know
them all, but you, O terror of (your) foes! do not know them. Even
though I am unborn and inexhaustible in (my) essence, even though I am
lord of all beings, still I take up the control of my own nature <span
id="fr_187"></span>[3](#fn_186), and am born by means

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

of my delusive power. Whensoever, O descendant of Bharata! piety
languishes, and impiety is in the ascendant, I create myself. I am born
age after age, for the protection of the good, for the destruction of
evil-doers, and the establishment of piety. Whoever truly knows thus my
divine birth and work, casts off (this) body and is not born again. He
comes to me, O Ar*g*una! Many from whom affection, fear <span
id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_187), and wrath have departed, who are full
of me, who depend on me, and who are purified by the penance of
knowledge <span id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_188), have come into my
essence. I serve men in the way in which they approach me <span
id="fr_190"></span>[3](#fn_189). In every way, O son of P*ri*thâ! men
follow in my path <span id="fr_191"></span>[4](#fn_190). Desiring the
success of actions <span id="fr_192"></span>[5](#fn_191), men in this
world worship the divinities, for in this world of mortals, the success
produced by action is soon obtained. The fourfold division of castes was
created by me according to the apportionment of qualities and duties.
But though I am its author, know me to be inexhaustible, and not the
author. Actions defile me not. I have no attachment to the fruit of
actions. He who knows me thus is not tied down by actions. Knowing this,
the men of old who wished for final emancipation, performed action.
Therefore do you, too, perform action as was done by men of old in olden
times. Even sages are confused as to what

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

is action, what inaction. Therefore I will speak to you about action,
and learning that, you will be freed from (this world of) evil. One must
possess knowledge about action; one must also possess knowledge about
prohibited action; and again one must possess knowledge about inaction.
The truth regarding action is abstruse. He is wise among men, he is
possessed of devotion, and performs all actions <span
id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_192), who sees inaction in action, and action
in inaction. The wise call him learned, whose acts are all free from
desires and fancies, and whose actions are burnt down by the fire of
knowledge. Forsaking all attachment to the fruit of action, always
contented, dependent on none, he does nothing at all, though he engages
in action. Devoid of expectations, restraining the mind and the self,
and casting off all belongings <span id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_193), he
incurs no sin, performing actions merely for the sake of the body <span
id="fr_195"></span>[3](#fn_194). Satisfied with earnings coming
spontaneously <span id="fr_196"></span>[4](#fn_195), rising above the
pairs of opposites, free from all animosity, and equable on success or
ill-success, he is not fettered down, even though he performs (actions).
The acts of one who is devoid of attachment, who is free <span
id="fr_197"></span>[5](#fn_196), whose mind is fixed on knowledge, and
who performs action for (the purpose of) the sacrifice <span
id="fr_198"></span>[6](#fn_197) are all destroyed.

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

Brahman is the oblation; with Brahman (as a sacrificial instrument) it
is offered up; Brahman is in the fire; and by Brahman it is thrown; and
Brahman, too, is the goal to which he proceeds who meditates on Brahman
in the action <span id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_198). Some devotees
perform the sacrifice to the gods, some offer up the sacrifice by the
sacrifice itself in the fire of Brahman <span
id="fr_200"></span>[2](#fn_199). Others offer up the senses, such as the
sense of hearing and others, in the fires of restraint <span
id="fr_201"></span>[3](#fn_200); others offer up the objects of sense,
such as sound and so forth, into the fires of the senses <span
id="fr_202"></span>[4](#fn_201). Some again offer up all the operations
of the senses and the operations of the life-breaths into the fire of
devotion by self-restraint <span id="fr_203"></span>[5](#fn_202),
kindled by knowledge. Others perform the sacrifice of wealth, the
sacrifice of penance, the sacrifice of concentration of mind, the
sacrifice of Vedic study <span id="fr_204"></span>[6](#fn_203), and of
knowledge, and others are ascetics of rigid vows. Some offer up the
upward life-breath into the downward life-breath, and the downward
life-breath into the upper life-breath, and stopping up the motions of
the upward and downward life-breaths, devote themselves to the restraint
of the life-breaths <span id="fr_205"></span>[7](#fn_204). Others, who
(take) limited food, offer up the life-breaths into

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

the life-breaths. All of these, conversant with the sacrifice, have
their sins destroyed by the sacrifice. Those who eat the nectar-like
leavings of the sacrifice repair to the eternal Brahman <span
id="fr_206"></span>[1](#fn_205). This world is not for those who perform
no sacrifice, whence (then) the other, O best of the Kauravas! Thus
sacrifices of various sorts are laid down in the Vedas. Know them all to
be produced from action <span id="fr_207"></span>[2](#fn_206), and
knowing this you will be released (from the fetters of this world). The
sacrifice of knowledge, O terror of (your) foes! is superior to the
sacrifice of wealth, for action, O son of P*ri*thâ! is wholly and
entirely comprehended in knowledge. That <span
id="fr_208"></span>[3](#fn_207) you should learn by salutation,
question, and service <span id="fr_209"></span>[4](#fn_208). The men of
knowledge who perceive the truth will teach knowledge to you. Having
learnt that, O son of Pâ*nd*u! you will not again fall thus into
delusion; and by means of it, you will see all beings, without
exception, first in yourself, and then in me <span
id="fr_210"></span>[5](#fn_209). Even if you are the most sinful of all
sinful men, you will cross over all trespasses by means of the boat of
knowledge alone. As a fire well kindled, O Ar*g*una! reduces fuel to
ashes, so the fire of knowledge reduces all actions to ashes <span
id="fr_211"></span>[6](#fn_210). For there is in this world no means of
sanctification like knowledge <span id="fr_212"></span>[7](#fn_211), and
that one perfected by devotion finds within one's self in time. He who
has faith, whose

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

senses are restrained, and who is assiduous, obtains knowledge <span
id="fr_213"></span>[1](sbe0807.htm#fn_212). Obtaining knowledge, he
acquires, without delay, the highest tranquillity. He who is ignorant
and devoid of faith, and whose self is full of misgivings, is ruined.
Not this world, not the next, nor happiness, is for him whose self is
full of misgivings. Actions, O Dhanañ*g*aya! do not fetter one who is
self-possessed <span id="fr_214"></span>[2](sbe0807.htm#fn_213), who has
renounced action by devotion, and who has destroyed misgivings by
knowledge. Therefore, O descendant of Bharata! destroy, with the sword
of knowledge, these misgivings of yours which fill your mind, and which
are produced from ignorance. Engage in devotion. Arise!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_184"></span>[58:1](sbe0806.htm#fr_185) Because its fruit is
imperishable, viz. final emancipation.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[58:2](sbe0806.htm#fr_186) In the
*Kh*ândogya-upanishad, Manu is the channel of communication for some
doctrine taught by Pra*g*âpati, which Manu teaches the 'people,'
interpreted by *S*a<u>n</u>kara to mean Ikshvâku, &c. (p. 178; see too
p. 625).

<span id="fn_186"></span>[58:3](sbe0806.htm#fr_187) Nature is what goes
to the formation of the material form in which he is born; the 'power'
includes knowledge, omnipotence, &c. It is delusive because he is still
really 'unborn.'

<span id="fn_187"></span>[59:1](sbe0806.htm#fr_188) Cf. Sutta Nipâta, p.
73.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[59:2](sbe0806.htm#fr_189) Cf. infra, [p.
61](#page_61).

<span id="fn_189"></span>[59:3](sbe0806.htm#fr_190) I. e. I give to each
worshipper what is proper for him.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[59:4](sbe0806.htm#fr_191) The original words
used here occur before in a different sense (see [p.
55](sbe0805.htm#page_55)). Here the meaning is that to whomsoever
directly addressed, all worship is worship of me (see [p.
84](sbe0811.htm#page_84)). In the whole passage, K*ri*sh*n*a says that
the Deity is not chargeable with partiality on account of the variety of
human qualities and states.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[59:5](sbe0806.htm#fr_192) Such as acquisition
of sons, cattle, &c.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[60:1](sbe0806.htm#fr_193) Devoted though
performing all actions.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[60:2](sbe0806.htm#fr_194) 'Appropriating
nothing,' at Sutta Nipâta, p. 101, seems to be the same idea. 'Self'
just before this means senses.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[60:3](sbe0806.htm#fr_195) Preferably, perhaps,
'with the body only.' But *S*a<u>n</u>kara rejects this.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[60:4](sbe0806.htm#fr_196) Cf. infra, [p.
101](sbe0814.htm#page_101); and Sutta Nipâta, p. 12.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[60:5](sbe0806.htm#fr_197) The commentators
vary in their interpretations of this word (mukta), but the common point
appears to be 'free from attachment to worldly concerns,' Cf. Sutta
Nipâta, p. 8.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[60:6](sbe0806.htm#fr_198) Sacrifice here
apparently means every act for the attainment of <span id="page_61">p.
61</span> the supreme; cf. supra, [p. 53](sbe0805.htm#page_53). In
Â*s*valâyana G*ri*hya-sûtra III, 1, 5, a text is cited meaning
'salutation verily is a sacrifice.'

<span id="fn_198"></span>[61:1](sbe0806.htm#fr_199) This thorough
identification with the Brahman explains why the action is 'destroyed'
and does not 'fetter' the doer.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[61:2](sbe0806.htm#fr_200) I. e. all acts,
religious and other, offered up to the Brahman in the mode above stated.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[61:3](sbe0806.htm#fr_201) Practise 'yoga' and
other like exercises.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[61:4](sbe0806.htm#fr_202) Remaining unattached
to sensuous enjoyments.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[61:5](sbe0806.htm#fr_203) Stopping the bodily
operations mentioned, and engaging in contemplation.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[61:6](sbe0806.htm#fr_204) This is called
Brahmaya*g*ña, Â*s*valâyana Grihya-sûtra III, 1, 3.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[61:7](sbe0806.htm#fr_205) Maitrî-upanishad, p.
129.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[62:1](sbe0806.htm#fr_206) Supra, [p.
53](sbe0805.htm#page_53).

<span id="fn_206"></span>[62:2](sbe0806.htm#fr_207) Operations of mind,
senses, &c.; cf. supra, [p. 54](sbe0805.htm#page_54).

<span id="fn_207"></span>[62:3](sbe0806.htm#fr_208) I. e. knowledge.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[62:4](sbe0806.htm#fr_209) Addressed to men of
knowledge. Cf. Mu*nd*akopanishad, p. 282.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[62:5](sbe0806.htm#fr_210) The essential unity
of the supreme and individual soul and the whole universe. Cf.
Îsopanishad, pp. 13, 14.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[62:6](sbe0806.htm#fr_211) Supra, [p.
60](#page_60).

<span id="fn_211"></span>[62:7](sbe0806.htm#fr_212) Sutta Nipâta, p. 48.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](sbe0807)
