[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0816)  [Next](sbe0818) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

# CHAPTER XV.

The Deity said:

They say the inexhaustible A*s*vattha <span
id="fr_468"></span>[1](#fn_467) has (its) roots above, (its) branches
below; the *Kh*andas are its leaves. He who knows it knows the Vedas.
Upwards and downwards extend its branches, which are enlarged by the
qualities, and the sprouts of which are sensuous objects. And downwards
to this human world are continued its roots which lead on to action. Its
form is not thus known here, nor (its) end, nor beginning, nor support.
But having with the firm weapon of unconcern, cut this A*s*vattha, whose
roots are firmly fixed, then should one seek for that seat from which
those that go there never return, (thinking) that one rests on that same
primal being from whom the ancient course (of worldly life) emanated.
Those who are free from pride and delusion, who have overcome the evils
of attachment, who are constant in (contemplating) the relation of the
supreme and individual self, from whom desire has departed, who are free
from the pairs (of opposites) called pleasure and pain, go undeluded to
that imperishable seat <span id="fr_469"></span>[2](#fn_468). The

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

sun does not light it, nor the moon, nor fire <span
id="fr_470"></span>[1](#fn_469). That is my highest abode, going to
which none returns. An eternal portion of me it is, which, becoming an
individual soul in the mortal world, draws (to itself) the senses with
the mind as the sixth <span id="fr_471"></span>[2](#fn_470). Whenever
the ruler (of the bodily frame) obtains or quits a body, he goes taking
these (with him) as the wind (takes) perfumes from (their) seats <span
id="fr_472"></span>[3](#fn_471). And presiding over the senses of
hearing and seeing, and touch, and taste, and smell, and the mind, he
enjoys sensuous objects. Those who are deluded do not see (him)
remaining in or quitting (a body), enjoying or joined to the
qualities <span id="fr_473"></span>[4](#fn_472); they see, who have eyes
of knowledge. Devotees making efforts perceive him abiding within their
selfs <span id="fr_474"></span>[5](#fn_473). But those whose selfs have
not been refined, and who have no discernment, do not perceive him even
(after) making efforts. Know that glory (to be) mine which, dwelling in
the sun, lights up the whole world, or in the moon or fire <span
id="fr_475"></span>[6](#fn_474).

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Entering the earth <span
id="fr_476"></span>[1](#fn_475), I by my power support all things; and
becoming the juicy moon, I nourish all herbs. I becoming the fire, and
dwelling in the bodies of (all) creatures, and united with the upward
and downward life-breaths, cause digestion of the fourfold food <span
id="fr_477"></span>[2](#fn_476). And I am placed in the heart of
all <span id="fr_478"></span>[3](#fn_477); from me (come) memory,
knowledge, and their removal; I alone am to be learnt from all the
Vedas; I am the author of the Vedântas <span
id="fr_479"></span>[4](#fn_478); and I alone know the Vedas. There are
these two beings in the world, the destructible and the
indestructible <span id="fr_480"></span>[5](#fn_479). The destructible
(includes) all things. The unconcerned one is (what is) called the
indestructible. But the being supreme is yet another, called the highest
self, who as the inexhaustible lord, pervading the three worlds,
supports (them). And since I transcend the destructible, and since I am
higher also than the indestructible <span
id="fr_481"></span>[6](#fn_480), therefore

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

am I celebrated in the world and in the Vedas as the best of beings. He
who, undeluded, thus knows me the best of beings, worships me every
way <span id="fr_482"></span>[1](sbe0818.htm#fn_481), O descendant of
Bharata! knowing everything. Thus, O sinless one! have I proclaimed this
most mysterious science. He who knows this, has done all he need do, and
he becomes possessed of discernment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_467"></span>[111:1](sbe0817.htm#fr_468) Cf.
Ka*th*opanishad, p. 70, and Sutta Nipâta, p. 76.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[111:2](sbe0817.htm#fr_469) A*s*vattha stands
here for the course of worldly life. Its roots are above, viz. the
supreme being; its boughs are Hira*n*yagarbha and others of the higher
beings. The Vedas are its leaves, preserving it as leaves preserve trees
(another interpretation is that they are the causes of the fruit which
the tree bears, i. e. salvation, &c.) Upwards and downwards, from the
highest to the lowest of created things. Enlarged = the qualities
manifesting themselves, as body, senses, &c.; objects of sense are
sprouts as they are attached to the senses, which are the tips of the
branches above stated. The roots which extend downwards are the desires
for various <span id="page_112">p. 112</span> enjoyments. Its form not
thus known here, i.e. to those who live and move in this world, thus
viz. as above described. The man who knows the tree thus is said to know
the Vedas, because knowledge of it is knowledge of the substance of the
Vedas, which is, that the course of worldly life springs from the
supreme, is kept up by Vedic rites, and destroyed by knowledge of the
supreme. As to freedom from pride, cf. Sutta Nipâta, p. 4.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[112:1](sbe0817.htm#fr_470) Cf.
Ka*th*opanishad, p. 142; Mu*nd*aka, p. 304; N*ri*si*m*hatâpinî, p. 106;
*S*vetâ*s*vatara, p. 110.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[112:2](sbe0817.htm#fr_471) Five senses and the
mind issue from nature, in which they are absorbed during sleep or at a
dissolution of the world. Cf. Sutta Nipâta, p. 44.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[112:3](sbe0817.htm#fr_472) Cf.
Kaushîtaki-upanishad, pp. 86, 87.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[112:4](sbe0817.htm#fr_473) Perceiving objects
of sense, or feeling pleasure, pain, &c.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[112:5](sbe0817.htm#fr_474) 'Selfs' = bodies,
Râmânu*g*a and *S*rîdhara; 'understandings,' *S*a<u>n</u>kara. In the
next sentence 'self' means mind.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[112:6](sbe0817.htm#fr_475) Cf.
Maitrî-upanishad, p. 142. This sentence continues what has been stated
at the top of the page. The intervening <span id="page_113">p.
113</span> portion explains how souls do come back in some cases. As a
general rule, 'all going ends in returning.' But the soul is an
exception in some cases, as the 'going' to the Brahman is going to the
fountain-head. Then the question arises, How does the severance come off
at all? And that is what the lines up to this explain.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[113:1](sbe0817.htm#fr_476) 'Entering in the
form of the goddess earth,' say Ânandagiri and Madhusûdana. Support, i.
e. by keeping the earth from falling or crumbling away. The moon is said
to nourish herbs by communicating to them some of her 'juice.' The moon,
it may be noted, is called 'watery star' by Shakespeare. As to her
relation to the vegetable kingdom, see Matsya-purâ*n*a XXIII, stanza 10
seq.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[113:2](sbe0817.htm#fr_477) I. e. what is
drunk, what is licked, what is powdered with the teeth, and what is
eaten without such powdering.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[113:3](sbe0817.htm#fr_478) Cf. [p.
104](sbe0815.htm#page_104) supra.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[113:4](sbe0817.htm#fr_479) See Introduction,
[p. 17](sbe0802.htm#page_17).

<span id="fn_479"></span>[113:5](sbe0817.htm#fr_480) Cf.
*S*vetâ*s*vatara, p. 294.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[113:6](sbe0817.htm#fr_481) The two are the
whole collection of things as they appear and their material cause. The
supreme being is a third principle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chaper XVI](sbe0818)
