[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0803)  [Next](sbe0805) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II.

Sañ*g*aya said:

To him, who was thus overcome with pity, and dejected, and whose eyes
were full of tears and turbid, the destroyer of Madhu spoke these words.

The Deity said:

How (comes it that) this delusion, O Ar*g*una! which is discarded by the
good, which excludes from heaven, and occasions infamy, has overtaken
you in this (place of) peril? Be not effeminate, O son of P*ri*thâ! it
is not worthy of you. Cast off this base weakness of heart, and arise, O
terror of (your) foes!

Ar*g*una said:

How, O destroyer of Madhu! shall I encounter with arrows in the battle
Bhîshma and Dro*n*a--both, O destroyer of enemies! entitled to
reverence? Not

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

killing (my) preceptors--(men) of great glory--it is better to live even
on alms in this world. But killing them, though they are avaricious of
worldly goods, I should only enjoy blood-tainted enjoyments. Nor do we
know which of the two is better for us-whether that we should vanquish
them, or that they should vanquish us. Even those, whom having killed,
we do not wish to live--even those sons of Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra stand
(arrayed) against us. With a heart contaminated by the taint of
helplessness <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_105), with a mind
confounded about my duty, I ask you. Tell me what is assuredly good for
me. I am your disciple; instruct me, who have thrown myself on your
(indulgence). For I do not perceive what is to dispel that grief which
will dry up my organs <span id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_106) after I
shall have obtained a prosperous kingdom on earth without a foe, or even
the sovereignty of the gods <span id="fr_108"></span>[3](#fn_107).

Sañ*g*aya said:

Having spoken thus to Hrishîkesa, O terror of (your) foes! Gu*d*âke*s*a
said to Govinda, 'I shall not engage in battle;' and verily remained
silent. To him thus desponding between the two armies, O descendant of
Bharata! H*ri*shîkesa spoke these words with a slight smile.

The Deity said:

You have grieved for those who deserve no grief,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

and you talk words of wisdom <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_108).
Learned men grieve not for the living nor the dead. Never did I not
exist, nor you, nor these rulers of men; nor will any one of us ever
hereafter cease to be. As, in this body, infancy and youth and old age
(come) to the embodied (self) <span id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_109), so
does the acquisition of another body; a sensible man is not deceived
about that The contacts of the senses <span
id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_110), O son of Kuntî! which produce cold and
heat, pleasure and pain, are not permanent, they are ever coming and
going. Bear them, O descendant of Bharata! For, O chief of men! that
sensible man whom they <span id="fr_112"></span>[4](#fn_111) (pain and
pleasure being alike to him) afflict not, he merits immortality. There
is no existence for that which is unreal; there is no non-existence for
that which is real. And the (correct) conclusion about both <span
id="fr_113"></span>[5](#fn_112) is perceived by those who perceive the
truth. Know that to be indestructible which pervades all this; the
destruction of that inexhaustible (principle) none can bring about.
These bodies appertaining to the embodied (self) which is eternal,
indestructible, and indefinable, are said <span
id="fr_114"></span>[6](#fn_113) to be perishable; therefore do engage in
battle, O descendant of Bharata! He who thinks it to be the killer and
he who thinks

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

it to be killed, both know nothing. It kills not, is not killed <span
id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_114). It is not born, nor does it ever die,
nor, having existed, does it exist no more. Unborn, everlasting,
unchangeable, and primeval, it is not killed when the body is
killed <span id="fr_116"></span>[2](#fn_115). O son of P*ri*thâ! how can
that man who knows it thus to be indestructible, everlasting, unborn,
and inexhaustible, how and whom can he kill, whom can he cause to be
killed? As a man, casting off old clothes, puts on others and new ones,
so the embodied (self) casting off old bodies, goes to others and new
ones. Weapons do not divide it (into pieces); fire does not burn it,
waters do not moisten it; the wind does not dry it up. It is not
divisible; it is not combustible; it is not to be moistened; it is not
to be dried up. It is everlasting, all-pervading, stable, firm, and
eternal <span id="fr_117"></span>[3](#fn_116). It is said to be
unperceived, to be unthinkable, to be unchangeable. Therefore knowing it
to be such, you ought not to grieve, But even if you think that it is
constantly born, and constantly dies, still, O you of mighty arms! you
ought not to grieve thus. For to one that is born, death is certain; and
to one that dies, birth is certain <span
id="fr_118"></span>[4](#fn_117). Therefore

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

about (this) unavoidable thing, you ought not to grieve. The source of
things, O descendant of Bharata! is unperceived; their middle state is
perceived; and their end again is unperceived. What (occasion is there
for any) lamentation regarding them <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_118)? One looks upon it <span
id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_119) as a wonder; another similarly speaks of
it as a wonder; another too hears of it as a wonder; and even after
having heard of it, no one does really know it <span
id="fr_121"></span>[3](#fn_120). This embodied (self), O descendant of
Bharata! within every one's body is ever indestructible. Therefore you
ought not to grieve for any being. Having regard to your own duty also,
you ought not to falter, for there is nothing better for a
Kshatriya <span id="fr_122"></span>[4](#fn_121) than a righteous battle.
Happy those Kshatriyas, O son of P*ri*thâ! who can find such a battle
(to fight)--come of itself <span id="fr_123"></span>[5](#fn_122)--an
open door to heaven! But if you will not fight this righteous battle,
then you will have abandoned your own duty and your fame, and you will
incur sin. All beings, too, will tell of your everlasting infamy; and to
one who has been honoured, infamy is (a) greater (evil) than death.
(Warriors who are) masters of great cars will think that you abstained
from the battle through fear, and having been highly thought of by them,
you will fall down to littleness. Your enemies, too,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

decrying your power, will speak much about you that should not be
spoken. And what, indeed, more lamentable than that? Killed, you will
obtain heaven; victorious, you will enjoy the earth. Therefore arise, O
son of Kuntî! resolved to (engage in) battle. Looking alike on pleasure
and pain, on gain and loss, on victory and defeat, then prepare for
battle, and thus you will not incur sin. The knowledge here declared to
you is that relating to the Sâ<u>n</u>khya, <span
id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_123). Now hear that relating to the Yoga.
Possessed of this knowledge, O son of P*ri*thâ! you will cast off the
bonds of action. In this (path to final emancipation) nothing that is
commenced becomes abortive; no obstacles exist; and even a little of
this (form of ) piety protects one from great danger <span
id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_124). There is here  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[3](#fn_125), O descendant of Kuru! but one state of
mind consisting in firm understanding. But the states of mind of those
who have no firm understanding are many-branched and endless. The state
of mind consisting in firm understanding regarding steady
contemplation <span id="fr_127"></span>[4](#fn_126) does not belong to
those, O son of P*ri*thâ! who are strongly attached to (worldly)
pleasures and power, and whose minds are drawn away by that flowery talk
which is full of (ordinances of) specific acts for the attainment of
(those) pleasures and (that) power, and which promises

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

birth as the fruit of acts <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_127)--(that
flowery talk) which those unwise ones utter, who are enamoured of Vedic
words, who say there is nothing else, who are full of desires, and whose
goal is heaven <span id="fr_129"></span>[2](#fn_128). The Vedas (merely)
relate to the effects of the three qualities <span
id="fr_130"></span>[3](#fn_129); do you, O Ar*g*una! rise above those
effects of the three qualities, and be free from the pairs of
opposites <span id="fr_131"></span>[4](#fn_130), always preserve
courage <span id="fr_132"></span>[5](#fn_131), be free from anxiety for
new acquisitions or protection of old acquisitions, and be
self-controlled <span id="fr_133"></span>[6](#fn_132). To the instructed
Brâhma*n*a, there is in all the Vedas as much utility as in a reservoir
of water into which waters flow from all sides <span
id="fr_134"></span>[7](#fn_133). Your business is with action alone; not
by any means with fruit. Let not the fruit of action be your motive (to
action). Let not your attachment be (fixed) on inaction <span
id="fr_135"></span>[8](#fn_134). Having recourse to devotion, O
Dhanañ*g*aya! perform actions, casting off (all) attachment, and being
equable in success or

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

ill-success; (such) equability is called devotion. Action, O
Dhanañ*g*aya! is far inferior to the devotion of the mind. In that
devotion seek shelter. Wretched are those whose motive (to action) is
the fruit (of action). He who has obtained devotion in this world casts
off both merit and sin <span id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_135). Therefore
apply yourself to devotion; devotion in (all) actions is wisdom. The
wise who have obtained devotion cast off the fruit of action; and
released from the shackles of (repeated)births <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_136), repair to that seat where there is no
unhappiness <span id="fr_138"></span>[3](#fn_137). When your mind shall
have crossed beyond the taint of delusion, then will you become
indifferent to all that you have heard or will heard <span
id="fr_139"></span>[4](#fn_138). When your mind, confounded by what you
have heard <span id="fr_140"></span>[5](#fn_139), will stand firm and
steady in contemplation <span id="fr_141"></span>[6](#fn_140), then will
you acquire devotion.

Ar*g*una said:

What are the characteristics, O Kesava! of one whose mind is steady, and
who is intent on contemplation? How should one of steady mind speak, how
sit, how move?

The Deity said:

When a man, O son of P*ri*thâ! abandons all the

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

desires of his heart, and is pleased in his self only and by his
self <span id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_141), he is then called one of
steady mind. He whose heart is not agitated in the midst of calamities,
who has no longing for pleasures, and from whom (the feelings of)
affection, fear, and wrath <span id="fr_143"></span>[2](#fn_142) have
departed, is called a sage of steady mind. His mind is steady, who,
being without attachments anywhere, feels no exultation and no aversion
on encountering the various agreeable and disagreeable <span
id="fr_144"></span>[3](#fn_143) (things of this world). A man's mind is
steady, when he withdraws his senses from (all) objects of sense, as the
tortoise (withdraws) its limbs from all sides. Objects of sense draw
back from a person who is abstinent; not so the taste (for those
objects). But even the taste departs from him, when he has seen the
Supreme <span id="fr_145"></span>[4](#fn_144). The boisterous senses, O
son of Kuntî! carry away by force the mind even of a wise man, who
exerts himself (for final emancipation). Restraining them all, a man
should remain engaged in devotion, making me his only resort. For his
mind is steady whose senses are under his control. The man who ponders
over objects of sense forms an attachment to them; from (that)
attachment is produced desire; and from desire anger is produced <span
id="fr_146"></span>[5](#fn_145); from anger results want of
discrimination <span id="fr_147"></span>[6](#fn_146); from want of
discrimination,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

confusion of the memory; from confusion of the memory, loss of reason;
and in consequence of loss of reason. he is utterly ruined. But the
self-restrained man who moves among <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_147) objects with senses under the control of
his own self, and free from affection and aversion, obtains
tranquillity <span id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_148). When there is
tranquillity, all his miseries are destroyed, for the mind of him whose
heart is tranquil soon becomes steady. He who is not self-restrained has
no steadiness of mind; nor has he who is not self-restrained
perseverance <span id="fr_150"></span>[3](#fn_149) in the pursuit of
self-knowledge; there is no tranquillity for him who does not persevere
in the pursuit of self-knowledge; and whence can there be happiness for
one who is not tranquil? For the heart which follows the rambling senses
leads away his judgment, as the wind leads a boat astray upon the
waters. Therefore, O you of mighty arms! his mind is steady whose senses
are restrained on all sides from objects of sense. The self-restrained
man is awake, when it is night for all beings; and when all beings are
awake, that is the night of the right-seeing sage <span
id="fr_151"></span>[4](#fn_150). He into whom all objects of desire
enter, as waters enter the ocean, which, (though) replenished, (still)
keeps its position unmoved,-he only obtains tranquillity; not he who
desires (those) objects of desire. The man who, casting

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

off all desires, lives free from attachments, who is free from
egoism <span id="fr_152"></span>[1](sbe0805.htm#fn_151), and from (the
feeling that this or that is) mine <span
id="fr_153"></span>[2](sbe0805.htm#fn_152), obtains tranquillity. This,
O son of P*ri*thâ! is the Brahmic <span
id="fr_154"></span>[3](sbe0805.htm#fn_153) state; attaining to this, one
is never deluded; and remaining in it in (one's) last moments, one
attains (brahma-nirvâ*n*a) the Brahmic bliss <span
id="fr_155"></span>[4](sbe0805.htm#fn_154).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_105"></span>[43:1](sbe0804.htm#fr_106) The commentators say
that 'heart' here signifies the dispositions which are stated in chapter
XVIII infra, [p. 126](sbe0820.htm#page_126). The feeling. of
'helplessness' is incompatible with what is there stated as the proper
disposition for a Kshatriya.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[43:2](sbe0804.htm#fr_107) I. e. by the heat of
vexation; the meaning is, 'which will cause constant vexation of
spirit.'

<span id="fn_107"></span>[43:3](sbe0804.htm#fr_108) I. e. if the means
employed are the sinful acts referred to.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[44:1](sbe0804.htm#fr_109) Scil. regarding
family-rites, &c.,. for, says Nîlaka*nth*a, they indicate knowledge of
soul as distinct from body.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[44:2](sbe0804.htm#fr_110) A common word in the
Gîtâ, that which presides over each individual body.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[44:3](sbe0804.htm#fr_111) Scil. with external
objects.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[44:4](sbe0804.htm#fr_112) I.e. the.
'contacts.'

<span id="fn_112"></span>[44:5](sbe0804.htm#fr_113) The sense is
this--there are two things apparently, the soul which is indestructible,
and the feelings of pain &c. which 'come and go.' The true philosopher
knows that the former only is real and exists; and that the latter is
unreal and non-existent. He therefore does not mind the latter.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[44:6](sbe0804.htm#fr_114) Scil. by those who
are possessed of true knowledge.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[45:1](sbe0804.htm#fr_115) Cf.
Ka*th*a-upanishad, p. 104.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[45:2](sbe0804.htm#fr_116) Ka*th*a-upanishad,
pp. 103, 104.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[45:3](sbe0804.htm#fr_117) 'Eternal.'
Nîlaka*nth*a explains this by 'unlimited by time, place,' &c.
*S*a<u>n</u>kara and others as 'uncreated,' 'without cause.' Stable =not
assuming new forms; firm = not abandoning the original form.
(*S*rîdhara.) The latter signifies a slight change; the former a total
change.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[45:4](sbe0804.htm#fr_118) Cf. the following
from the Sutta Nipâta (Sir M. C. Swamy's translation), pp. 124, 125:
'There is, indeed, no means by which those born could be prevented from
dying.' Even thus the world is afflicted with death and decay; therefore
wise men, knowing the course of things in the world, do not give way to
grief.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[46:1](sbe0804.htm#fr_119) Cf. Sutta Nipâta, p.
125. 'In vain do you grieve, not knowing well the two ends of him whose
manner either of coming or going you know not.'

<span id="fn_119"></span>[46:2](sbe0804.htm#fr_120) I. e. the self
spoken of above.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[46:3](sbe0804.htm#fr_121) Ka*th*a-upanishad,
p. 96.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[46:4](sbe0804.htm#fr_122) One of the warrior
caste.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[46:5](sbe0804.htm#fr_123) Without any effort,
that is to say, of one's own.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[47:1](sbe0804.htm#fr_124) Sâ<u>n</u>khya is
explained in different modes by the different commentators, but the
resulting meaning here seems to be, that the doctrine stated is the
doctrine of true knowledge and emancipation by its means. See infra, [p.
52](#page_52).

<span id="fn_124"></span>[47:2](sbe0804.htm#fr_125) Viz. this mortal
mundane life.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[47:3](sbe0804.htm#fr_126) I. e. for those who
enter on this 'path.'

<span id="fn_126"></span>[47:4](sbe0804.htm#fr_127) I.e. of the supreme
Being; Yoga meaning really the dedication of all acts to that Being.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[48:1](sbe0804.htm#fr_128) See Sutta Nipâta, p.
4.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[48:2](sbe0804.htm#fr_129) This is a merely
temporary good, and not therefore deserving to be aspired to before
final emancipation.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[48:3](sbe0804.htm#fr_130) I. e. the whole
course of worldly affairs. As to qualities, see chapter XIV.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[48:4](sbe0804.htm#fr_131) Heat and cold, pain
and pleasure, and so forth. Cf. Manu I, 26.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[48:5](sbe0804.htm#fr_132) Cf. Sutta Nipâta, p.
17 and other places.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[48:6](sbe0804.htm#fr_133) Keeping the mind
from worldly objects.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[48:7](sbe0804.htm#fr_134) The meaning here is
not easily apprehended. I suggest the following explanation:--Having
said that the Vedas are concerned with actions for special benefits,
K*ri*sh*n*a compares them to a reservoir which provides water for
various special purposes, drinking, bathing, &c. The Vedas similarly
prescribe particular rites and ceremonies for going to heaven, or
destroying an enemy, &c. But, says K*ri*sh*n*a, man's duty is merely to
perform the actions prescribed for him among these, and not entertain
desires for the special benefits named. The stanza occurs in the
Sanatsu*g*âtîya, too.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[48:8](sbe0804.htm#fr_135) Doing nothing at
all.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[49:1](sbe0804.htm#fr_136) Merit merely leads
to heaven, as to which see note on last page. Cf. Sutta Nipâta, pp. 4,
136, 145 note.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[49:2](sbe0804.htm#fr_137) Sutta Nipâta, pp.
3-7, &c.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[49:3](sbe0804.htm#fr_138) Sutta Nipâta, p. 21.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[49:4](sbe0804.htm#fr_139) This, according to
Ânandagiri, means all writings other than those on the science of the
soul.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[49:5](sbe0804.htm#fr_140) I. e. about the
means for the acquisition of various desired things.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[49:6](sbe0804.htm#fr_141) I. e. of the soul
(*S*a<u>n</u>kara), of the supreme Being (*S*rîdhara). Substantially
they both mean the same thing.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[50:1](sbe0804.htm#fr_142) I. e. pleased,
without regard to external objects, by self-contemplation alone.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[50:2](sbe0804.htm#fr_143) Cf. Sutta Nipâta, p.
3.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[50:3](sbe0804.htm#fr_144) The word
*s*ubhâ*s*ubha in this sense also occurs in the Dhammapada, stanza 78,
and in the Maitrî-upanishad, p. 34.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[50:4](sbe0804.htm#fr_145) See on this,
Wilson's Essays on Sanskrit Literature, vol. iii, p. 130.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[50:5](sbe0804.htm#fr_146) I. e. when the
desire is frustrated.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[50:6](sbe0804.htm#fr_147) I. e. between right
and wrong. Confusion of memory = forgetfulness of *S*âstras and rules
prescribed in them.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[51:1](sbe0804.htm#fr_148) Cf. Sutta Nipâta, p.
45.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[51:2](sbe0804.htm#fr_149) Cf.
Maitrî-upanishad, p. 134, where the commentator explains it to mean
freedom from desires.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[51:3](sbe0804.htm#fr_150) For a somewhat
similar use of the word bhâvanâ in this sense, comp. Dhammapada, stanza
301.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[51:4](sbe0804.htm#fr_151) Spiritual matters
are dark as night to the common run of men, while they are wide awake in
all worldly pursuits. With the sage the case is exactly the reverse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](sbe0805)
