[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0804)  [Next](sbe0806) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III.

Ar*g*una said:

If, O Ganârdana! devotion is deemed by you to be superior to action,
then why, O Kesava! do you prompt me to (this) fearful action? You seem,
indeed, to confuse my mind by equivocal words. Therefore, declare one
thing determinately, by which I may attain the highest good.

The Deity said:

O sinless one! I have already declared, that in this world there is a
twofold path <span id="fr_156"></span>[5](#fn_155)--that of the
Sâ<u>n</u>khyas by devotion in the shape of (true) knowledge; and that
of the Yogins by devotion in the shape of action. A man does not attain
freedom from action <span id="fr_157"></span>[6](#fn_156) merely by not
engaging in action; nor does he attain perfection <span
id="fr_158"></span>[7](#fn_157) by mere <span
id="fr_159"></span>[8](#fn_158) renunciation. For nobody ever remains
even for an instant without

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

performing some action; since the qualities of nature constrain
everybody, not having free-will (in the matter), to some action <span
id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_159). The deluded man who, restraining the
organs of action <span id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_160), continues to
think in his mind about objects of sense, is called a hypocrite. But he,
O Ar*g*una! who restraining his senses by his mind <span
id="fr_162"></span>[3](#fn_161). and being free from attachments,
engages in devotion (in the shape) of action, with the organs of action,
is far superior. Do you perform prescribed action, for action is better
than inaction, and the support of your body, too, cannot be accomplished
with inaction. This world is fettered by all action other than action
for the purpose of the sacrifice <span id="fr_163"></span>[4](#fn_162).
Therefore, O son of Kuntî! do you, casting off attachment, perform
action for that purpose. The Creator, having in olden times created men
together with the sacrifice, said: 'Propagate with this. May it be the
giver to you of the things you desire. Please the gods with this, and
may those gods please you. Pleasing each other, you will attain the
highest good. For pleased with the sacrifices, the gods will give you
the enjoyments you desire. And he who enjoys himself without giving them
what they have given, is, indeed, a thief.' The good, who eat the
leavings of a sacrifice, are released from all sins. But the unrighteous
ones, who prepare food for themselves only, incur sin <span
id="fr_164"></span>[5](#fn_163).

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

\[paragraph continues\] From food are born (all) creatures; from rain is
the production of food; rain is produced by sacrifices; sacrifices are
the result of action; know that action has its source in the Vedas; the
Vedas come from the Indestructible. Therefore the all-comprehending
Vedas are always concerned with sacrifices <span
id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_164). He who in this world does not turn
round the wheel revolving thus, is of sinful life, indulging his senses,
and, O son of P*ri*thâ! he lives in vain. But the man who is attached to
his self only, who is contented in his self, and is pleased with his
self <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_165), has nothing to do. He has no
interest at all in what is done, and none whatever in what is not done,
in this world <span id="fr_167"></span>[3](#fn_166); nor is any interest
of his dependent on any being. Therefore <span
id="fr_168"></span>[4](#fn_167) always perform action, which must be
performed, without attachment. For a man, performing action without
attachment, attains the Supreme. By action alone, did *G*anaka and the
rest work for perfection <span id="fr_169"></span>[5](#fn_168). And
having regard also to the keeping of people (to their duties) you should
perform action. Whatever a great man does, that other men also do. And
people follow whatever he receives as authority. There is nothing, O son
of P*ri*thâ! for me to do in (all) the three worlds,

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

nothing to acquire which has not been acquired. Still I do engage in
action. For should I at any time not engage without sloth in action, men
would follow in my path from all sides, O son of P*ri*thâ! If I did not
perform actions, these worlds would be destroyed, I should be the cause
of caste interminglings; and I should be ruining these people. As the
ignorant act, O descendant of Bharata! with attachment to action, so
should a wise man act without attachment, wishing to keep the people (to
their duties). A wise man should not shake the convictions of the
ignorant who are attached to action, but acting with devotion (himself )
should make them apply themselves to all action. He whose mind is
deluded by egoism thinks himself the doer of the actions, which, in
every way, are done by the qualities of nature <span
id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_169). But he, O you of mighty arms! who knows
the truth about the difference from qualities and the difference from
actions <span id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_170), forms no attachments,
believing that qualities deal with qualities <span
id="fr_172"></span>[3](#fn_171). But those who are deluded by the
qualities of nature form attachments to the actions of the
qualities <span id="fr_173"></span>[4](#fn_172). A man of perfect
knowledge should not shake these men of imperfect knowledge (in their
convictions). Dedicating all actions to me with a mind knowing the
relation of the supreme and individual self, engage in battle without

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

desire, without (any feeling that this or that is) mine, and without any
mental trouble <span id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_173). Even those men who
always act on this opinion of mine, full of faith, and without carping,
are released from all actions. But those who carp at my opinion and do
not act upon it, know them to be devoid of discrimination, deluded as
regards all knowledge <span id="fr_175"></span>[2](#fn_174), and ruined.
Even a man of knowledge acts consonantly to his own nature <span
id="fr_176"></span>[3](#fn_175). All beings follow nature. What will
restraint effect? Every sense has its affections and aversions towards
its objects fixed. One should not become subject to them, for they are
one's opponents <span id="fr_177"></span>[4](#fn_176). One's own duty,
though defective, is better than another's duty well performed. Death in
(performing) one's own duty is preferable; the (performance of the) duty
of others is dangerous.

Ar*g*una said:

But by whom, O descendant of V*ri*sh*n*i! is man impelled, even though
unwilling, and, as it were, constrained by force, to commit sin?

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

The Deity said:

It is desire, it is wrath <span id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_177), born
from the quality of passion; it is very ravenous, very sinful. Know that
that is the foe in this world. As fire is enveloped by smoke, a mirror
by dust, the fœtus by the womb, so is this <span
id="fr_179"></span>[2](#fn_178) enveloped by desire. Knowledge, O son of
Kuntî! is enveloped by this constant foe of the man of knowledge, in the
shape of desire, which is like a fire <span
id="fr_180"></span>[3](#fn_179) and insatiable. The senses, the mind,
and the understanding are said to be its seat <span
id="fr_181"></span>[4](#fn_180); with these it deludes the embodied
(self) after enveloping knowledge. Therefore, O chief of the descendants
of Bharata! first restrain your senses, then cast off this sinful thing
which destroys knowledge and experience <span
id="fr_182"></span>[5](#fn_181). It has been said <span
id="fr_183"></span>[6](#fn_182), Great are the senses, greater than the
senses is the mind, greater than the mind is the understanding. What is
greater than the understanding is that <span
id="fr_184"></span>[7](#fn_183). Thus knowing that which is higher than
the understanding, and restraining (your)self by (your)self, O you of
mighty

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

arms! destroy this unmanageable enemy in the shape of desire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_151"></span>[52:1](sbe0804.htm#fr_152) Either pride or,
better, the false notion mentioned infra, [p. 55](#page_55).

<span id="fn_152"></span>[52:2](sbe0804.htm#fr_153) An almost identical
expression occurs in the Dhammapada, stanza 367, and Maitrî-upanishad,
p. 37.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[52:3](sbe0804.htm#fr_154) The state of
identification of oneself with the Brahman, which results from a correct
knowledge of the Brahman.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[52:4](sbe0804.htm#fr_155) Infra, [p.
66](sbe0807.htm#page_66).

<span id="fn_155"></span>[52:5](sbe0805.htm#fr_156) Supra, [p.
47](sbe0804.htm#page_47).

<span id="fn_156"></span>[52:6](sbe0805.htm#fr_157) I. e., according to
*S*a<u>n</u>kara, identification of oneself with Brahman.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[52:7](sbe0805.htm#fr_158) Final emancipation.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[52:8](sbe0805.htm#fr_159) I. e. not coupled
with knowledge and purity of heart.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[53:1](sbe0805.htm#fr_160) Cf. infra, pp.
[122](sbe0820.htm#page_122)-[128](sbe0820.htm#page_128).

<span id="fn_160"></span>[53:2](sbe0805.htm#fr_161) Hands, feet, &c.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[53:3](sbe0805.htm#fr_162) By means of true
discrimination keeping the senses from attachments to worldly objects,
which lead to sin and evil.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[53:4](sbe0805.htm#fr_163) Cf. infra, pp.
[60](sbe0806.htm#page_60), [61](sbe0806.htm#page_61). Probably the
'sacrifices' spoken of in that passage must be taken to be the same as
those referred to in the Creator's injunction mentioned in this passage.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[53:5](sbe0805.htm#fr_164) Cf.
Maitrî-upanishad, p. 143

<span id="fn_164"></span>[54:1](sbe0805.htm#fr_165) The commentators
explain this to mean that though the Vedas elucidate all matters, their
principal subject is the sacrifice.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[54:2](sbe0805.htm#fr_166) The distinctions
here are rather nice,--an ordinary man is 'attached' to worldly objects,
is 'contented' with goods &c., and is pleased' with special gains.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[54:3](sbe0805.htm#fr_167) No good or evil
accrues to him from anything he does or omits to do.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[54:4](sbe0805.htm#fr_168) *S*rîdhara says that
Ar*g*una is here told to perform action, as freedom from it is only for
the man of true knowledge, which Ar*g*una is not as yet.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[54:5](sbe0805.htm#fr_169) I. e. final
emancipation; cf. [p. 59](sbe0806.htm#page_59) infra, and Î*s*opanishad,
p. 6.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[55:1](sbe0805.htm#fr_170) The active principle
is nature, the aggregate of the three qualities; the soul is only the
looker-on;, cf. inter alia, [p. 104](sbe0815.htm#page_104) infra.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[55:2](sbe0805.htm#fr_171) Scil. the difference
of the soul from the collection of qualities, viz. the body, senses.
&c., and from the actions of which they are the authors.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[55:3](sbe0805.htm#fr_172) Qualities (i. e.
senses) deal with qualities, i. e. objects of sense.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[55:4](sbe0805.htm#fr_173) I. e. all mundane
affairs.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[56:1](sbe0805.htm#fr_174) About the
consequences of your actions.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[56:2](sbe0805.htm#fr_175) Of actions, or of
the Brahman in its various forms.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[56:3](sbe0805.htm#fr_176) Which is the result
of the virtues and vices of a preceding life. The sequence of ideas here
is as follows:--The true view stated here about the 'difference from
qualities and actions' is disregarded by some, owing to their nature' as
now explained. Then the question is, if nature is so potent, what is the
good of the *S*âstras? The answer is, Nature only acts through our likes
and dislikes. Withstand them and then you can follow the *S*âstras. It
is under the influence of these likes and dislikes, that some may say,
we shall practise duties prescribed for others (our own being bad ones)
as they are equally prescribed by the *S*âstras. That, as stated in the
last sentence here, is wrong.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[56:4](sbe0805.htm#fr_177) Cf. Sutta Nipâta, p.
101, as to 'likings and dislikings.'

<span id="fn_177"></span>[57:1](sbe0805.htm#fr_178) Vide [p.
50](sbe0804.htm#page_50) supra.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[57:2](sbe0805.htm#fr_179) I. e. knowledge,
mentioned in the next sentence, for which construction [p.
71](sbe0808.htm#page_71) and [p. 98](sbe0813.htm#page_98) may be
compared.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[57:3](sbe0805.htm#fr_180) Which becomes more
powerful the more it is fed.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[57:4](sbe0805.htm#fr_181) The mind is that
which ponders over things as such or such the understanding is that
which finally determines (cf. Lewes' History of Philosophy, II,
463-465). These and the senses are the 'seat' of desire, because the
perception of an object by the sense, the pondering over it by the mind,
and the determination about it by the understanding are the
preliminaries to the awakening of the desire; supra, [p.
50](sbe0804.htm#page_50).

<span id="fn_181"></span>[57:5](sbe0805.htm#fr_182) Knowledge is from
books or teachers, experience is the result of personal perception.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[57:6](sbe0805.htm#fr_183) Ka*th*opanishad, p.
114; and see also pp. [148](sbe0821.htm#page_148),
[149](sbe0822.htm#page_149).

<span id="fn_183"></span>[57:7](sbe0805.htm#fr_184) I. e. the supreme
Being, as in the Ka*th*opanishad.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](sbe0806)
