<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mtc03)  [Next](mtc05) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*More Translations from the Chinese*, by Arthur Waley, \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

### WANG WEI

#### (A.D. *699-759*)

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

### \[2\] PROSE LETTER

#### *To the Bachelor-of-Arts P‘ei Ti*

<span class="smallcaps">Of</span> late during the sacrificial month, the
weather has been calm and clear, and I might easily have crossed the
mountain. But I knew that you were conning the classics and did not dare
disturb you. So I roamed about the mountain-side, rested at the Kan-p‘ei
Temple, dined with the mountain priests, and, after dinner, came home
again. Going north-wards, I crossed the Yüan-pa, over whose waters the
unclouded moon shone with dazzling rim. When night was far advanced, I
mounted Hua-tzŭ's Hill and saw the moonlight tossed up and thrown down
by the jostling waves of Wang River. On the wintry mountain distant
lights twinkled and vanished; in some deep lane beyond the forest a dog
barked at the cold, with a cry as fierce as a wolf's. The sound of
villagers grinding their corn at night filled the gaps between the slow
chiming of a distant bell. Now I am sitting alone. I listen, but cannot
hear my grooms and servants move or speak. I think much of old days: how
hand in hand, composing poems as we went, we walked down twisting paths
to the banks of clear streams. We must wait for Spring to come: till the
grasses sprout and the trees bloom. Then wandering together in the
spring hills we shall see the trout leap lightly from the stream, the
white gulls stretch their wings, the dew fall on the green moss. And in
the morning we shall hear the cry of curlews in the barley-fields.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

It is not long to wait. Shall you be with me then? Did I not know the
natural subtlety of your intelligence, I would not dare address to you
so remote an invitation. You will understand that a deep feeling
dictates this course.

Written without disrespect by Wang Wei, a dweller in the mountains.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Drinking Alone by Moonlight](mtc05)

</div>
