[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Age of
Reason](../../index)  [Ingersoll](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](i0107)  [Next](i0109.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### X

#### "HE MADE THE STARS ALSO."

Moses came very near forgetting about the stars and only gave five words
to all the hosts of heaven. Can it be possible that he knew anything
about the stars beyond the mere fact that he saw them shining above him?

Did he know that the nearest star, the one we ought to be best
acquainted with, is twenty-one billion of miles away, and that it is a
sun shining by its own light? Did he know of the next, that is
thirty-seven billion miles distant? Is it possible that he was
acquainted with Sirius, a sun two thousand six hundred and eighty- eight
times larger than our own, surrounded by a system of heavenly bodies,
several of which are already known, and distant from us eighty-two
billion miles? Did he know that the Polar star that tells the mariner
his course and guided slaves to liberty and joy, is distant from this
little world two hundred and ninety-two billion miles, and that Capella
wheels and shines one hundred and thirty-three billion miles beyond? Did
he know that it would require about seventy-two years for light to reach
us from this star? Did he know that light travels one hundred and
eighty-five thousand miles a second? Did he know that some stars are so
far away in the infinite abysses that five millions of years are
required for their light to reach this globe?

If this is true, and if as the Bible tells us, the stars were made after
the earth, then this world has been wheeling in its orbit for at least
five million years.

It may be replied that it was not the intention of God to teach geology
and astronomy. Then why did he say anything upon these subjects? and if
he did say anything, why did he not give the fact?

According to the sacred records God created, on the first day, the
heaven and the earth, "moved upon the face of the waters," and made the
light. On the second day he made the firmament or the "expanse" and
divided the waters. On the third day he gathered the waters into seas,
let the dry land appear and caused the earth to bring forth grass, herbs
and fruit trees, and on the fourth day he made the sun, moon and stars
and set them in the firmament of heaven to give light upon the earth.
This division of labor is very striking. The work of the other days is
as nothing when compared with that of the fourth. Is it possible that it
required the same time and labor to make the grass, herbs and fruit
trees, that it did to fill with countless constellations the infinite
expanse of space?

We are then told that on the next day "God said, Let the waters bring
forth abundantly the moving creatures that hath life, and fowl that may
fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven. And God created
great whales and every living creature which the waters brought forth
abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind, and
God saw that it was good. And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful and
multiply and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the
earth."

Is it true that while the dry land was covered with grass, and herbs,
and trees bearing fruit, the ocean was absolutely devoid of life, and so
remained for millions of years?

If Moses meant twenty-four hours by the word day, then it would make but
little difference on which of the six days animals were made; but if the
word day was used to express millions of ages during which life was
slowly evolved from monad up to man, then the account becomes infinitely
absurd, puerile and foolish. There is not a scientist of high standing
who will say that in his judgment the earth was covered with
fruit-bearing trees before the moners" the ancestors it may be of the
human race, felt in Laurentian seas the first faint throb of life. Nor
is there one who will declare that there was a single spire of grass
before the sun had poured upon the world his flood of gold.

Why should men in the name of religion try to harmonize the
contradictions that exist between Nature and a book? Why should
philosophers be denounced for placing more reliance upon what they know
than upon what they have been told? If there is a God, it is reasonably
certain that he made the world, but it is by no means certain that he is
the author of the Bible. Why then should we not place greater confidence
in Nature than in a book? And even if this God made not only the world
but the book besides, it does not follow that the book is the best part
of creation, and the only part that we will be eternally punished for
denying. It seems to me that it is quite as important to know something
of the solar system, something of the physical history of this globe, as
it is to know the adventures of Jonah or the diet of Ezekiel. For my
part, I would infinitely prefer to know all the results of scientific
investigation, than to be inspired as Moses was. Supposing the Bible to
be true; why is it any worse or more wicked for Freethinkers to deny it,
than for priests to deny the doctrine of evolution, or the dynamic
theory of heat? Why should we be damned for laughing at Samson and his
foxes, while others, holding the Nebular Hypothesis in utter contempt,
go straight to heaven? It seems to me that a belief in the great truths
of science are fully as essential to salvation, as the creed of any
church. We are taught that a man may be perfectly acceptable to God even
if he denies the rotundity of the earth, the Copernican system, the
three laws of Kepler, the indestructibility of matter and the attraction
of gravitation. And we are also taught that a man may be right upon all
these questions, and yet, for failing to believe in the "scheme of
salvation," be eternally lost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII: Saturday](i0109.md)
