[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Age of
Reason](../../index)  [Ingersoll](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](i0146)  [Next](i0148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE LATEST CREED.

But I find that I have correctly interpreted the creeds. There was put
into my hands the new Congregational creed. I have read it, and I will
call your attention to it to-night, to find whether that church has made
any advance; to find whether the sun of science has risen in the heavens
in vain; whether they are still the children of intellectual darkness;
whether they still consider it necessary for you to believe something
that you by no possibility can understand, in order to be a winged angel
forever. Now, let us see what their creed is. I will read a little of
it.

They commence by saying that they

"Believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and
of all things visible and invisible."

They say, now, that there is the one personal God; that he is the maker
of the universe and its ruler. I again ask the old question; Of what did
he make it? If matter has not existed through eternity, then this God
made it. Of what did he make it? What did he use for the purpose? There
was nothing in the universe except this God. What had the God been doing
for the eternity he had been living? He had made nothing--called nothing
into existence; never had had an idea, because it is impossible to have
an idea unless there is something to excite an idea. What had he been
doing? Why does not the Congregational Church tell us? How do they know
about this Infinite Being? And if he is infinite how can they comprehend
him? What good is it to believe in something that you know you do not
understand, and that you never can understand?

In the Episcopalian creed God is described as follows:

"There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts
or passions."

Think of that!--without body, parts, or passions. I defy any man in the
world to write a better description of nothing. You cannot conceive of a
finer word-painting of a vacuum than "without body, parts, or passions."
And yet this God, without passions, is angry at the wicked every day;
this God, without passions, is a jealous God, whose anger burneth to the
lowest hell. This God, without passions, loves the whole human race; and
this God, without passions, damns a large majority of mankind. This God
without body, walked in the Garden of Eden, in the cool of the day. This
God, without body, talked with Adam and Eve. This God, without body, or
parts met Moses upon Mount Sinai, appeared at the door of the
tabernacle, and talked with Moses face to face as a man speaketh to his
friend. This description of God is simply an effort of the church to
describe a something of which it has no conception.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: God As A Governor](i0148)
