[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Age of
Reason](../../index)  [Ingersoll](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](i0152)  [Next](i0154.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### INSPIRATION.

What is the next thing in this great creed?

"We believe that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments are the
record of God's revelation of Himself in the work of redemption; that
they were written by man under the special guidance of the holy spirit;
that they are able to make wise into salvation; and that they constitute
an authoritative standard by which religious teaching and human conduct
are to be regulated and judged."

This is the creed of the Congregational Church; that is, the result
reached by a high-joint commission appointed to draw up a creed for
their churches; and there we have the statement that the Bible was
written "by men under the special guidance of the Holy Spirit."

What part of the Bible? All of it? All of it. And yet what is this Old
Testament that was written by an infinitely good God? The being who
wrote it did not know the shape of the world he had made; knew nothing
of human nature. He commands men to love him, as if one could love upon
command. The same God upheld the institution of human slavery; and the
church says that the Bible that upholds that institution was written by
men under the guidance of the Holy Spirit. Then I disagree with the Holy
Spirit.

This church tells us that men under the guidance of the Holy Spirit
upheld the institution of polygamy--I deny it; that under the guidance
of the Holy Spirit these men upheld wars of extermination and
conquest--I deny it; that under the guidance of the Holy Spirit these
men wrote that it was right for a man to destroy the life of his wife if
she happened to differ with him on the subject of religion--I deny it.
And yet that is the book now upheld in this creed of the Congregational
Church.

If the devil had written upon the subject of slavery, which side would
he have taken? Let every minister answer. If you knew the devil had
written a work on human slavery, in your judgment, would he uphold
slavery, or denounce it? Would you regard it as any evidence that he
ever wrote it, if it upheld slavery? And yet, here you have a work
upholding slavery, and you say that it was written by an infinitely good
God! If the devil upheld polygamy, would you be surprised? If the devil
wanted to kill men for differing with him would you be astonished? If
the devil told a man to kill his wife, would you be shocked? And yet,
you say, that is exactly what God did. If there be a God, then that
creed is blasphemy. That creed is a libel upon him who sits on heaven's
throne. If there be a God, I ask him to write in the book in which my
account is kept, that I denied these lies for him.

I do not believe in a slaveholding God! I do not worship a polygamous
Holy Ghost, nor a Son who threatens eternal pain; I will not get upon my
knees before any being who commands a husband to slay his wife because
she expresses her honest thought. Suppose a book should be found old as
the Old Testament in which slavery, polygamy and war are all denounced,
would Christians think that it was written by the devil?

Did it ever occur to you that if God wrote the Old Testament, and told
the Jews to crucify or kill anybody that disagreed with them on
religion, and that this God afterward took upon himself flesh and came
to Jerusalem, and taught a different religion, and the Jews killed
him--did it ever occur to you that he reaped exactly what he had sown?
Did it ever occur to you that he fell a victim to his own tyranny, and
was destroyed by his own hand? Of course I do not believe that any God
ever was the author of the Bible, or that any God was ever crucified, or
that any God was ever killed, or ever will be. but I want to ask you
that question.

Take this Old Testament, then, with all its stories of murder and
massacre; with all its foolish and cruel fables; with all its infamous
doctrines; with its spirit of caste; with its spirit of hatred, and tell
me whether it was written by a good God. If you will read the
maledictions and curses of that book, you will think that God, like
Lear, had divided heaven among his daughters, and then, in the insanity
of despair, had launched his curses on the human race.

And yet, I must say--I must admit--that the Old Testament is better than
the New. In the Old Testament, when God had a man dead, he let him
alone. When he saw him quietly in his grave he was satisfied. The
muscles relaxed, and the frown gave place to a smile. But in the New
Testament the trouble commences at death. In the New Testament God is to
wreak his revenge forever and ever. It was reserved for one who said,
"Love your enemies," to tear asunder the veil between time and eternity
and fix the horrified gaze of man upon the gulfs of eternal fire. The
New Testament is just as much worse than the Old, as hell is worse than
sleep; just as much worse, as infinite cruelty is worse than dreamless
dust; and yet, the New Testament is claimed to be a gospel of love and
peace.

Is it possible that: "The Scriptures constitute the authoritative
standard by which religious teaching and human conduct are to be
regulated and judged"?

Are we to judge of conduct by the Old Testament, by the New, or by both?
According to the Old, the slave-holder was a just and generous man; a
polygamist was a model of virtue. According to the New, the worst can be
forgiven and the best can be lost. How can any book be a standard, when
the standard itself must be measured by human reason? Is there a
standard of a standard? Must not the reason be convinced? and, if so, is
not the reason of each man the final arbiter of that man? If he takes a
book as a standard, does he so take it because it is to him reasonable?
In what way is the human reason to be ignored? Why should a book take
its place, unless the reason has been convinced that the book is the
proper standard? If this is so, the book rests upon the reason of those
who adopt it. Are they to be saved because they act in accordance with
their reason, and are others to be damned because they act by the same
standard--their reason? No two are alike. Can we demand of all the same
result? Suppose the compasses were not constant to the pole--no two
compasses exactly alike--would you expect all ships to reach the same
harbor?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Reign Of Truth And Love](i0154.md)
