[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Age of
Reason](../../index)  [Ingersoll](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](i0161)  [Next](i0163) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CASTING OUT DEVILS.

Most of the miracles said to have been wrought by Christ were recorded
to show his power over evil spirits. On many occasions, he is said to
have "cast out devils"--devils who could speak, and devils who were
dumb.

For many years belief in the existence of evil spirits has been fading
from the mind, and as this belief grew thin, ministers endeavored to
give new meanings to the ancient words. They are inclined now to put
"disease" in the place of "devils," and most of them say, that the poor
wretches supposed to have been the homes of fiends were simply suffering
from epileptic fits! We must remember that Christ and these devils often
conversed together. Is it possible that fits can talk? These devils
often admitted that Christ was God. Can epilepsy certify to divinity? On
one occasion the fits told their name, and made a contract to leave the
body of a man provided they would be permitted to take possession of a
herd of swine. Is it possible that fits carried Christ himself to the
pinnacle of a temple? Did fits pretend to be the owner of the whole
earth? Is Christ to be praised for resisting such a temptation? Is it
conceivable that fits wanted Christ to fall down and worship them?

The church must not abandon its belief in devils. Orthodoxy cannot
afford to put out the fires of hell. Throw away a belief in the devil,
and most of the miracles of the New Testament become impossible, even if
we admit the supernatural. If there is no devil, who was the original
tempter in the garden of Eden? If there is no hell, from what are we
saved? to what purpose is the atonement? Upon the obverse of the
Christian shield is God, upon the reverse, the devil. No devil, no hell.
No hell, no atonement. No atonement, no preaching, no gospel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Necessity Of Belief](i0163)
