[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nes04)  [Next](nes06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# CHAPTER II.

### THE CHILD.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"Honour, riches, marriage-blessing,<br />
Long continuance, and increasing<br />
Hourly joys be still upon you."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="img_winit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![W](img/winit.jpg) |

HEN the child was born, if it was a boy it was wrapped in a woman's
shirt, and if it was a girl it was wrapped in a man's. If the operation
was reversed the luckless victim of such an untoward act never entered
into the joys of married life.

In washing the new-born infant great care was used not to let the water
touch the palms of the hands, and this care was continued for a
considerable length of time, under the belief that to wash the palms of
the hands washed away the luck of this world's goods. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) By some a live coal was thrown into the
water in which the new-born infant was washed. By others it was
carefully poured under the foundation of the dwelling-house, to prevent
it from coming in contact with fire, and thus to preserve in coming
years the child from the harm of burning. When dressed it was turned
three times heels over head in the nurse's arms, and blessed, and then
shaken three times with the head downward. These ceremonies kept the
fairies at a distance from the infant, and prevented it from being
frightened when suddenly awaked from sleep, as well as from growing in a
knot. The same ceremonies were gone through every time the child was
dressed. When it was laid out of the arms, as to bed, the words, "God be
with you," or "God bless you," were repeated.

To guard the child from being *forespoken*, it was passed three times
through the petticoat or chemise the mother wore at the time of the
accouchement. It was not deemed proper to bestow a very great deal of
praise on a child; and one doing so would

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

have been interrupted by some such words as "Gueede sake, haud yir tung,
or ye'll forespyke the bairn." Such a notion of forespeaking by
bestowing excessive praise was not limited to infants, but extended to
full-grown people, to domestic animals, and to crops. If the child was
sickly, and there was a suspicion that it had. been forespoken, recourse
was had to the well-approven modes of discovering the truth or the
untruth of the suspicion.

Here are two modes. A new shilling, after being put three times round
the *crook*, was placed on the bottom of a wooden cap. The cap was
filled with water, which was immediately poured off. If the shilling
came off with the water, the child had not been forespoken. Three
stones--one round, to represent the head, another as near the shape of
the body as possible, and a third as, like the legs as could be
found--were selected from a south-running stream, that formed the
boundary between *twa lairds' laan*, heated red hot, and thrown into a
vessel containing a little water. A new shilling, was laid on the bottom
of a wooden cap, and this water was poured over it. The water was then
decanted, and if the shilling stuck to the bottom of the cap the
sickness was brought on by forespeaking. The water used in the ceremony
was administered as a medicine.

To turn away the *evil eye*, and to preserve the child from the power of
the fairies, a small brooch, of the shape of a heart, was worn on one of
the petticoats, usually behind.

There were those who had the reputation of having the power of showing
to the parents or relatives the face of the one who had been guilty of
casting ill upon the child. If ill had been cast upon the child it was
cured by taking its own first shirt, or the petticoat the mother wore
before confinement, or the linen she wore at the time of delivery, and
passing it through it three times, and then three times round the
*crook*.

If the child became cross and began to *dwine*, fears immediately arose
that it might be a "fairy changeling," and the trial by fire was put
into operation. The hearth was piled with peat, and when the fire was at
its strength the suspected changeling was placed in front of it and as
near as possible not to be

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

scorched, or it was suspended in a basket over the fire. If it was a
"changeling child" it made its escape by the *lum*, throwing back words
of scorn as it disappeared.

One mode of bringing back the true child was the following. A new
*skull* was taken and hung over the fire from a piece of a branch of a
hazel tree, and into this basket the suspected changeling was laid.
Careful watch was kept till it screamed. If it screamed it was a
changeling, and it was held fast to prevent its escape. When an
opportunity occurred, it was carried to n place where four roads met,
and a dead body was carried over it. The true child was restored.

On the first symptoms of the child's cutting teeth, a *teethin bannock*
was made. It was baked of oatmeal and butter or cream, sometimes with
the addition of a ring, in presence of a few neighbours, and without a
single word being spoken by the one baking it. When prepared, it was
given to the child to play with till it was broken. A small piece was
then put into the child's month, if it had not done so of its own
accord. Each one present carried away a small portion. Such a bannock
was supposed to ease the troubles of teething. It went also by the name
of *teething plaster*.

When once a child was weaned, suck was not on any account again given.
Thieving propensities would have been the result of such an action.
Neither was it lawful to cut its nails with knife or scissors. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) That, too, begot a thieving disposition.
Biting off was the only mode adopted.

If a child spoke before it walked, it turned out a liar.

When a child entered a house something was given it. Its hand was
crossed with money, or a piece of bread was put into its hand. If this
was not done, hunger was left in the house. It was sometimes a custom to
put a little meal into the child's mouth the first time it was carried
out and taken into a neighbour's house. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7)

The cradle was an object of much care. A child was never put into a new
cradle. A live cock or hen was first placed in

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

it; and the firstborn was never put into a new cradle, but into an old
one, borrowed. In sending the cradle it was not sent empty. In some
districts, it' it was borrowed for a girl's use, a live cock was tied
into it, and if for a boy's, a live hen. In other districts it was
filled with potatoes, a bag of meal, or such like, respect being
commonly had to the state of the borrower. It was not allowed to touch
the ground till it was placed on the floor of the house in which it was
to be used.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[7:1](nes05.htm#fr_5) Cf. Henderson, p. 16.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[9:1](nes05.htm#fr_6) Cf. Henderson, p. 16, and
*F. L. Record*, vol. i. p. 11 (30).

<span id="fn_7"></span>[9:2](nes05.htm#fr_7) Cf. Henderson, p. 20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Baptism](nes06)
