[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](nes01)  [Next](nes03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

# TABLE OF CONTENTS.

### INTRODUCTION.

Personal, pp. [1](nes03.htm#page_1.md)-3.

### CHAPTER I.

#### BIRTH.

Who present--Who not permitted to be present--Customs if two women with
child in same house--A woman giving suck not allowed to seat herself on
the edge of the bed on which the woman in labour lay--All locks opened
in house during the time of labour--Whoso entered the house bade the
birth God speed--Gave a draught of water if labour difficult--Some had
luck in doing this--When doctor called--The "merry-meht"--"The Cryin
Kebback"--"The Cryin Bannock"--A piece of it carried home--Fairies'
liking for human milk--Fairies carried off unsained or unchurched
women--Anxiety of fairies to get possession of infants--Mother and child
"sained"--Bible with bread and cheese placed below pillow--Bible and
biscuit--Bread and cheese given away to friends--A fir-candle or a
basket containing bread and cheese placed on bed--A pair of trowsers
hung up--Mother watched till churched--Child, till baptized--Mother not
allowed to work till churched--Not allowed to enter a neighbour's
house--Why prevented--Mode of churching in Scotland--If unable to go to
church what she did--Water first fetched from well by mother in a
thimble--Or in a vessel of small size, pp. [4](nes04.htm#page_4.md)-6.

### CHAPTER II.

#### THE CHILD.

A male child wrapped in a woman's shirt--A girl, in a man's--If
operation reversed boy or girl never married--Palms of hands not
washed--Live coal thrown into water in which new-born infant
washed--Poured under foundation of dwelling-house--Child when dressed
turned three times heels over head--To prevent "forespeaking"--Excessive
praise--Modes of finding out "forespeaking"--To prevent "evil eye"--Cure
in casting ill--How to find out a "fairy changeling"--How to bring back
the true child--"Teethin Bannock"--"Teethin Plaster"--Suck not given to
a child when once weaned--Nails of fingers not cut--Bitten--Child that
speaks before walking

<span id="page_ii">p. ii</span>

a liar--Something given to child on first entering a house--The
cradle--A child not put into a new cradle--A borrowed cradle-Cradle not
placed on ground till carried into house, pp. [7](nes05.htm#page_7.md)-10.

### CHAPTER III.

#### BAPTISM.

Baptism early administered--Reasons for so doing--Name not pronounced
till after baptism--Written and given to minister--Unbaptized infants
not taken into heaven--Baptizing a sick infant--Minister "kills or
cures"--System of registration, effect of on early baptism--Baptismal
dress--Ceremonies connected with baptism--Gifts given by guests--Child
must sleep in baptismal dress--Effect of water of baptism entering the
eyes--Child ought to cry when water fell on its face--What done with the
water of baptism--Drunk to strengthen the memory--Ceremonies if child
carried out of house for baptism--Girl baptized first, when boy and girl
baptized at one time--A girl brought to church and not baptized never
married--*Fuarag* pp. [11](nes06.htm#page_11.md)-13.

### CHAPTER IV.

#### THE NURSERY.

Rhyme on the face--On the brow, eye, nose, and mouth--On the fingers--On
the legs----On taking off the child's boots--On the legs and feet--On
various parts of the body--On giving the child food--On being undressed
for bed--On getting sulky--On mounting a stick as a "horse "--On
dandling a child on the knee--On two children placing themselves back to
back and alternately lifting each other--Various--On the numbers up to
twenty--"The Souters' Grace," pp. [14](nes07.htm#page_14.md)-20.

### CHAPTER V.

#### BOY CODE OF HONOUR.

The rule of the ring--Of a race--Of bargain--making--Of making a
gift--Acting the informer--Lying--Asking sweetmeats--When anything is
found, pp. [21](nes08.htm#page_21.md)-24.

### CHAPTER VI.

#### ABOUT THE HUMAN BODY.

Days of the week for birth--A child born with a caul lucky--Possession
of caul or "selly hoo" lucky--Health of one born with it could be
divined from it--Child born with feet first doomed to be hanged--"The
Broon Coo's Lick"--Strong growth of hair on the body--To find out if a
person is proud by the hair--The hair when cut must be burned--Meaning
of long slender fingers--Of large hands and feet--"Lucken Toes"--Meaning
of second and third toes in a man being equal--Of white spots on the
finger-nails--Why

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

marriage--ring on ring--finger--A black speck on tooth--Ringing in the
ears--A glow in the ears--An itching in the eyes--In the nose--In the
palm of the right hand--In that of the left--In the soles of the
feet--Sneezing--The deaf and dumb--Their faculty of knowing the
future--Consulted about distant friends--In love affairs--Those of weak
intellect, pp. [25](nes09.htm#page_25.md)-28.

### CHAPTER VII.

#### DREAMS, DIVINATION, &c.

To dream of a white horse--A horse--A swine--Eggs--Fresh
fish--Butter--Fruit in season--Out of season--Fire--Water--Loosing a
tooth--Being bitten by dogs or cats--One dead--Being dead by one
unmarried coming marriage--Loosing shoes--Seeing one smeared with
blood--Throwing the staff to find out the success of a journey--Unlucky
to turn back when setting out on a journey--Meaning of anything
forgotten when paying a visit--Bad manners to stir the fire in a
neighbour's house--Etiquette at table when with one of higher
rank--Unwillingness to give name on making a call--Token of servant soon
leaving her situation--Her first work in her new home--Sudden
hunger--"Hungry Hillock"--"Hungry folks' meat" in pot--In cooking
stirring food from left to right, effect of--How cakes served up--On
"the Right Side"--To whom served up otherwise--Straw in brogue--"Shee
wisp "--Burned--Right stocking put on first--"Hansel" given on putting
on a piece of new dress--A kiss given, "Beverage of New
Claes"--Something given to a boy or girl on entering a neighbour's
house--All sewing done on Sunday undone by the devil--Crooked sixpence
in purse lucky--A present of a knife un lucky--Unlucky to sing before
breakfast--Tea-stalk floating in cup--A black speck on a burning
candle--A film of carbon on rib of grate--Fiery spots on the bottom of a
pot, "Sodgers"--Theft of a five-pound note--How recovered--A nobleman's
horses stopped--How relieved--Theft--Unwillingness to take back stolen
property, pp. [29](nes10.htm#page_29.md)-33.

### CHAPTER VIII.

#### LEECHCRAFT.

Causes of Disease--Casting ill--"The Ill
Ee"--Prayers--Forespeaking--Hidden grave--Sudden
news--Fright--Cures--Men and women famed for secret wisdom--In certain
families the power of curing certain diseases--Power went down--One
family had power of extracting motes from the eye--Another, that of
setting broken bones--Charming diseases forbidden by the Church--A lucky
hand in dressing boils--Power of a posthumous child--Ability to show in
a mirror the face of the one that cast ill--Cure of a man at Broadford,
in Skye, by a wise woman--Woman's daughter would not receive the gift of
healing--Some articles have in them a healing virtue--Willox "ball and
bridle"--"The Ball"--"The Bridle"--Others cured only certain
diseases--An "Ee-stehn"--An amber bead--Wells having curative powers--At
Althash, near Fochabers--Pilgrimages to it first three Sundays in
May--Fergan Well--Wallak Kirk--Pilgrimages to it forbidden by the

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Church--Chapels resorted to for cures--Forbidden
by the Church--Clach-na-bhan--Cure of the "Ill Ee"--Of
Forespeaking--Casting the heart--Cure of sleepy fever--Of epilepsy----Of
rickets--Of lumbago, rheumatism, sprains--Of whooping-cough--Of eye
disease--Of erysipelas or "rose"--Of sting of nettle--Of ringworm--Of
toothache--Of warts--Of hiccup, pp. [34](nes11.htm#page_34.md)-49.

### CHAPTER IX.

#### THE HOUSE.

Building materials--Walls--Couples--Roofs--"Foonin pint"--Laying
foundation--Refusal to give "foonin pint"
avenged--"Hoose-heatin"--Fire-kinlin"--Feast on entering a new
house--Arrangement of
apartments--Kitchen--Hearth--"Crook"--"Rantle-tree"--"Bole"--"Canle
gullie"--Saat-backet"--"Bench"--Settle"--"Box-bed"--Windows--"Dog-hole"--Hole
for going in and out of hens--"Trance"--"But ein"--Furniture--Houses of
fishing population--Houses with but one door for men and
beasts--Ceremonies on leaving a house--How to take away the luck from
next occupier--Throwing cat into house carried off disease if any left,
pp. [50](nes12.htm#page_50.md)-53.

### CHAPTER X.

#### EVENINGS AT THE FIRESIDE.

The hearth--"The bait-pot" boiling over the fire--"The lit-pot"--Means
of light--"Fir-can’les"--Candle--stick--"The Peerman" or
"Peer-page"--Oil-lamps--"Eely-dolly"--How evening passed--Women
knitting, spinning, sewing--Men making candles from bog-fir,
manufacturing harrow-tynes, &c.--Scholars preparing
school-lessons--Singing songs and ballads--Telling
stories--Riddles--Visitors--Amusements--Beggars--"Quarterer"--The
chapman--The tailor, pp. [54](nes13.htm#page_54.md)-58.

### CHAPTER XI.

#### FAIRIES.

Belief in fairies--Who they were--Fallen angels--Their
abodes--Fairy-wells--Ruled by a queen--Dressed in green--Dislike to the
name of fairy--Called "The Fair Folk" or "The Gueede Neebours"--A stone
arrow a safeguard against their power--The inmates of a house built over
their dwelling liable to annoyance from them--Came out in the
gloamin--Spinning-wheels and meal-mills had to be thrown out of
gear--They had to pay the teind to hell every seven years--Stole
children to do so--How to get back a stolen child--Story of a
fisherwoman--Of another in Tyrie--Of another--Liking for human
milk--Carried off unsained mothers--Traditions of their doing
so--Alluring men and women into their abodes--If such tasted food or
drink with them they were detained for seven years--When they returned
they avoided the dwellings of men--Grateful for kindness--Had a habit of
borrowing

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

from men--Particularly meal--A fixed measure of it--A tradition--Avenged
a slight--Animals fell under their anger--A tradition--Their musical
skill--Took to fishing--Baked during sunshine in rain--Ate counted
cakes--A furl o’ fairies ween," pp. [59](nes14.htm#page_59.md)-65.

### CHAPTER XII.

#### WATER-KELPIE.

Lived in deep pools of rivers and streams--Had the appearance of a black
horse--Enticed the traveller to destruction--Caused annoyance to
farms--Could be caught--Mode of capture--Made to do hard work--Could be
killed--Traditions--Guardian demons in pools--Danger of going into such
pools--A tradition--Blood-thirstiness of streams and rivers, pp.
[66](nes15.htm#page_66.md), 67.

### CHAPTER XIII.

#### GHOSTS.

Mansions haunted by ghosts--Traditions--How to get rid of
them--Excessive grief brought back the spirit--Spirit of the murdered
one returned till the murderer was brought to justice--Spirit itself the
executioner of justice--Woods, bridges, graveyards haunted, pp.
[68](nes16.htm#page_68.md)-70.

### CHAPTER XIV.

#### WITCHES.

Belief in witchcraft--The witch an old woman--Her power derived from
Satan--What she could do--Her revenge--A tradition--Men had the
power--It went down in families, pp. [71](nes17.htm#page_71.md), 72.

### CHAPTER XV.

#### "BLACK AIRT" AND DEVIL COMPACTS.

Belief in "Black Airt"--Professors of it in communion with Satan--What
it was--Taught in Spain and Italy--A tradition--Devil compacts--How
made--Price of contract--Power of those who made such compacts--Time of
contract prolonged--A tradition--"Hell-Fire Club"--Life of its
members--Their fate, pp. [73](nes18.htm#page_73.md)-75.

### CHAPTER XVI.

#### RIDDLES.

Jonah in the whale's belly--Lot's sons--The hair of the head--A
bottle--A bottle of whisky--Ann--Andrew--Bean--That--Was--The letter
*m*--John Lamb--The piper's wife--A fiddle--Hunger--An egg--Wood--A
coffin--A tub--A boy with a pot on his head--A man with a pot on his
head--A pot with a wooden cover--The bars of a grate--The
tongs--Smoke--A "tenousen

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

pleuch"--A hairy rope--A ship--A cherry--An onion--A nettle--A magpie--A
worm--The town clock--A watch--The moon--A snowflake--Mist--A murdered
lady--A woman fetching water in wooden pails--A black cow in a snowy
day--Scatterty's cat--Time when most holes in the ground--Hay--A
window--The cock--A nail in a horse's shoe--Noah striking the first nail
of the ark--One's shoes--One's shadow--Hell--The whiting--Tod's tails to
reach the moon--An icicle, pp. [76](nes19.htm#page_76.md)-82.

### CHAPTER XVII.

#### MARRIAGE.

Means taken to find out future husband or wife--Sleeping in a strange
bed--Reading 3rd verse of 17th chapter of Job--First time cuckoo is
heard--Ribwort--Incantations on Halloween--Pulling the castoc--Sowing
lint-seed--Fathoming a rick--Win’ing the blue clue--Winnowing
corn--Washing the sleeve of the shirt--Roasting peas--Eating an apple in
front of a looking-glass--By three caps or wooden basins--Incantation by
young women of Fraserburgh--How to divine the number of the family--How
to gain love--By orchis-roots--By two lozenges--Marriage dissipated love
so gained--A live coal tumbling from the fire portended
marriage--Apron-string or garter loosed with a young woman, meaning
of--Effect of mending clothes on her back--Psalm CIX.--Rhymes--Colour
rhyme--How courtship carried on--How marriage arranged--Tuesday or
Thursday common marriage day--More rarely Saturday--Unlucky for two of a
family to be married in the same year--Making ready the "Providan
"--"Thigging" wool by bride--Buying the "Bonnie Things"--"Providan" sent
home unlocked and unbound--Invitation of guests--Minister asked after
the invitation of the guests--A hat presented to minister--A present
made by each guest--Reserved till morning of marriage
day--"Hansel"--Marriage feast--Bridal ale--Bridal cakes--Omens drawn
from the brewing of the ale--From the baking of the bread--"Beuckin
nicht"--Proclamation of banns--Rubbing shoulders--Feet-washing--Omens
drawn from weather on marriage day--Rhymes--Bridal dress--Bridal
shoes--Something borrowed worn--Green garters presented by a younger
sister to an elder unmarried--Arrival of guests--Marriage
breakfast--"The sens"--The demand for the bride by the "sens"--Bride and
her party arrived first at church--Bride led by bridesmen--Bridegroom
led by two young women--Both parties carried whisky with bread and
cheese--"First fit" observed by both--Attention to "first fit"--Best a
man on horseback--Or a horse drawing a cart--Each party headed by a
piper--Firing of guns--"Bride-steel"--Great care to place the bride
properly--Place of "best maid"--Danger of being best maid--Bride and
bridegroom should not meet on the day of the marriage till they met to
be married--Ceremonies after marriage--Beadle received his
fee--Procession home--The welcome--Bride lifted over the
threshold--Bread and cheese in a sieve placed on her head--Sometimes
scattered--Gathered by young folks--The bride
cake--Distributed--Installation of bride as mistress"--"Basiller"--

<span id="page_Vii">p. Vii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Beggars--The marriage feast--"Penny
weddings"--Forbidden by the Church--Bridegroom did not take his seat at
marriage feast--Dancing--"Shaim-spring"--"Shaimit--reel"--Marriage
favours--Male dancers paid musician--Ceremony of "Beddan"--First asleep
first dead--Who carried pains of labour--The "Kirkin"--No bye-road taken
to Church--Service begun before entrance--Two bridal parties in church
at once--Kirkin feast--In change-houses--Such forbidden by the
Church--Marriage among the fishing population--Early
marriages--Arranging marriage--"Nicht o’ the Greeance"--Guests invited
by the bride and bridegroom in company--Customs on morning of marriage
day--Where marriage celebrated--Sixpence put into bride's shoe--The heel
of bride's shoe put down--Bridegroom's put down--Marriage party
sometimes makes the circuit of village after marriage ceremony--"First
Fit"--Sailor's marriage--Ceremonies on entering her home--What the bride
provides--What the husband provides--Taking home of the
"Plinisan"--Marriages in Crovie--In Rosehearty--Bridal bed in
Gardenston--The "Beddan "--Custom in Boddam--Presents to newly-married
pair, pp. [83](nes20.htm#page_83.md)-101.

### CHAPTER XVIII.

#### PLACE RHYMES.

Aikybrae--Aberdour--Avon--Banff--Boyne--Buchan--Strila--Buck--Belriunes--Tap
o’
Noth--Bennochie--Cabrach--Rushter--Cairnmuir--Cairnbyke--Rumblin-Steens--Stoney
Dyke--Carnousie--Corncairn--Cruden--Culblean--Cromar--Cullen--Cullycan--Daach--Sauchin--Keithock
Mill--Tam o’
Rivven--Balveny--Cults--Clunymoire--Auchindroin--Dee--Don--Urie--Bass--Deer--Tillery--Dipple--Dindurcas--Dandilieth--Delvey--Brig
o’ Balgownie--Eden--Fochabers--Fraserburgh--Fyvie Castle--St.
Fergus--Kilbirnie--Keith--Marna--Mormond--Mount
Mar--Lochnagar--Clochnaben--Bennochie--Pitfodels--Mearns--Pittentyoul--Pittendrum--Aberdour--Rattrayhead--Rivven
(Ruthven)--St. Brandon--St. Olav's Well--Brig o’ Turra--Little
Ugie--Druidical circles--The Helliman Rig at Killishment--The "Gudmahns'
Craft"--Caves, pp. [102](nes21.htm#page_102.md)--116.

### CHAPTER XIX.

#### PLACE AND FAMILY CHARACTERISTICS.

Aberdeen--Drum--Duff--Fraser--Gordon--Hay--Earl of
Mar--Ogilvie--Strathbogie--Towie Barclay, pp.
[117](nes22.htm#page_117.md)-122.

### CHAPTER XX.

#### ANIMAL AND PLANT SUPERSTITIONS.

Section I.--Four--footed animals--The mole--The cat--The dog--The
porpoise--The mouse--The field--mouse--The rat--The harp--The pig--The
horse--How to find water by a mare--The ass--The sheep--Cattle--Cow

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

rhymes. Section II.----Birds--Bird rhymes--The crow--Crow rhymes--The
raven--The magpie--The redbreast--The lark--Lark rhymes--The
yellow--hammer--The cock--The hen--Setting a hen--Time of day for so
doing--Months for so doing--Hen hatching a-field--Hand not to touch wild
ducklings--Bird's eggs not to be touched in nest--Hens and ducks
preening themselves--The dove--The golden plover--The moor-hen--The
lapwing--The wild-goose--The Swan. Section III.--Reptiles, fish, and
insects--Reptiles--The frog--The toad--Fishes--The dog-fish, part of
backbone a cure of toothache--The herring--The haddock--The fluke--The
salmon and the trout--Insects--The burying-beetle--The ladybird--The
Ant--Bees--Moths--Spiders--The green crab--The hairworm--The black
snail. Section IV.--Trees and plants--The aspen--The
bluebell--Broom--Whin--Turnip blossom--Wild fruits--Omens from first dug
potatoes--The puff-ball, pp. [123](nes23.htm#page_123.md)--148.

### CHAPTER XXI.

#### TIMES AND SEASONS AND WEATHER.

Days of the week--Monday--Tuesday--Friday--Saturday--The
months--February--March--April--The borrowing
days--May--June--Candlemas--Rood day wind--Wind on first day of
quarter--The moon--Unlucky to see new moon through a window--With empty
hands--Luck to have something in the hand--Money in the pocket must be
turned--Kiss one next you--"Mairt" killed when the moon increasing--Fish
hung in moonlight poisonous--Sleeping in moonlight dangerous--Influence
in ripening grain--"A broch"--"A cock's eye"--Moon seen soon after its
coming in indicates bad weather--"Lying on her back" the same--Old moon
lying in new moon--Mist--Mock sun--The rainbow--Thunder--Snow--Snow
rhyme--Snow--Rain rhyme--Rain before seven A.M.--A "Borie"--Rain from
south-west--Dust blowing--Mist--Clouds--The wind--"The song of the
sea"--"The dog afore his maister"--"The dog ahin his maister," pp.
[149](nes24.htm#page_149.md)-155.

### CHAPTER XXII.

#### CHRISTMAS, NEW YEAR'S DAY, &c.

Preparations for keeping them--Three days observed--Blacksmith would not
work unless by necessity--Every piece of work finished before
Christmas--Time about Christmas and New Year given to festivity--Food of
all kinds for man and beast prepared--Omen drawn from baking the
cakes--Yeel cakes kept as long as possible--Fish--Kebback--A piece of
new dress--"Yeels Jaad"--A child must not cry on Christmas
morning--"Yeel sones" Divination from them--A small quantity of the dish
left--Requiring a long time to cook indicated a late harvest or some
disaster--Christmas breakfast--Dinner--Gysers--Balls--Masonic
walks--Cattle got unthreshed corn--"Clyack Sheaf" given to mare in
foal--A fire in each byre--Creaming the well--How such water used--Well
creamed last night of year in some districts--Something must first be
carried into the house on Christmas morning--

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

\[paragraph continues\] A live coal not given out--First fire watched,
and omens drawn from it--"Ristin" fire on last night of year--Examined
in morning--Omens drawn from it--Appearance of stars--Wind on New Year's
day--Thigging--Thigging song--"Hogminay"--Hogminay
ditty--Raffles--Shooting-matches--"Dambrod"--Children's games of
chance--Totum "Nivey, neeck-nack"--"Headocks or
Pintacks"--"Yeel-preens"--Card playing--Playing in roadside inns and
public houses--"Hansel Monday"--Faster Even--Brose day--Bannock nicht--A
beef dinner on that day--Beef brose--Ring among brose--Omen drawn from
dreaming over the ring--Bannocks--Fortunetelling from eggs that partly
composed the bannocks--The "Sautie bannock"--How prepared--How used--No
spinning on that day--Playing the ball--Cock-fighting--Valentine
Day--Peace Sunday eggs--Beltane fires--Hallowe’en fires near
villages--Near farm-steadings, pp. [156](nes25.htm#page_156.md)-168.

### CHAPTER XXIII.

#### COUNTINGS OUT.

In use in Fraserburgh--Tyrie--Pitsligo--Rathen--Portosy--Keith--Banff,
pp. [169](nes26.htm#page_169.md)-175.

### CHAPTER XXIV.

#### WASHING DAY.

Little or no soap--Cow-dung as a detergent--"Book"--"Hen-pen"--Yearly
washing--Washing rhyme, pp. [176](nes27.htm#page_176.md)-177.

### CHAPTER XXV.

#### FARMING.

Aid given to one entering on a farm--By ploughing--By giving
seed--Crofter with bad crop "thigged"--Parts cultivated--No fixed
rotation of crops--A "Rig" left to grow wild oats--Corners left
uncultivated "for the aul’ man"--The plough--The harrows--Ropes--"Twal
ousen plew"--"Gaadman"--A proverb--How oxen yoked--A tradition--Ceremony
on putting the plough into the ground for the first time during the
season--Mode of harvesting--A mysterious animal--"Clyack"
sheaf--Divining about next harvest by the reapers--Firing shots into a
neighbour's field by those first finishing--"Clyack" feast--The
"winter"--How treated--"Meel an ale"--Part of grain left to feed
birds--Mode of winnowing grain--Prejudice against fans--A
tradition--Produce of land consumed within seven years--Mills--Mode of
stopping mills--Cattle--Injured by fairies--Shot by their
darts--"Thunderbolts"--The "Ill ee"--"Hackit flesh" buried in the
dungpit to work ill among the cattle--If found it was burned--Carcass of
dead animal burned if it was supposed that the disease was caused by a
witch or a warlock--An example--A tradition--Sacrifice of a pig to

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

stop disease among cattle--Diseased animals sacrificed--Byres purified
with virgin fire in cases of "Quarter Ill"--Fumigating with
juniper--"Need-fyre"--Forbidden by Church--Forelegs of dead animal cut
off and kept--Liver and lungs, parts of hung over the
fireplace--Sometimes boiled--Transferring the disease--Modes of doing
so--Place of burying the animal stopped the disease--Cures by
draughts--Off a new shilling--"Willox stone and bridle"--Modes of
keeping witches at a distance--The rowan tree--Woodbine--Throwing besom
after animal when led to market--Halter went along with animal when
sold--Thrown on roof of byre when animal taken home--Making sign of
cross on animal when bought--"Blockan ale"--The dairy--Chief
enemies--Witch and warlock--Modes of taking away milk--By witch--Turning
herself into a hare--Mode of taking it away when cow was calving--Mode
of preventing this--First milk through a finger-ring--On a "crosst
shilling"--On a horseshoe nail--By curdling the first milk--By a rope
plaited the contrary way round the cow's neck--By first draught of water
off a shilling--Driving the newly-calved cow from the byre over fire and
iron--Or over fire and salt--Same done to all the animals--"Seal" on
cow's neck kept witch at a distance--Modes of bringing back milk when
taken from cow--Boiling milk with pins, &c.--Corking up cow's urine in a
bottle--Traditions--Pour milk on a boulder between lichen and stone--By
ceremony with churn--Mode by selling--Mode of preventing a cow being
"forespoken"--Mode of finding out whether "forespoken"--Mode of
cure--Modes of finding out who took away milk--Cure of lumps in
udder--How to increase quantity of milk--Milk boiling over pot into
fire--Milk utensils washed indoors--If washed in a stream or pond
washings thrown on bank--Reason of such--"Ream-pig"--"Ream-bowie"--The
"paddle-doo"--"Gueede batter gaitherer"--Frog kept amongst cream--A
tradition--Cream--Crooked sixpence or cross of rowan tree or horseshoe
put below churn when butter was being made--One entering the house when
the butter was being churned churned a short time--How to make cow calve
during the day-time--Calf as it fell from the cow not touched with
hand--Cow not milked on the morning when taken to market--"Seal" went
along with milch cow when sold--The "Hird"--His club made of ash--Reason
for so doing--"Jockies plew"--Number of cattle notched on club--A
tradition--Each animal had a name--"Hird" Rhyme, pp.
[177](nes27.htm#page_177.md)-196.

### CHAPTER XXVI.

#### BOATS AND FISHING.

Boat launched to a flowing tide--Whisky, &c., given at launch and
naming--Rhyme--Ceremony by skipper's wife on arrival of a new
boat--Horseshoe nailed to boat--On going a-fishing new boat allowed to
take the lead--Reason---Ceremony on returning from fishing--A boat
wrecked with loss of life not afterwards used--White stone not used as
ballast--Stone bored by *pholas* not used--Village awakened by an old
fisherman--Men with an "Ill Fit"--Traditions--Mode of drawing down the
boats on going to sea-Repugnance

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

to go to sea if asked where they were going--Words not uttered when at
sea--Swine--Salmon--Trout--Dog--Minister--Kirk--Fish "glowered oot o’
'the boat"--Mode of taking off the spell--Boats at sea not to be pointed
at with finger--Nor counted--Nor women counted when travelling to sell
fish--Certain family names not pronounced in Buckie--Anecdote--Whyte an
unlucky name in other villages--Mode of curing haddocks--Different kinds
of cured haddocks--Other fish--Mode of selling--Ceremony on New Year's
Day, pp. [197](nes29.htm#page_197.md)-202.

### CHAPTER XXVII.

#### DEATH.

Omens--Three knocks--The "Dead-drop"--"Chackie Mill"--Heavy sound
outside door of house--Murmur of human voices--Mirror or picture
falling--"Dead--can’le"--A "Fey-crap"--"Coffin-spehl"--Apparition of
person doomed to die--Three drops of cold blood falling from
nose--Unusual joy--Sneezing a sign of recovery--Dead and living
grave--Forbidden by Church--Mysterious sound--A tradition--Break rock
over head of the dying--Dying one removed from bed--Reason for so
doing--Doors and windows opened in hour of death--Iron stuck into
butter, &c., on the death taking place--Milk in house thrown out--Onions
and butter in some fishing villages thrown out--Chairs, &c. sprinkled
with water--Clothes of dead sprinkled with water--Had a peculiar
smell--Clock stopped--Mirrors, pictures, &c., covered--Hens and cats
shut up--Reason for so doing--Neighbours did not yoke horses unless a
running stream between dwellings--Earth not dug in one village--Wright
sent for on death to make coffin--Laying out of body--A penny or
halfpenny put on eyelids if they did not close--Salt laid on
breast--Green turf laid on breast to prevent swelling--Candles kept
burning--A tradition--Time of death--Drowning--Body floated on ninth
day--Reason--Mode of finding body--Body of suicide--Murder--Murderer
touching body causes blood to flow--The lyke-wake--The "Kistan"--The
"Waukan"--How time employed--Sometimes practical jokes--"Tobacco
Nichts," pp. [203](nes30.htm#page_203.md)-209.

### CHAPTER XXVIII.

#### BURIAL.

Reception of funeral guests--hospitality--Looking at the dead
body--Touching it--Body soft, meaning of--Part of winding--sheet cut off
and kept--Mode of carrying the coffin to the graveyard--A young woman
carried by young women in Buckie-Chairs, on which coffin rested before
moving away from the door, overturned--Allowed to lie for a
time--Washed--All animals about the farm loosed from their stalls and
driven forth--The funeral must go by the common road--Bellman went
before funeral ringing a bell in some place--Church-bell rung in
others--Whisky carried if graveyard distant--Partaken of at the "ristin
stehn"--Tradition--Whisky partaken of when grave covered--Feast after
funeral--A shower on the open grave--A

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

hurricane--Bread and water put beside the dead body the night after the
funeral--A funeral not to be looked at from a window--Suicides--Not
buried in graveyard--A tradition--Where buried--Why not buried in
graveyard--The knot of a suicide's hanging rope--A
criminal's--Still-born children--The baptized
children--Graveyards--Reluctance to put first body in a new graveyard--A
tradition--The "Meels"--The mortcloth--Coffins--Graveyards haunted--Mode
of making contract with the devil--Mode of "arresting" a man or a
beast--Mould of graveyard used in sorcery--Forbidden by the Church, pp.
[210](nes31.htm#page_210.md)-216.

GLOSSARY, pp. [217](nes32.htm#page_217.md)-225.

INDEX, pp. 227-238.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](nes03.md)
