[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](nes17)  [Next](nes19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

# CHAPTER XV.

### "BLACK AIRT" AND DEVIL COMPACTS.

<span id="img_qbinit"></span>

|                      |
|----------------------|
| ![B](img/qbinit.jpg.md) |

LACK AIRT" was firmly believed in. If the proficients in this science
did not make a compact with Satan, they were very much in communion with
him. He was regarded as the fountain from which it sprang. It was looked
upon as a kind of wisdom by which men came to be able to know the hidden
essence of things, the virtues of herbs for cure or poison, to have
power over nature in many of her workings, power to cure disease, to
guard against witches and fairies, to remove their spells, to discover
thieves, and even to see into the future. Under the teaching they got
some of the students reached a high degree of expertness, and became a
match for the devil himself in cunning, and were even able to outwit
him.

Spain and Italy, particularly Italy, were the countries in which the
science was most flourishing, and in which it was taught most
efficiently, and thither all, who wished to become adepts in it, went.
Its study was carried on in dark rooms under famous teachers; and, on
leaving the class-rooms, the students had to pass through a long black
passage at the end of which stood the prince of darkness watching to
catch the last one. No sooner had the last word of the professor's
lecture been spoken than out rushed the students, and made for the light
pell-mell through the black passage shouting "Deel tack the hinmost!"
The devil, on one occasion, clutched at a student; he met one who was
more than a match for him. The student called out, "There is another
behind me!" His sable majesty looked first to this side, and then to
that. He saw what seemed a man; he rushed upon it and seized it. It was
the student's shadow. Ever after the student was shadowless.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

### DEVIL COMPACTS.

It was believed that many went further than the students of "Black Art,"
and actually made compacts with the devil. Such a compact was made at
midnight in some lonely churchyard, or amid the ruins of some castle.
Those who did so, were they men or women, became bound to give
themselves up soul and body to Satan at the end of a certain number of
years, on a fixed day, and at a fixed hour, or at the time of their
death. For this they received power to do almost everything man could
conceive--to control the elements, to send disease on man or beast, to
make crops unfruitful, to destroy them by wind or rain, to amass as much
wealth as they wished to spend upon their evil passions--in short, to do
what wicked work they set their minds to. A wild wanton life did such
lead, often with the appearance of unbounded wealth and happiness far
beyond the reach of most men. Their whole time seemed one round of
success and joy.

The time fixed by the contract might be prolonged, but, if the contract
was not renewed, go they must at the hour appointed.

A man had made such a contract. He had, to all appearance, lived a life
of comfort and success. The time for him to go drew very near. When he
began to think of his doom, horror took hold of him. He told his
terrible secret to some of his friends. They did what they could to
cheer him, and make him forget it. On the last night they met with him,
and kept him surrounded, persuading him and themselves that, if it
should come to the worst, they would be able to defend him. Hour after
hour passed, and they begin to think that the devil had forgotten. The
appointed hour came. Next moment a knock was heard at the door. All eyes
were turned to it. It opened, and in stalked the devil. There was no
delay. He rushed upon his thrall, and both disappeared in fire, leaving
behind them nothing but smoke and stench.

At times a few of like thought and manner of life joined together, and
made a compact with the prince of darkness. They took the name of "The
Hell-fire Club." They met at night among the ruins of some old castle,
or in a vault of it, if such

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

was still entire. For hours they carried on their orgies, drinking,
swearing, scoffing at the Bible, turning everything sacred into
ridicule, and putting God Himself to defiance. To crown all, once a year
in the darkness of the night, in their usual meeting-place, they partook
of the Communion in the devil's name, and renewed their contract with
him. Such men were noted for their drunken, debauched, reckless, defiant
lives. It was said of them that most of them commonly came to ail
untimely end. This one was drowned; the next one was thrown from a
horse; this other one in a fit of remorse put an end to his days by
hanging himself; and another, by drowning himself. Such of them as did
die a natural death were seized with some terrible disease, and, after
the greatest sufferings, passed away in agony of soul and body, cursing
God and man with their last breath. Vengeance in some way or other
overtook them all. <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[75:1](nes18.htm#fr_56.md) Cf. Henderson, p. 279.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Riddles](nes19.md)
