[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](nes27)  [Next](nes29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

# CHAPTER XXV.

### FARMING.

<span id="img_winit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![W](img/winit.jpg.md) |

HEN one entered upon a farm, it was usual for friends and neighbours to
lend a helping hand. Aid was given in ploughing. A day was fixed, and
each neighbour sent one or more ploughs according to the number he had.
Goodly hospitality was not awanting at such times. But the kind offices
of neighbours were not confined to ploughing the fields of the in-going
tenant. They contributed at least part of the grain to sow the fields.
The new tenant, along with a friend, went from farm to farm, and got a
peck or two from this one, a leppie from the next one, a hathish-cogful
from the next one. This was called "thiggin the seed." No one, however,
gave in this way any grain till he himself had some of his own fields
sown.

Thigging was not confined to the gathering of the seed by a new tenant.
A crofter, with a bad crop, at times went the round of the country
during harvest, and begged grain in the fodder. In later times this was
done with a cart. Usually a few sheaves were given by each farmer and
brother-crofter. The poor man collected in this way a quantity
sufficient for his need, and was able to tide over his distress.

It was only the higher and drier parts of the land that were cultivated.
The low and wet parts were reserved for growing "rashes" and "sprots,"
which formed cattle-litter and thatch for the grain-stacks and houses.
The land was not divided into regular and shapely fields. There was a
patch here and a patch there in the middle of a tract overgrown with
heather or whin or broom, and often choked up with stones. Even in the
cultivated parts of larger size there was no regularity. They were
twisted, bent like a bow, zig-zag, of all shapes, and cut

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

up by "baaks," into which were gathered stones and such weeds as were
taken from the portion under crop.

There was no fixed rotation of crops. Each farmer did as he thought fit.
Here is one system.

The lea was ploughed and sown with oats. This crop was called the "ley
crap." The next crop was also of oats, and was named the "yaavel crap."
At times a second "yaavel" was taken. The land was then manured and sown
with bere. The crop which followed was the "bar-reet crap," and was of
oats. Then came the second "bar-reet crap," and last of all the "waarshe
crap." The land was then allowed to rest for an indefinite number of
years, according to the fancy of the owner. It soon ran to a sward of
natural grasses.

It was not at all uncommon to leave a "rig" or two unsown for the wild
oats to grow up. They came earlier to maturity than the cultivated, and
thus furnished the staff of life for the time between the exhaustion of
the old crop and the incoming of the new.

Some left a corner uncultivated altogether for "the aul man," *i. e.*
the devil, or spirit of evil.

The plough was made of wood, and was of so simple and easy construction
that a man had no difficulty in making one in a day, or in even less
time.

The harrows were of wood, and the tynes of the same material, and for
the most part of birch. The thrifty, foreseeing farmer often spent part
of his winter evenings in preparing tynes. When prepared they were hung
in bundles on the rafters of the kitchen to dry and harden.

Ropes were made either of hair, willows, bog-fir split up into canes,
broom roots, or heather.

On large farms the plough was drawn by twelve oxen, and was called a
"twal ousen plew." Counting from the pair next the plough, the name of
each pair was --

"Fit yoke,  
Hin frock,  
Fore frock,  
Mid yoke,  
Steer-draught o’ laan,  
Wyners."

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The oxen were driven by the "gaadman." He
carried a long polo, sharpened at one end, or tipped with iron, which he
applied to the animal that was shirking his work. The "gaadman" usually
whistled to cheer the brutes in their work. Hence the proverb to signify
that much exertion had been made with poor results:--"Muckle fuslan all
little red-laan."

The oxen were yoked to the plough by a common rope called the "soum."
The bridle of the plough bore the name of the "cheek-lone," to which the
"fit-yoke," was attached by the "rack-baan." Hence the origin of the two
phrases, "a crom i’ the soum," and "a thrum i’ the graith," to indicate
that a hitch had taken place in the carrying out of an undertaking.

With such slender-looking materials as a wooden plough and graith made
of "sauch waans," one unacquainted with the strength of such was apt to
look down upon the implement. Tradition has it that a Lord Povost of
Aberdeen began, in the hearing of one of the Dukes of Gordon, to make
light of a "twal-ousen plew." The duke defended, and asserted that his
plough would tear up the "plainstanes" of Aberdeen. The Provost accepted
the challenge. A day was fixed. The duke hastened home, and had
everything made of the best material, and in the strongest fashion.
Oxen, plough, and graith, were conveyed to Aberdeen, with the Duke's
best ploughman and most skilful "gaadman." On the day appointed, and at
the hour fixed, the "twal-ousen plew" in all its splendour was on the
spot. The duke and the provost, with a crowd of eager onlookers, stood
round. A small hole had been made to allow the plough to enter, and it
was duly placed in it, and hold firm by the iron grip of a stalwart
Gordon, whilst the gaadman stood watching his team. The word was given
to begin. The "gaadman" struck up his tune and applied the "gaad"; the
oxen bent their necks, raised their backs, and tugged; but the stones
remained immoveable. The strain was slackened, and the oxen drew breath.
Again did the "gaadman" try his skill and cheer on the brutes. When the
full strain was felt one of the fit-yoke shirked the pull. The Duke's
keen eye saw what the "gaadman" failed to see. It was the critical
moment. Everything

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

depended on that ox. The duke shouted out "The brod t’ Brockie." In an
instant the "brod" was in Brockie's flank. Brockie bowed his neck, and
curved his back. Down went the plough, away tugged the oxen, and right
and left flew the "plainstanes" of Aberdeen before the Duke of Gordon's
"twal-ousen plew."

When the plough was "strykit," *i. e.*, put into the ground for the
first time in autumn or spring, to prepare the soil for the seed, bread
and cheese, with ale or whisky, were carried to the field, and partaken
of by the household. A piece of bread with cheese was put into the
plough, and another piece was cast into the field "to feed the craws."

When the seed was once taken to the field, it must on no account be
taken back to the barn, if the weather broke, and prevented it from
being sown. It lay on the field till the weather cleared up and the soil
became fit for being sown, however long the time might be.

Harvesting was done by the sickle, and eight harvesters, four men and
four women, were put on each "rig." A binder and a "stooker" were
appointed to each eight reapers. At times there were only two on each
rig. Before commencing work on the harvest field, each reaper cast a
cross on the ground with the sickle "to keep the wrist from being
sprained." During a wet harvest the sheaves, after having the band drawn
up to the ears, were set up on end singly to dry. This process was
called "gyttin." The reapers when at work, looked for a kindly
salutation from the passers-by, and took it ill if such a greeting was
not given. A common one was "God speed the wark."

It was believed by some that a very mysterious animal, which when met
with by the reapers among the corn had the appearance of a grey stone,
but which could change its shape, lived among the corn. When met with, a
small quantity of the crop was left standing around it, and the ears of
grain only were cut off. This animal looks like the hedgehog.

The "clyack" sheaf was cut by the maidens on the harvest field. On no
account was it allowed to touch the ground. One

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

of the maidens seated herself on the ground, and over her knees was the
band of the sheaf laid. Each of the maidens cut a handfull, or more if
necessary, and laid it on the band. The sheaf was then bound, still
lying over the maiden's knees, and dressed up in woman's clothing. It
was carried home in triumph and carefully preserved till Christmas or
New Year morning. On that morning it was given to a mare in foal, if
such was on the farm, and if not, it was given to the oldest cow. Some
left a few stalks unreaped for the benefit of "the aul’ man."

When the "clyack" sheaf was cut, the reapers threw their sickles to
divine in what direction the farm lay on which they were to be reapers
the following harvest. The sickle was thrown three times over the left
shoulder, and note was taken in what direction its point lay. The" best
o’ three" decided the question--that is, if the point twice lay in the
same direction, the reaper was to reap the next harvest on a farm, in
that direction.

The reapers on neighbouring farms always vied with each other who should
have the crop first reaped. Those who finished first fired one or more
shots into their neighbours' fields.

The best produce of the farm was served up for dinner on the day
"clyack" was taken, if it was taken before the hour of dinner. If the
cutting of the crop was finished after the dinner-hour, then the feast
was served as supper. One part of the feast that could not be dispensed
with was a cheese which was called the "clyack kebback." Like the "yeel
kebback," it must be cut by the gueedman. The absence of this cheese
from the "clyack" feast, or its being cut by another than the master of
the household, would have been unpropitious.

The one who took the last of the grain from the field to the stackyard
was called the "winter." Each one did what could be done to avoid being
the last on the field, and when there were several on the field there
was a race to get off.

The unfortunate "winter" was the subject of a good deal of teasing, and
was dressed up in all the old clothes that could be gathered about the
farm, and placed on the "bink" to eat his supper.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

When all was safe and snug for the winter season, there was the "meel an
ale"--that is, a feast in which a dish made of ale, oatmeal, sugar, with
whisky, formed the characteristic dish. In some districts this feast was
called "the winter." Commonly to it were invited the unmarried folks
from the neighbouring farms and the evening was spent in "dance and
jollity."

One was not over exact in gathering from the fields all the scattered
ears of grain. Birds had to be fed as well as man, and some of the
bounties of Providence had to be left for the fowls of the air.

The winnowing of the grain was done by the wind. The barn had two doors,
the one right opposite the other, and between the two doors, when the
wind was suitable, the winnowing was carried on by means of riddles
having meshes of different sizes. When fans were introduced, there was
great prejudice against the use of them. The wind was looked upon as the
means provided by the Father of all for separating the chaff from the
grain, and to cast it away and use artificial wind was regarded as a
slur on His wisdom and a despising of His gifts. An old-fashioned man in
the parish of Pitsligo, on seeing a neighbour proceed to winnow his
grain with a fan, cried out:--"Eh! Sauny Milne, Sauny Milne, will ye
tak’ the poor oot o’ the Almichty's han’?"

It was the common saying that the produce of the land in each period of
seven years was consumed within that period.

The tradition was that, when mills for grinding grain into meal were
first introduced, those sites were chosen to which water for driving the
wheel flowed naturally. There must be no artificial embanking, and
little or no turning of the water from its natural run. The site of the
mill was fore-ordained by Providence. Man had merely to use his powers
to find out the site.

The wheel of the mill could be stopped by throwing into the race some
mould taken from a churchyard at midnight, and the repeating the Lord's
Prayer backward during the act of casting the mould, "the meels," into
the water.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

### CATTLE.

Cattle, like human beings, were exposed to the influences of the evil
eye, of forespeaking, and of the casting of evil. Witches and warlocks
did the work of evil among their neighbours' cattle if their anger had
been aroused in any way.

The fairies often wrought injury amongst cattle. <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136.md) Every animal that died suddenly was
killed by the dart of the fairies, or, in the language of the people,
was "shot-a-dead." <span id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_137.md) Flint arrows
and spear-heads went by the name of "faery dairts," whilst the kelts
were called "thunderbolts," and were coveted as the sure bringers of
success, provided they were not allowed to fall to the ground. When an
animal died suddenly the canny woman of the district was sent for to
search for the "faery dairt," and in due course she found one, to the
great satisfaction of the owner of the dead animal.

There were those who were dreaded as buyers, if the purchase was not
completed by them. In a short time the animal began to "dwine," or an
accident befell it, or death speedily followed. Such had an
"ill-ee." <span id="fr_138"></span>[3](#fn_138.md) It was alleged that they
were well aware of the opinion entertained of their power, and offered a
price less than that of the market, fully aware that the seller would
rather give the animal at the low price than risk a sale in the market,
or no sale at all, for the same men were believed to prevent the sale to
any other.

One mode of in enemy's working evil among a neighbour's cattle was to
take a piece of carrion, cut the surface of it into small pieces, and
bury it in the dunghill, or put it over the lintel of the door. Such
carrion was called "hackit-flesh." If disease broke out among the cattle
of a farm, the dunghill was carefully searched for "hackit-flesh." If
such a thing was found it was taken to a short distance from the "toon,"
and always to a spot above it, and there burned.

If the "hackit flesh" was not found, and if it was divined

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

that the disease arose from the work of a witch or a warlock, the
carcass of the animal which first died was burned.

Not many years ago two farmers on the north-east coast of Aberdeenshire,
one of whom bore the character of being "uncanny," as all his
"forebeers" had been, quarrelled over a bargain. A short time after, a
horse belonging to the one who provoked the quarrel was taken ill and
died. It was the "uncanny" man who had done the deed. Within a day of
the death of the first a second was taken ill, and died. It was drawn
forth from the stable to a convenient spot, and piled round with a
quantity of peats. The heap of fuel was set on fire, and for several
days the pile burned.

Near the same place, but many years ago, a crofter's cow fell ill, and
died. Not long after a second fell ill, and died too. In a short time
the remaining cow was seized with the same disease. A "skeely" man wast
sent for. He came, examined the cow, and told the owner that the cow
would soon die as the other two had done. He then went into the kitchen
and seated himself on the "dies," that he might give further
instructions. He told at the same time that all was the work of a near
neighbour. There was, however, only one near neighbour, and the owner of
the cows said it could not be that near neighbour, calling her by name.
The man made no reply to this, but went on to say that a woman carrying
a little black jar would soon enter, and ask for a little milk, which
was on no account to be given. Scarcely had he finished giving this
order, than in walked this near neighbour, carrying a black jar, and
asked for a little milk. It was at once refused. She looked at the man
of skill for a moment, and then seated herself on the "dies" not far
from him. While the conversation was being carried on, the woman with
the black jar was trying to move nearer and nearer the man of skill. But
he saw what she was aiming at, and he moved away little by little,
always followed by the woman, both to all appearance unconscious of each
other's movements. At last the man reached the end of the "dies," and
the woman was coming always nearer. He jumped to the middle of the
floor, and thus saved himself. Had the woman laid her hand on him all
his skill was gone.

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

The cow died. She was dragged away to a convenient spot, and burnt to
ashes in accordance with the man's orders.

About the year 1850 disease broke out among the cattle of a small farm
in the parish of Resoliss, Black Isle, Ross-shire. The farmer prevailed
on his wife to undertake a journey to a wise, woman of renown in
Banffshire to ask a charm against the effects of the "ill ee." The long
journey of upwards of fifty miles was performed by the good wife, and
the charm was got. One chief thing ordered was to burn to death a pig,
and sprinkle the ashes over the byre and other farm buildings. This
order was carried out, except that the pig was killed before it was
burned. A more terrible sacrifice was made at times. One of the diseased
animals was rubbed over with tar, driven forth, set on fire, and allowed
to run till it fell down and died. <span id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139.md)

When the quarter-ill made its appearance the "muckle wheel" was set in
motion, and turned till fire was produced. From this virgin flame fires
were kindled in the byres. At the same time, if neighbours requested the
favour, live coals were given them to kindle fires for the purification
of their homesteads and turning off the disease. Fumigating the byres
with juniper was a method adopted to ward off disease.

Such a fire was called "needfyre." The kindling of it came under the
censure of the Presbytery at times.

"The said day \[28 Februarii, 1644\], it was regraited be Mr. Robert
Watsone that ther vas neid fyre raysed vithin his parochin of Grange for
the curing of cattell, *etc*. The bretherin thoght to referr the mater
to the consideratioun of the Provinciall Assemblie."

"28th Martii, 1649, Mr. Robert Watson regrated the kindling of neidfyre
vithin his parochin. Referred to the consideratioun of the Assemblie of
course to be taken heirwith."

"Penult Maij 1649, compeired . . . . . . parishoneris of Grange,
confessed they ver present at the kindling of neidfyre, and did nothing
but as they ver desired be James Duncan in Keyth. Also, they delated
some of their owne elderis to haue been accessorie thereto . . . . . .
all ordained to satisfie according to the ordinance of the Provinciall
Assemblie, vith three dayes repentance in sackcloth." <span
id="fr_140"></span>[2](#fn_140.md)

The fore-legs of one of the animals that had died were cut

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

off a little above the knee, and hung over the fire-place in the
kitchen. <span id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_141.md) It was thought sufficient
by some if they were placed over the door of the byre, in the "crap o’
the wa." Sometimes the heart and part of the liver and lungs were cut
out, and hung over the fireplace instead of the fore-feet. Boiling them
was at times substituted for hanging them over the hearth.

Transferring the disease was another mode of cure. To do this the
carcass was secretly buried on a neighbouring farm; but, as this act
transferred the disease to the neighbour's cattle, it was seldom done.
The animal was conveyed by night to a wood or a lone hill-side on a
neighbouring proprietor's lands and buried. Sometimes the dead animal
was buried in the bottom of a ditch dividing farms or proprietors'
lands. It is not over forty years since a firmer in the parish of Keith,
on the lands of the Earl of Fife, carted the carcass of an animal to a
hill on the property of the Earl of Seafield, and there buried it. In
doing this act all care had to be used to avoid detection; for, if the
actors had been caught in the act, they would have had to pay dearly for
their deed.

A mode of arresting the progress of disease on a farm was the place on
the farm where the dead animal was buried; it must be buried "abeen" the
"toon" and not "aneth" it.

Another series of cures was by draughts prepared in particular ways.

Let a new shilling be put into a pail or cog and water poured over it;
such water was considered of great efficacy in effecting a cure.

A few years ago a farmer who happened to be in the seaport village of
Portgordon was asked to visit and prescribe for a sick cow belonging to
one of the villagers. He asked if anything had been done in the way of
cure. "Oo aye," said the woman, "a ga’ ir a drink aff o’ a new shillin
yesterday, in a think she's been some better sin seen." But the most
noted medicine of the draught kind is furnished by Willox "stone" and
bridle. This stone and bridle have been in possession of the family for
generations. All the virtue lies in the stone and the bridle, and

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

not in the possessor or operator. A small quantity of water is poured
into a basin. The stone is put into the water and turned three times
round while the words, "In the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost," are repeated. The bridle is then dropped into the water and
turned round in the same way, and with the same words. The water so
treated has the power to cure all manner of disease. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_142.md)

To keep the witches at a distance there were various methods, and all of
approved value. On bonfire night (1st May, O.S.) small pieces of
rowan-tree and woodbine were placed over the byre doors inside the
house. Sometimes it was a single rod of rowan, covered with notches.
There is the well-known rhyme:--

"The rawn-tree in the widd-bin  
Hand the witches on cum in."

\[paragraph continues\] Another and even more effectual method was to
tie to each animal's tail by a scarlet thread a small cross made of the
wood of the rowan-tree; hence the rhymes:--

"Rawn-tree in red-threed  
Pits the witches t’ their speed."

\[paragraph continues\] And,

"Rawn-tree in red-threed  
Gars the witches tyne their speed." <span
id="fr_143"></span>[2](#fn_143.md)

\[paragraph continues\] When all animal was led away to market the besom
was thrown on it to ward off all harm from witches, the "ill-ee," or
"forespeaking."

The halter by which the animal was led went along with it when sold; to
have taken it off would have been unpropitious. It was taken off when
the animal reached the byre door, and cast on the roof of the byre,
where it was allowed to lie. The removal of it from the roof would have
brought down misfortune on the beast that had been purchased.

If the seller of an animal was in the least degree suspected of
possessing uncanny powers, the buyer made the sign of the cross on the
animal's side, "to keep a’s ain." This was done in an

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

especial manner if the animal was a milch cow, as it prevented the
seller from retaining the milk though he sold the cow. When the bargain,
was settled on, the buyer and seller struck hands, or, wetting their
thumbs, pressed them together. Both went to a tent, many of which had
been pitched on the market-green for the sale of refreshments, when
payment was made, and the "blockan ale" drunk. The seller, on receiving
payment, returned a "luck penny" to the buyer, a sixpence, a shilling,
or a larger sum, if it was thought a "stret bargain." <span
id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_144.md)

### THE DAIRY.

The chief enemies of the dairy were the witch and the warlock, <span
id="fr_145"></span>[2](#fn_145.md) that had the power of drawing away the
milk and the cream of the cows. There were various modes of doing so.
The witch with hair streaming over her face and shoulders has been seen
on her knees in the byres beside a blazing fire. Then she has been known
to make the milk pour through the key-hole of the door or from the foot
of the couple. <span id="fr_146"></span>[3](#fn_146.md) She has been
observed to turn herself into a hare, mount on the cow's back, and sit
for a time, and the milk has departed, whilst she never wanted milk,
though she had no cow at all, or, if she had one, though she was
"ferra."

When a neighbour's cow, whose milk was to be taken, was in the act of
calving, a pot was placed beside the fire by the witch. At the time the
calf dropped from the cow, of which the milk-stealer was informed by one
in her service, by

"Some deevlish cantrip slicht,"

the milk poured into the pot, and the milk of the cow could afterwards
be drawn by the witch at any time, and at any distance.

To prevent the milk from being taken away at the time of calving, the
moment the calf dropped from the cow, its mouth was opened, and a little
of the dam's excrement thrust in. If a witch had her pot beside the fire
to draw away the milk, it was

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

by this act performed on the calf, filled with dirt instead of milk.

When the first milk was drawn from the cow after calving, three "strins"
from each pap were milked through a finger-ring. A silver one was
preferred about Tomintoul. Others put a shilling into the cog. An old
shilling, called a "cross’t shillan," or a crossie-croon shillan," was
in the possession of some families, and was preserved with great care.
Those who had not the good fortune to possess such a treasure made use
of a coin current at the time. Others put into the cog a horse-shoe
nail. A stallion's shoe nail had most efficacy.

A more elaborate method of preserving the milk from the power of the
witch was the following:--Three "strins" from each dug were milked
through a marriage ring into a small pot. This quantity of milk was hung
over the fire till it curdled. The curds were salted, put into a small
piece of cloth, and hung up within the chimney so high that nothing
would disturb it.

Another mode of keeping the witch at a distance was to plait a piece of
cord the contrary way, or with the left hand, and tie it round the
animal's neck "atween the sin in the sky" at sunset.

The first draught of water given to the cow after calving was off a
shilling.

When the cow was driven forth for the first time after calving, the
tongs or a piece of iron and a live coal were laid in the byre door, and
the animal passed over them. In other places, instead of iron, fire and
salt were used. If the cow trampled on the fire, by so much more
efficacious was the charm. This ceremony of placing iron and fire or
fire and salt in the byre door was observed by some with respect not to
newly-calved cows alone, but to all the cattle when they were driven
forth to grass in spring.

In other places the cow was taken from the byre with the "seal" on her
neck. The witch had no power over an animal with the "seal" on its neck.

To bring back the milk when taken away there were several

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

methods. The gueedewife when alone and with barred door took what milk
the cow had, and put it into a pot along with a quantity of needles and
pins, or even nails. She put on a large fire, and hung the pot over it.
Before the lapse of a long time the guilty witch came to the window in
agony, and with the prayer to be relieved, and the promise to restore
the milk. Sometimes the cow's urine was substituted for the milk.
Another method was to catch some of the animal's urine in a bottle, cork
it tightly, and keep it. In no long time the milk-stealer made her
appearance, confessed her wicked deed, and entreated to be relieved of
the disease with which he had been seized. <span
id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147.md)

A crofter in the north-east of Buchan bought a cow. He took her home,
and everything seemed right and proper with the animal when tied lip in
the byre. But, when she was put to the pasture, she made straight to a
large boulder that was near the pasture, tore up the earth round the
stone, throwing it over her back and bellowing. It was with difficulty
she could be dragged away from it, and with as much difficulty kept on
the tether. When put to pasture morning after morning, she ran to the
stone, scraped, and bellowed. At the same time her milk disappeared. A
wise man was consulted. A witch had been at work, and the deed had been
done beside the boulder. The cure was as follows:--The small quantity of
milk still remaining to the cow was taken from her, put into a pot with
eleven new pins--pins that had "never been in claith"--and boiled. This
boiled milk was then poured round the foot of the stone. The cow never
afterwards went to the stone, and her milk returned to its full flow.

A man's cow on the north coast of Buchan fell ill. Her milk left her.
She was under the spell of a witch. A wise man lived on the east coast
of Buchan, and he had to be consulted. The owner of the cow, along with
a friend, set out early for a consultation; for, generally, on such
occasions, two went. On arriving, they were received by the canny man
with the greeting, "Cum awa’, a wiz leukin for ye." The story of the cow
was told him. He gave the owner a powder for the animal, and at

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

the same time enjoined the two men not to speak to any one in their
journey homewards, and to go straight to the byre, and administer the
powder to the beast. All this was carried out to the letter. The two men
then retired to the dwelling-house to get food. When one of the family
shortly after entered the byre to see if the cow was dead, she was found
standing, to all appearance in perfect health, and with the milk running
from her. The gueedewife began to milk, and drew from the cow two and
a-half large pailfuls of milk.

A woman's cow was seized with a fit of lowing and restlessness on the
pasture. She was under the power of a witch. The woman went to the
nearest wood, and cut a branch of rowan tree and another of ash. A cross
was made from the rowan tree, and tied with a piece of red thread to the
animal's tail amongst the hair at its point. A small piece was cut off
the ash-branch. Three slits crosswise were made in one end of it, and
into each slit was stuck a pin, so that the pills crossed each other.
This was placed above the byre-door on the inside.

Another means to bring back a cow's milk, when taken away by a witch,
was to pour a little of the milk that still remained on a boulder
between the "screef an the stehn," that is, below the lichen growing on
the stone.

Another mode of doing so was to take the churn across running water, dip
it three times in the stream, and carry it back without speaking to any
one.

Sometimes it happened that a cow on her first milk gave a large quantity
of it. After her second calf she gave almost none. The witch had been at
work. The animal had to be sold. When sold, the reason for selling was
told to the buyer. The animal was resold, and the milk returned to the
second buyer.

To prevent a cow from being "forespoken" it was the custom to draw water
from the well on the morning of the first day of each "raith" (quarter)
between the sun and the sky, pour it into a cog or pail over a new
shilling, and give it to the animal as a draught. If a cow was not
thriving, or if she was not giving the quantity of milk she usually
gave, and there was a suspicion that she was forespoken, the suspicion
must be put to the test

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

and the truth discovered. A little of the cow's milk was put into a pot
with some needles and pins. If the milk boiled as it ordinarily does
there was no forespeaking. If it boiled up like water the forespeaking
was undoubted. To undo the evil the milking-cogs were washed with the
stale urine of the forespoken animal.

If the cow's milk had been taken away, merely to discover who had done
the deed, two ceremonies, both similar, were performed. A pair of
trousers was tied over the animal's head, and she was driven forth from
the byre between the sun and the sky. She went straight to the house of
the one who had taken her milk. In the other ceremony a mare's bridle
was used instead of the pair of trousers.

If lumps appeared in the cow's udder after calving she was milked into a
tin pail, an act which proved an effectual cure. Another mode of cure
was to rub the udder with water heated by plunging red-hot iron into it.

To increase the quantity of milk at the expense of a neighbour on the
morning of the first day of each "raith" the dew was gathered off the
pasture of his cows, and the milk utensils were rinsed with it.

A method of increasing the quantity of milk without any injury to a
neighbour was to boil "white gowans" (*Chrysanthemum Leucanthemum*), and
to wash all the milk utensils with the decoction.

For milk to boil over the edge of the pot and run into the fire was very
unlucky, and diminished the quantity of milk given by the cow or cows.
To counteract the evil consequences salt was immediately thrown into the
fire.

The milk utensils were for the most part washed indoors. This was done
to prevent the possibility of wild animals touching the milk, because,
if they did so, the udders of the cows festered. Such was the custom
around Tomintoul. If the utensils were washed in a stream or pond, great
care was employed not to allow any of the water used in washing to fall
back into the stream or pond. It was scrupulously thrown on the bank,
and always in the direction up the stream. This was done lest the

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

frogs should swallow any particle of the milk, in which case all the
milk became thick and stringy, somewhat like "poddock-cruds."

The "ream-pig" or "ream-bowie" was never washed. Washing took away all
the luck. A sixpence was always kept in it. A crooked one had most
virtue. A frog was kept by some in it, and bore the name of "paddle-doo"
or "gueede butter-gaitherer."

A servant unacquainted with such a custom entered on the service of a
gueedewife, who followed the habit of keeping a "paddle-doo." The first
time the servant creamed the milk she observed the large overgrown frog
in the "ream-bowie." She immediately seized it, and cast it forth on the
dung-hill. After finishing her work, she told her mistress what she had
found, and what she had done. She received a sharp rebuke, and was sent
to search the dung-hill for the frog. The frog was found, carefully
taken up, washed clean, and replaced.

The cream was usually kept for a considerable length of time for weeks,
and even for months. There was at the bottom of the utensil in which the
cream was kept a small hole into which was inserted a short tube,
stopped by a pin. This tube and pin went by the name of a "cock and
pail" and served to draw off the thin sour part of the cream--the "wig."

When the butter was being churned a crooked sixpence, <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148.md) or a cross of rowan-tree, or a
horse-shoe was placed below the churn. When one entered the house during
the process of churning, the hand of the one who entered had to be put
to the churn. This was done to show that there was no evil intended
against the butter-making, and to do away with all effects that might
flow from the "ill-e’e" or the "ill-fit." There were persons whose
entrance was dreaded during the process of butter-making. If such did
enter there was either no butter, or it was bad in quality, or less in
quantity than it should have been, and got only after hours of churning.

That the cow might calve during day, she was let "yeel" on Sunday. <span
id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_149.md) When the calf fell from the cow it was
on no account

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

touched with the hand first. Such an act would have cause shivering in
the animal and this shivering might have gone on to paralysis, and
terminated in death. The human hand, stained with sin, brought about
this result. Something must be between the animal and the human hand the
first time it was touched--a little straw or the apron. Neither was it
safe to lay the hand at any time on the calf's back. <span
id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150.md)

When a cow was to be taken to market she was not milked on that morning.
Such an act was unlucky, and would have hurt the sale of the animal. A
case of this kind was prosecuted some time ago in Aberdeen by the
Association for Preventing Cruelty to Animals. The Sheriff decided for
the defendants.

If a milch cow was sold in the byre the "seal" went along with her. This
was done to prevent the seller, if he had the power, from retaining the
milk, and a witch from taking it away on her removal to another byre.
All the luck that should attend the beast went with the "seal," and all
the evil influences to which she was exposed were warded off by its
going along with the animal.

### THE "HIRD."

The fields in many districts were unfenced, and the cattle had to be
tended, "hirdit." The "hird" used a stick for driving the cattle--"a
club." If possible the club was of ash. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[2](#fn_151.md) This was because, if it had to be used,
which was often done by throwing, it was believed that it would break no
bones, and would not injure the beast if struck. In some districts this
club was ornamented with a carving representing "Jockie's plew."
Tradition has it that at one time there was in use a plough drawn by
thirty oxen. This plough was made of oak, of great strength, and with
one stilt, having a cross piece of wood at its end for the ploughman to
hold it by. Its work was lately to be seen on many moors in the broad
curved ridges that went by the name of "Burrel Rigs." The carving on the
"hirdie club" was very simple; it consisted of notches cut in a small
piece of the club, smoothed for the purpose, to show in what way the
Oxen were yoked. "Jockie," as the ploughman was called, was

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

represented by a cross, as well as the two oxen before the last four.
Here is the order in which the oxen were yoked:--

"Twa afore ane,  
Three afore five,  
Noo ane an than ane,  
An four comes belive,  
First twa an than twa,  
An three at a cast,  
Double ane an twice twa,  
An Jockie at the last."

\[paragraph continues\] In other districts the "hird" carved in notches
merely the number of cattle in the herd, giving the bull, if there was
one in the herd, a cross.

Here is a tradition about a "hird" and his "club." A half-witted lad
during "the ’45" was tending cattle on the haugh on which Duff House now
stands, near the "King's Ford," in the river Deveron. A detachment of
the royal army crossed the ford in boats. On reaching the haugh on which
the cattle were grazing the soldiers seized the "hird." They examined
his club, and found that the number of notches cut on it corresponded
with the number of boats by which they had crossed the river. The
simpleton was taken for a spy, and notwithstanding every kind of
protestation of innocence and remonstrance he was condemned to death,
carried to a place near the churchyard of Boyndie, and there hanged
against the gable of a house from the roof-tree that projected beyond
the wall.

Each animal had its name, and was trained to answer to it when called.

Here is a rhyme those who watched the cattle used to repeat at the top
of their voice on seeing each other's cattle wandering:--

"Hirdie, dirdie,  
Blaw yir horn,  
A’ the kye’s amo’ the corn.  
Here's ane, here's twa;  
Sic a hird a nivir saw,  
Here aboot or far awa,  
.   .   .   .   . dings them a’."

The name of the "hird" whose beast was straying was added in the last
line. The last line sometimes took the form:--

"Deel blaw the hirdie's plaid awa."

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_136"></span>[184:1](nes28.htm#fr_136.md) *Choice Notes*, p.
38.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[184:2](nes28.htm#fr_137.md) Cf. Henderson, pp,
185-7.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[184:3](nes28.htm#fr_138.md) *Choice Notes*, p.
257.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[186:1](nes28.htm#fr_139.md) Cf. Henderson, pp.
148, 149.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[186:2](nes28.htm#fr_140.md) Extracts from "the
Presbytery Book of Strathbogie," pp. 51, 104, 105 Spalding Club,
Aberdeen. A.D. 1843. Cf. Henderson, pp. 167, 168.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[187:1](nes28.htm#fr_141.md) Cf. Henderson, p.
167.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[188:1](nes28.htm#fr_142.md) Cf. Henderson, pp.
163-166.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[188:2](nes28.htm#fr_143.md) Cf. Henderson, pp.
225, 226; *Choice Notes*, pp. 38, 39.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[189:1](nes28.htm#fr_144.md) Cf. Henderson, pp.
119, 120; *Notes and Queries*, 5th series, vol. vi. p. 6.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[189:2](nes28.htm#fr_145.md) Cf. Henderson, pp.
183, 184.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[189:3](nes28.htm#fr_146.md) Cf. *Songs of the
Russian People*, p. 391.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[191:1](nes28.htm#fr_147.md) Cf. Henderson, p.
186.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[194:1](nes28.htm#fr_148.md) Cf. Henderson, p,
183.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[194:2](nes28.htm#fr_149.md) *Notes and Queries*,
5th series, vol. vi. p. 109.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[195:1](nes28.htm#fr_150.md) Cf. *ibid*. p. 109.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[195:2](nes28.htm#fr_151.md) Cf. *Choice Notes*,
p. 24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI. Boats and Fishing](nes29.md)
