[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nes28)  [Next](nes30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

# CHAPTER XXVI.

### BOATS AND FISHING.

<span id="img_ainit"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![A](img/ainit.jpg) |

new boat was always launched to a flowing tide, sometimes prow foremost
and sometimes stern foremost. When it was fairly in the water, whisky in
free quantity and bread with cheese were distributed among those present
at the launch. The boat was then named, and a bottle containing whisky
was broken on the prow or stern, according to the way the boat had been
launched. The following words were at times spoken before breaking the
bottle

"Fae rocks an saands  
An barren lauds  
An ill men's hands  
Keep's free.  
Weel oot, weel in,  
Wi a gueede shot."

On the arrival of a new boat at its home the skipper's wife, in some of
the villages, took a lapful of corn or barley, and sowed it over the
boat. In one village, when a new boat was brought home, the skipper
descended the moment the prow touched the beach, went for the woman last
married in the village, took her arm, and marched her round the boat, no
matter how far the water reached.

A horseshoe was nailed to some part of the boat--generally to the mast.
A "waith-horse" shoe was most sought after.

The new boat was allowed to take the lead in leaving the harbour or
shore the first time the boats of the village put to sea after its
arrival. When it was fairly at sea the other boats pushed out as fast as
possible; sails were spread to the full, and strong arms were strained
in plying the oars to overtake and outstrip the new craft. If it kept
a-head, and reached the fishing-ground first, its character was
established. When the new boat

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

returned from the fishing-ground, in some of the villages the owner's
wife gave bread and cheese to the men of all the boats that arrived from
the fishing-ground after it. It is said that at times the new boat
lingered so that most of the boats might reach home before it, and thus
as little bread and cheese as possible might have to be given.

A boat, that had been wrecked with the loss of life and cast ashore, was
allowed to lie, and go to pieces. A fisherman of the village to which
the boat belonged would not have set a foot in it to put to sea, and a
board of it would not have been carried away as firewood by any of the
inhabitants of the village. The boat was at times sold to a fisherman of
another village, repaired, and did service for many a year.

In some of the villages a white stone would not be used as ballast. In
others a stone bored by the *pholas* was rejected. Such a stone bore the
name of the "hunger steen."

It was the custom in each village for an aged experienced man to get up
in the morning, and examine the sky, and from its appearance
prognosticate the weather for the day. If the weather promised to be
good, he went the round of the village to awaken the inmates. In doing
this great attention was paid to the "first fit." In every village there
were more than one to whom was attached the stigma of having an "ill
fit." Such were dreaded, and shunned, if possible, in setting out on any
business.

There lived two such men in one village. Each knew his neighbour's fame,
but he did not know his own. Both had got out of bed one morning to
inspect the sky, and to prognosticate the weather, and to arouse the
village, if the weather was thought to be favourable for going to sea.
Both met, and both took fright, and returned each to his house, and the
village lost a day's fishing.

'The boats belonging to two villages were one afternoon during the
herring fishing season lying at anchor to the west of the larger village
waiting till the time arrived for going to the fishing-ground. One of
the boats outside belonged to a man who was reputed to have an "ill
fit." When he came to go on

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

board his boat, he had to step across another boat or two. When he put
his foot on the boat nearest the shore he was met with an oath and the
words, "Keep aff o’ ma boat, ye hiv an ill fit." The man drew back
quietly, and turned to the master of the next boat, and, addressing him
by his "tee name," said, "F------, a’m sure ye'll lat me our your boat."
Permission was readily granted. The boats put to sea. The only herrings
brought ashore were in F------'s boat; it was the man with the "ill fit"
that gave them.

In many of the villages there were no harbours, and the boats had to be
drawn up on the beach. They had to be pushed into the water stern
foremost. The prow was always turned seaward in the direction of the
sun's course.

A fisherman, on proceeding to sea, if asked where he was going, would
have put out with the thought that he would have few or no fish that
day, or that some disaster would befall him. He might have returned
under fear of being drowned if he went to sea. Sometimes such an answer
was given as, "Deel cut oot yer ill tongue." When at sea the words,
"minister," "kirk," "swine," "salmon," "trout," "dog," and certain
family names, were never pronounced by the inhabitants of some of the
villages, each village having an aversion to one or more of the words.
When the word "kirk" had to be used, and there was often occasion to do
so, from several of the churches being used as land-marks, the word
"bell-hoose" or "bell-’oose" was substituted. The minister was called
"the man wi’ the black quyte." A minister in a boat at sea was looked
upon with much misgiving. <span id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_152) He might
be another Jonah.

As it was the belief among the agricultural population that cows' milk
could be taken away, so among the fishing population it was believed the
fish could be taken away. This power of taking away the fish was in the
eye, and such as had the power "glowrt the fish oot o’ the boat" merely
by a look.

When it was suspected that the boat had been forespoken, or the fish
"glowrt oot o’ the boat," the boat was put through the halyards. This
was done by making a noose or "bicht" on the

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

halyards large enough to allow the boat to pass through. The halyard
with this noose was put over the prow of the boat, and pushed under the
keel, and the boat sailed through the noose. The evil was taken off the
boat.

It was not lawful in some of the villages to point with the finger to
the boats when at sea; if such a thing had to be done, the whole hand
had to be used.

On no account must the boats be counted when at sea, neither must any
gathering of men or women or children be numbered. Nothing aroused the
indignation of a company of fishwomen trudging along the road to sell
their fish more than to point towards them with the finger, and begin to
number them aloud:--

"Ane, twa, three,  
Faht a fishers I see  
Gyain our the brigg o’ Dee,  
Deel pick their muckle greethy ee."

When a boat was leaving home for another fishing station, as during the
herring season, some had the habit of borrowing an article of trifling
value from a neighbour, but with the intention of not returning it. The
luck of the fishing went along with the article; those who were aware of
the fact refused to lend.

In Buckie there are certain family names fishermen will not pronounce.
The bann lies particularly heavy on Ross. Coull also bears it, but not
to such a degree. The folks of that village speak of "spitting out the
bad name." If such a name is mentioned in their bearing they spit, or,
in the vernacular, "chiff." One bearing the dreaded name is called a
"chifferoot." If there is occasion to speak of one bearing such a name a
circumlocution is used, as:--"The man it diz so in so," or "The laad it
lives at such and such a place," or the "Tee-name" is used. If possible
the men bearing these names of reprobation are not taken as hired men in
the boats during the herring-fishing season. Men with the reprobated
names, who have been hired before their names were known, have been
refused their wages, when the fishing season closed, because the fishing
was unsuccessful with the boats in which they sailed, and because the
want of success was ascribed to their presence in the boat.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Neither would lodgings be rented during the
herring season from a man that bore one of the names that were under the
bann. "Ye hinna hid sic a fishin this year is ye hid the last," said a
woman to the daughter of a famous fisher who had just returned from
Peterhead from the herring fishing. "Na, na; faht wye cud we?" was the
answer. "Oh faht hinert ye this year mair nor afore?" asked the woman.
"Oh faht wye cud we? Ye needna speer faht wye we cudna. We wiz in a
'chiffer-oot’s' ’oose; we cudna hae a fushing." The house in which the
family lived during the fishing belonged to a man named Ross.

In some of the villages on the east coast of Aberdeenshire it was
accounted unlucky to meet one of the name of Whyte when going to sea.
Lines would be lost, or the catch of fish would be poor. When a child
was being carried to be baptised it was unlucky to meet one who bore the
name of Whyte.

It was accounted unlucky to utter the word "sow" or "swine" or "pig,"
particularly during the time when the line was being baited; it was sure
to be lost if any one was unwise enough to speak the banned word. In
some of the villages on the coast of Fife, if the word is mentioned in
the hearing of a fisherman, he cries out "Cold iron." Even in church the
same words are uttered when the clergyman reads the miracle about the
Gadarene swinery.

Haddocks were cleaned, split, and put in salt for a short time. They
were then hung up in the chimney, over a fire of wood, and smoked or
"yellowed." In later times the smoking of the haddocks was done in small
houses erected for the purpose. In the early part of summer, when the
haddocks are still somewhat lean after spawning, many of them are
sun-dried, and go by the name of "speldanes" or "spellans." Much of the
skate is prepared by being pressed under heavy stones, and dried in the
sun; this forms "blaain skate." Cod, ling, and tusk are split, salted,
and sun-dried, and in many parts still carried in creels. The haddocks
were carried over the country for sale by the women. The creel was, and
is yet, carried on the back by a strap round the shoulders in front.
Below the creel is worn a plaid; and the women of different villages
have different

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

coloured plaids. Some have them white, some red with a black cheek,
others blue with a black cheek. They left home by a very early hour in
companies of tens and scores. As they proceeded, one went off here, and
another there, each to supply her own customers. The bulk of them went
to the country villages, at which they commonly arrived at an early
hour, in time to supply newly cured fish for breakfast. They often
beguiled their long way--10, 12, 15, and 20 miles--with song. In the
villages the fish was sold for money, but in the country districts they
were exchanged for meal, potatoes, sids, turnips, and, even if money
were given, something in the way of barter had to be added. The creel
was often carried home heavier than it was carried out.

In the outward journey, if the weather was stormy, companies of the
women took possession of the houses by the wayside, if the doors had
been left unbarred. After the male inmates left for the barn to thresh,
it was usual for one of the females of the family to get up, and secure
the doors against their entrance. The railway has modified all this.

The greater part of the cod and ling and other larger cured fish was
taken by the fishermen in their large boats to the markets in the south
of Scotland. On their return they brought mussels for bait, soap, and
other family necessaries, and often a quantity of stoneware, of which
each house generally possessed a large stock. Sometimes they brought
such articles for friends and customers in the country.

Among the fishermen of each village there was a strong contest on New
Year's Day which boat should first reach the fishing-ground, "shot" the
lines, and draw them, as it was thought that he who first "drew blood"
on that day enjoyed more than all ordinary share of the luck of the
village during the year. If the weather was such as to prevent the boats
from putting to sea, those who had guns were out along the beach long
before dawn on the watch for the first living creature they could wound
or kill, so that they might have blood shed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_152"></span>[199:1](nes29.htm#fr_152) *Choice Notes*, p.
60.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII. Death](nes30)
