[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci077)  [Next](tci079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LION AND GRIZZLY BEAR <span id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_155)

Bear and Lion had a contest to see who was the strongest. The queen of
the animals wanted a man frightened who was always disobedient to his
people. She wished him put back into the right road. She asked all of
the animals which one of them would be willing to take the risk of
frightening this man in order to put him back on the right road. Grizzly
Bear said, "I will take the risk of frightening this man in order to put
him back on the right road." The queen said, "I am afraid of you because
you are so fierce. I am afraid that you will do him harm, and not just
put him on the right road." But at last she consented.

Grizzly Bear set out for the mountains. He was not to do the man any
harm but only frighten him. The bear found him, and he went against him,
but instead of just frightening him he killed the man. He took word back
to the queen. He said, "I have done as you told me." "How did you
frighten him?" "I killed him." "What did I tell you! I told you that was
what you would do, and I told you not to kill him. Now you will be
punished for this." "Well, if anyone is stronger than I am and can
punish me, let it be so!" So the queen called the Lion and told him that
he was to kill the Grizzly Bear. They started off for the mountains. The
power the Bear had was taken from him and given to the Lion. They
fought. The Lion roped the Bear with his tail and climbed up the pine
tree with him. The Lion split the pine tree as he climbed up and put the
Bear in the split tree to dry up. So the Lion killed the Bear. Lion took
the dead Bear back to the queen and she was very thankful, because the
Bear had no control over himself when he was angry.

### VARIANT <span id="fr_157"></span>[7](#fn_156)

In the mountains the lions and bears had a contest to see which was the
strongest. Grizzly Bear refused to come to the council and the Bear
Chief said, "Go tell him if he doesn't want to come to say so, so that
we won't have to send for him again." They went

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

to him saying, "We will see what we will do if you are determined to
refuse." But he would not come.

Bear Chief said to the Lion, "Tomorrow go to Grizzly; attack him and
kill him." "All right. I will do what you tell me to do." Bear Chief
said, "Tomorrow, early, watch the sun, and just as soon as it comes up,
attack him." As soon as the sun appeared, they jumped to fight each
other. They fought and fought. Lion killed Bear and split him down the
median line. Bear Chief told Lion who had killed Grizzly Bear to hang
the carcass on a pine tree. He said, "Nobody shall eat him. He was a bad
bear, he did not do right."

The animals went hunting down by the Painted Cave. They held a council
to decide on the next day's hunt. They stationed Lion at the mouth of
the canyon, in the rocks, so that he could catch the deer the hunters
drove toward him. He heard the hunters coming. They shouted, "There it's
going! There! Here!" Lion had a watcher. He said to him, "When the deer
comes up, don't let him get by. Shoot with your bow and arrow." The
people called, "There! There!" Lion said to his watcher, "There is a
deer coming. Don't be afraid to shoot at him." He got nearly to them and
the watcher shot his bow and the deer fell right before him.

In the evening all came together in the camp. Lion's watcher brought the
deer in. They quartered the deer, cooked, and ate it.

They held a council and planned the hunt for the next day. They said,
"We will hunt a bear." One of them said (to the ceremonial leader of the
party), "Father, you didn't bring your medicine bundle 'that which
always tells me' with you." He answered, "I left it in the fireplace."
In the morning he went to the house of the old man, and found him
sitting outside. He sat down. Presently he called out, "Boys, come over
here. Here's a rabbit sitting here." As soon as they got up to catch the
rabbit he grabbed the medicine bundle that was in the fireplace and
cried, "See, there is no rabbit. I fooled you!" He went off taking the
bundle.

He made medicine for the bear hunt. They went out hunting for bear. He
was leading one side and another man was leading the other. The leaders
were ahead hollering for them to make the circle for they saw the bear
lying under a tree. He (the bear) ran up the canyon. They followed in
pursuit. They called, "Which way?" "This way!" "Here!" "Be careful!
Don't get near! He will kill you!" They shot at him from powder guns
with arrow points set in corn cobs (stuffed with rag padding) and ran on
him with spears. They killed the bear and took it to camp. They put

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

little pieces of meat on the points of arrows and spears and marched in
with them singing,

Bear, bear we killed,  
Bear, bear we killed.

\[paragraph continues\] They were singing for the bear. The women came
out and joined in the singing, screaming and shouting. They took the
bear, shouting and praying, to the house of the man who killed it. <span
id="fr_158"></span>[8](#fn_157) "(The man who first touches the bear
gets the bear, but whoever kills him is initiated into the Warrior
Society, Ompe.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_155"></span>[142:1](tci078.htm#fr_156) Informant 1. Notes,
[p. 238](tci125.htm#page_238).

<span id="fn_156"></span>[142:7](tci078.htm#fr_157) Informant 3.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[144:8](tci078.htm#fr_158) An obviously deleted
account of the bringing in of the bear, which is equivalent to the
bringing in of a scalp.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Coyote Sings for the Prairie Dogs](tci079)
