[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tci098)  [Next](tci100.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

# V. EUROPEAN STORIES: MÄRCHEN AND NOODLE TALES <span id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_182.md)

### GININI (HALFWIT) <span id="fr_184"></span>[2](#fn_183.md)

Gĭnĭni lived with his grandmother who was very old. She said to him, "Go
for wood." "All right." "Get gray wood (i. e., seasoned). It is far
away. If it gets dark, lie down wherever you are when it is too dark to
travel." "All right." On the way up to the mountains he remembered what
his grandmother said, to get "gray wood." He found the old bones of a
dead horse and he brought back a load to his grandmother. When he was
nearing the house the sun set. He was two steps up the ladder. He
remembered that she had said, "When it gets dark lie down," so he lay
down and slept on the second rung. Early in the morning she went to the
fireplace to start the fire. She gathered up a few ashes to throw out.
She climbed up to the roof and then down. She stepped on something. She
turned and looked. She cried, "Goodness! What is this? My grandchild,
why are you sitting here? Did you stay here all night?" "Yes; you told
me wherever I was when the sun set, lie down." "Only if the sun went
down when you were far away. You don't understand what I say. You are
always doing things like this." "I did what you said, and I'm always
doing what you tell me."

Again that night the grandmother said to him, "Are you willing to go to
Sia? They will have a give-away dance, at Sia." "Yes." The boy started
to go to Sia. His grandmother gave him a bit of skin to carry whatever
he caught (at the dance). As he was going he thought, "Where is Sia?" He
went wondering. He came to an ant hill. <span
id="fr_185"></span>[2a](#fn_184.md) He watched the ants working. He said to
himself, "I guess this is what Grandmother meant; this is Sia Pueblo."
So he spread out the skin and took what the ants brought him and put it
in his skin. The ants bit him. He said, "At Sia they do nothing but bite
me." Toward evening he had gathered all the presents and he took up the
skin and started toward home. When he arrived he told his grandmother
how he had passed the day. "At Sia they were angry at me, and bit me all
over my hands." He showed her what

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

he had brought. She began to scold him and said, "You always do foolish
things. I told you to go to Sia, not to an ant hill." "I took the ant
hill for Sia."

Again the grandmother told the boy, "It is the season for gathering
locusts. Up in the piñon trees you will find the biggest and fattest."
The boy started after locusts. He came to the hills where the piñon
trees grow. He thought to himself, "What is it grandmother means that I
should gather?" He looked and looked. He saw somebody sitting in a tree.
It was a Jemez Indian gathering pitch. Gĭnĭni' went and got a piece of
wood and said, "You're a good locust." He struck the Indian and he fell
to the ground. "My, what a meal grandmother will have!" he exclaimed.
The Jemez Indian moaned, "Ai-ai-aili-i," and died. "What do you mean by,
'ai-ai-aili-i'? You are a good Indian locust." The boy was glad that he
had killed a good locust and started home carrying the man on his back.
When he got home he called to his grandmother, "Here come your locusts."
"Yes; I hope that you have had good luck." He let the body fall into the
house. Down went his locusts. She cried, "My grandchild, what have you
done now!" "You told me that I would find the locusts on the piñon
trees. I found him on the tree and hit him with a club and killed him."
"Take the man right back!" The next day the boy took his big locust on
his shoulder and went back and put him where he had found him.

Again his grandmother told him, "Go to the fields. I did not finish the
hoeing (i. e., 'throwing up'), I will stay home and do the grinding." "I
will go finish it." The grandmother explained everything so that he
wouldn't get into mischief. There was very little hoeing left to be
done. "Throw up the rest," she told him. The boy went out to the field.
He didn't know what to throw up. He looked and looked. "But Grandmother
wants me to throw up," he thought. He found a snake. "I guess this is
what Grandmother wants me to throw up," he said. He caught it and all
day he threw up the snake and caught him again. In the evening the boy
came home and said to his grandmother, "I did what you said. I have
thrown it up." "I am happy. I will go down and see it." So the next
morning his grandmother went down to her little field and found that it
had not been hoed. She thought, "What was my grandson. doing all day
yesterday? He must have done some mischief. He never does what I tell
him." She found the snake and thought, "I guess this is what he must
have been throwing." The snake was all bruised. In the field she could
trace where he had been jumping and running all over it. That is the way
she discovered

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

what he had thrown up. She told him that he had done mischief again. He
said, "I looked and looked to find what to throw up and I found a snake.
It didn't die right away. That's why I trampled all over the field
throwing it up." "It was the earth that I wanted you to throw up by
hoeing." She felt pity for the snake because he had killed it.

### VARIANT <span id="fr_186"></span>[3](#fn_185.md)

The people were living on the mesa. Two men were together, one was blind
and the other lame. The blind man carried the lame man on his back when
they went hunting, and the lame man guided him. They came to a place
where there were lots of birds. The blind man put the lame man down and
he gave him a hair. He put one end in his mouth and made, bird calls
(with the hair). The birds came and he called, "Kill them, kill them!"
The lame man killed lots and took them home for dinner. He made a fire
and cooked the birds. They burst with a great noise. They were
frightened. They both jumped.

The blind man could see and the lame man could walk.

The lame man said, "Don't go near the fire again or you will be blind."
And the blind man said, "Don't go near the fire or you will be lame."

They were both well. The birds all flew away.

Again they went to hunt locusts. They came to a place where there were
lots of piñons. They looked up and saw a man in the tree. He was an
Indian from Jemez. The blind man called, "See the big locust. <span
id="fr_187"></span>[4](#fn_186.md) Let's catch him to eat." They struck at
him and killed him. He cried out, "Ai li li yi!" "Don't say 'ai li li
yi.' We are going to eat you up, you are a locust." They took him home
and ate him. That is why locusts always say "ai li li yi."

The next day they were going hunting. They killed nothing. One of them
said, "To-morrow there is to be a feast in Sia. I'll go and get some
bread at the give away." He started out. He found an ant hill, and he
saw that the ants were all carrying something. He sat and watched them,
and he thought it was bread. He took it away and came home bringing the
"bread." He was all bitten by the, ants. "You didn't bring anything
home. You have been gone all day and have brought nothing back."

In the morning the brother said, "Go to the, field and 'throw up'
(hoe)." He went to the field and found a snake. He thought, \[paragraph
continues\]

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

"This is what my brother must have meant me to throw." He picked up the
snake and threw it up in the air. The snake jumped at him and tried to
bite him. He didn't hoe at all. He went home in the evening and his
brother asked, "Have you finished the hoeing?" "You told me to 'throw
up.' I found a snake and threw it up. Finally I had to kill him. It was
too hard to throw him around all day." "You didn't do what I told you to
do."

The next day his brother sent him for wood. "Bring in nice white (i. e.,
dry) sticks. If the sun sets before you get back, stay where you are."
He went out and found some old bones. He got lots and made a bundle of
them and brought it in. He got to the rungs of his ladder just as the
sun set, and he lay down and slept. His brother got up early. He came
down the ladder and stepped on him. He was scared. He scolded him hard.
"You told me to stay where I was when the sun set." He brought in the
bones. His brother said, "These are not what I sent you for." "You told
me to bring in nice white ones."

Next day his brother told him to go to the old ruins
(Washushrotra--beamed houses) to see if there was any smoke coming out.
His brother said, "Hunt around there." He went. He found an old woman
firing pots. He went up and killed her and brought her home. His brother
scolded him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_182"></span>[163:1](tci099.htm#fr_183.md) Tales and incidents
of European provenience occur in an the types of tales above, but often
are strikingly acculturated. In this section, except in the noodle
tales, acculturation is at a minimum.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[163:2](tci099.htm#fr_184.md) Informant 1. Notes,
[p. 244](tci127.htm#page_244.md).

<span id="fn_184"></span>[163:2a](tci099.htm#fr_185.md) A pun. *ts’ia*, the
pueblo; *si'a*, ant.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[165:3](tci099.htm#fr_186.md) Informant 3.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[165:4](tci099.htm#fr_187.md) "In the spring
locusts are black"; i. e., there is a suggested resemblance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Blind One and the Lame One](tci100.md)
