[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tci047)  [Next](tci049.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE WITCH AND HER HUSBAND <span id="fr_108"></span>[7](#fn_107.md)

Them was a town there in the north above, and there lived one youth and
a Yellow Woman. This youth killed many deer, but his wife, this Yellow
Woman, was tired of making mush. The witches talked about it that they
would kill him, (but) the game animals did not want to give him up. The
game animals also assembled. They went to tell this youth. The antelope
went to get him. "Let us go, I came after you," said the antelope to
him. Then the youth spoke thus, "How shall we two cross the river? It is
big. It is always high water." "Do not say so," said the antelope.
"Indeed, we two can. go across." Then the two went. "Come here," said
the antelope to him. Then he carried him on his back. "Shut your eyes!"
Then they went. They reached the river. "Sit down! "said the antelope to
him. Then again he said thus to him, "Sit down on top! We two shall
cross the river. Hold tight!" The antelope swam across and somewhere
they came out (of the water). Then the antelope said thus to him, "Sit
down. Let me dry myself." Then he rolled on the ground. Then he became
dry again and they went on from there. "Shut your eyes," said the
antelope to him. They went just like a cyclone, like a storm wind. Then
they arrived where the game animals were inside. The antelope entered
alone. He went to tell them. "He is here," said he. "Have you come?"
they said. "Yes," said the antelope. "Then let him come in!" they said.
Then he took him in. "How are things?" said the youth. "It is well,"
they said. "Sit down," they said. \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

"We told you to come here. The witches are working against you. They
want to kill you. It does not seem good to us. Your own wife has given
you up to them. She wants you to be killed tomorrow morning. It will be
your last day; but it will not be so. This antelope will take you there
where the witches are." Then he took him along and they came to some
place where it was light above. Then the antelope said thus to him, "Up
above there is a light. There is a door leading down. Go there. I am
going to eat here," said the antelope. "I shall wait for you. I shall
not go away." Then the youth went. He arrived there and above was a door
(leading) downward. He listened to what they were talking about inside.
He heard his wife. She agreed to give up her husband. They were going to
kill him. He heard everything and went away. He went back to where the
antelope was. "Let us go!" said he to him. "I heard everything." "That
is good," said the antelope. "Let us go! Let us leave!" Then they
arrived at the place where the game animals were. "There below!" said
the antelope. Then they two entered. They questioned him, "Did you
hear?" "Yes," said he, "I heard everything. To-morrow they want to kill
me." "Now you will go there. When you arrive where you always lie down,
at that place is a perfect ear of corn which your wife put down. Take
the perfect ear of corn and throw it against the wall. Then go back into
the room. On the south wall above is a hole. In it are your wife's eyes.
Take them and drop them into urine and then put them back." Then he put
them back. He lay down. It became morning. He was lying down. He did not
sleep. Then he heard an owl arriving above. It entered the room again
and at once went in. Then she took her eyes, but she was there forever
motionless. It became morning and her husband arose. He entered the room
and there was the owl. Its head was bent down. Then her husband called
her relatives to see her. They killed her. The youth was saved. His own
wife did not kill him. He forestalled her.

### VARIANT <span id="fr_109"></span>[22](#fn_108.md)

A hunter and his wife lived together. Every day he went out and killed a
deer. His wife was angry because he killed so many deer. It made a great
deal of work and she was late to her meetings. So she gave her husband
up to the witches to be killed. He was to be carried off by the
Whirlwind (dust sworls). They said, "The Whirlwind will meet him on his
way to the mountains and carry him away." Next day he went hunting; he
took sacred meal and asked the six directions for good hunting. He
started to the mountain. Just

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

that moment the Whirlwind came. He took tight hold of an oak tree, but
Whirlwind lifted him off the ground. He held tight, and the wind
stopped. He came home.

It was night. His wife was not there. His dream had told him that when
his wife was away she left a red (i. e., witch) Mother Corn <span
id="fr_110"></span>[22a](tci049.htm#fn_110.md) in her place (in a human
shape). The Mother Corn spoke to him, "Did you come back?" His wife had
told Mother Corn to give him supper. After supper Mother Corn said, "Now
we will go to bed." Because of his dream the husband knew that it was
not his real wife. Late at night when she thought that he was sound
asleep, she got up. He was listening. When he heard her moving he got up
and took hold of her, and she became the red Mother Corn. He threw her
against the door as hard as he could. Some kernels fell out. He went
into the inner room. There was a little shelf in the wall, and on it
were his wife's eyes. He took them and urinated, and dropped the eyes
into the urine, as his dream had told him to do. He replaced the eyes in
the niche and went back to bed.

Later he heard his wife coming on the top of the roof. He heard an owl
fly down. It was in this form that his wife traveled. She came in. She
went straight into the inner room (to get her eyes). She saw the kernels
of corn scattered over the floor. She went to the shelf in the wall to
get her eyes. They were changed since she left them; she could not make
them as they had been. She could not leave that room.

In the morning her husband said, "I wonder why she has not come out from
the inner room." So he called, "Come out!" She did not move. He said,
"Why can't you come out?" He went in and there he found her dead. He
took her out of that room and laid her on the floor of the outer room.
Everybody came to see her but they could not take the manta off her face
because she had owl eyes in her head. So her husband was saved. Instead
of killing him she had died first.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_107"></span>[90:7](tci048.htm#fr_108.md) Recorded in text by
Franz Boas. Informant 8. Notes, [p. 232](tci125.htm#page_232.md).

<span id="fn_108"></span>[91:22](tci048.htm#fr_109.md) Informant 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Arrow Boy, Child of the Witch Man](tci049.md)
