[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci037)  [Next](tci039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

# III. NOVELISTIC TALES

### CUISI'NYINAWA <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76)

She was in a town. Then Yellow Woman went for water. With her jar Yellow
Woman went for water. She reached the river. The girl was standing
there. She saw a kicking stick. Below there was the kicking stick. Then
Yellow Woman picked it up. She put it into (her dress). The
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> arrived. He told Yellow Woman, "Did
you not pick up a kicking stick?" "No," said the girl. "Yes," said
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> to her, "yes," said he. "You have it
somewhere," said he to the Yellow Woman. "It is so," said
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>. "I have not got it," said Yellow
Woman. Then, "Yes," said Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>.
"Somewhere," said he to her. "Give me the blue one (?)" said
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>. "Give me the kicking stick." "No,"
said Yellow Woman; "I shall keep it as my own," said she. (?) "I just
might give you the kicking stick." Then
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> took away Yellow Woman.
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> took her to a place where he dwelt.
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> was bad.
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> arrived with her at his house.
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> carried her on his back to where he
dwelt above, where a rainbow stands on
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>'s house. Then he made Yellow Woman
arrive. Early he went hunting deer. Then
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> ordered the girl to grind corn. When
she was ready to grind corn, Yellow Woman ground it. Then she put the
flour of the corn into a basket. Then Yellow Woman was to make wafer
bread. Then she gave Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> wafer bread to
eat. He arrived in the evening. Then Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>
told her that he had killed a deer which he had brought to his house.
Then Yellow Woman went out and took the deer. He gave it to Yellow Woman
to eat. Then she put it down in front of the fireplace and Yellow Woman
took sacred corn meal. Then Yellow Woman gave sacred meal to the deer to
eat. Yellow Woman inhaled. "Thank you," said she, "you killed a deer,
thank you," said she to Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>. He was
eating wafer bread. "Eat wafer bread!" said she to
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>. He was eating. Then
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> finished eating. "Thank you," said
he. "I have eaten wafer bread," said
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>. "Put the deer down here." Then
Yellow Woman put down the deer.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

Right here in the town was Yellow Woman's house. Then her husband came
home. Then Yellow Woman was not in her house. He had lost his wife. She
was not there. Then he searched for his wife. He searched at the river;
he was searching for her where his wife Yellow Woman had drawn water.
The jar was at the river. Then her husband found the jar. Then (he
said), "Where did my wife go? Where did she go to?" Then he was
searching for his wife. Then Old Spider Woman told him. "Where are you
going, grandson?" said Old Spider Woman to him. Then he spoke thus, "I
am searching for my wife," said he. Then Old Spider Woman spoke thus to
him, "Poor grandson," said she to him.
"Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> has taken her away," said Old
Spider Woman to him. She told him that
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> had taken away his wife. "He took
her eastward," said she. "Poor grandson," said Old Spider Woman to him.
"Come in, grandson," said she to him. "How can I go in?" said the
husband of Yellow Woman. Then <span id="fr_78"></span>[1a](#fn_77) he
entered Old Spider Woman's house. "Sit down!" said Old Spider Woman, "my
grandson." Then he sat down. Then, "Eat, grandson!" Old Spider Woman
cooked a snowbird head. Just one was there. Then she served it to him.
He was eating. He ate the head of the snowbird. He broke it to pieces.
Then Old Spider Woman spoke thus, "Oh my," said she, "grandson! you have
broken the snowbird head," said Old Spider Woman. "We had only one to
serve, grandson. The poor one! My poor grandson <span
id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_78) killed one. He always goes hunting
snowbirds. My poor grandson never kills any more (?)" said Old Spider
Woman. Then her grandson <span id="fr_80"></span>[3](#fn_79) spoke thus,
"Do not say so. I shall go hunting, grandmother, I shall hunt snowbirds
for you." Then he killed snowbirds. He arrived below at the river. Then
he went hunting snowbirds for her to serve. Then he made traps for the
snowbirds. He made snares. Then he hunted the snowbirds with snares, and
he killed many. Then Old Spider Woman took them to her house. Then he
arrived at Old Spider Woman's house. Then, "Grandmother," said he to
her, "there below!" said he. "That is good!" said Old Spider Woman. Then
her grandson entered downward. He was in search of his wife. He had been
hunting snowbirds for Old Spider-Woman. "Thank you," said Old Spider
Woman. "Grandson, I want to take you to where your wife is.
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> took her away. Will you go after
your wife?" said she to him. "Yes; I will go after my wife," said he.
"Let me take you there, grandson!" Then Old Spider Woman made medicine
for him. Then they went. Old Spider Woman took him to
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>'s house. \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

He arrived there. Then he arrived at the town. Then, "Woe!" said the
people of the town. "Woe! He is mean. He has taken your wife. Woe!
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> is mean. He will kill you. Nobody
stays there. Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> has gone hunting," they
said. "Right there in the town, there is your wife," they said.
"Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> has stolen her. He is very mean.
Did he take your wife?" they said to him. "Yes," said he. "I came to get
her, because Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> stole her from me. I
came after her. I must get my wife back." Then he entered
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>'s house. He went in. Then his wife
was there. Then he found his wife. Then his wife jumped toward her
husband. She hugged him. "My poor husband," said she to him. "How did
you come here?" said she to him. "I have been searching for you," said
he to his wife. "Poor one," said he to her. "Old Spider Woman brought me
here," said he. "Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> stole you from me,"
said he. "I came to get you," said he to his wife. "Now let us go, I'll
take you to our home," said he to her. Then he took her back. Old Spider
Woman was waiting for them. Then he took her there. Old Spider Woman
said thus to him, "Are you coming, grandson?" said she to him. "Yes,"
said he. "Now I brought my wife here," said he. "Poor one," said Old
Spider Woman, "grandson. Let us go!" said she. Then Old Spider Woman and
his wife (and he) went together. He took his wife back. They went back
from the east. They had been in the east. There in the east dwells
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>. Far away he had taken Yellow Woman.
Here from the east he took her. Together from the east came they, the
three together. Way over there in the east dwells
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>. Then he arrived at his house.
Yellow Woman was no longer there. Now her husband had already taken back
Yellow Woman. Then Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> arrived. No more
did he find Yellow Woman. Already her husband had taken her back. Then
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> became angry. Then
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> pursued Yellow Woman.
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> came from the east. Already Yellow
Woman had arrived at her house here, She had arrived at her husband's
house. Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> was pursuing them. Then
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> came out from the east thundering.
He was about to shoot them, both her and her husband, (but)
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> shot beside (the mark).
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> is mean. Then
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> arrived at Yellow Woman's house.
Then he said to him thus, "Why did you take her back?" said
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> to him. Thus he said to the two, "If
Yellow Woman were not pregnant, I should kill you." Thus he said to both
Yellow Woman and her husband. Then Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>
said to him, when the pregnant Yellow Woman would give birth to a child
that would be Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>'s child. Then she gave

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

birth. Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> came after his child. Yellow
Woman being pregnant, therefore Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> did
not kill the two. Then Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> said it was
his child. Then Yellow Woman gave birth to a child. Then
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> went to where he dwelt. There
somewhere on the northeast side far away he came out.
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> had taken away too many Yellow
Women. He had already taken many. Those who did not make wafer bread
quickly enough Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> threw down from the
north side. He is mean. The poor girls, he threw them down upon the ice.
Many he had taken. He is too mean. They all died below on the north side
on the ice, the poor ones. Nobody went after the Yellow Women, the poor
ones, and they froze to death there below. He is too mean. He never
forgave them. Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> had no consideration.
Whoever did not grind flour quickly enough and had not made wafer bread
when he came home from hunting, and they had not made the wafer bread,
then he threw them down, the Yellow Women, on the north side. Then there
below they died. They froze to death on the ice, the poor Yellow Women.
Down below there they died. No one went after the Yellow Women. Then
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> threw them down.
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> did not forgive any one of them.
Therefore they abused Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> below in this
town. He would take any Yellow Woman. Therefore they abused
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>. "Oh, poor ones," they said. "Now he
has again taken from somewhere a poor Yellow Woman." Oh, dear,
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> is mean, the poor Yellow Women. He
fooled the poor Yellow Women. The poor ones!
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> took them along. "Oh my! He is
mean," they said, "Oh my! The poor ones, he fools the poor ones with the
kicking stick. Therefore he always takes away the Yellow Women. He has
fooled many poor Yellow Women. They all died there below on the ice. He
threw down the poor Yellow Women and their sisters Merinako.
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> is mean. Oh my!
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> comes after them this way, with the
kicking stick. Then he takes the Yellow Woman away. The poor ones! He
kills them. Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> asks them too urgently
to work for him. A Yellow Woman that does not agree to do so when he has
taken the Yellow Woman, then that one he throws them down on the north
side. Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> is too mean. When he has taken
a Yellow Woman and anyone goes after the Yellow Woman then, when he
arrives in the evening and does not find the Yellow Woman, then
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> knows about it. At once he pursues
the Yellow Woman (and the one who took her back). Now
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> kills them. He always kills them. He
walks with much noise. Nobody lives there, but
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> lives by himself. He is all alone.
He is very bad.--That long is the bald tail. That is all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[66:1](tci038.htm#fr_77) Recorded in text by
Franz Boas. Informant 7. Recorded also by Benedict, informant 1
(omitted), in a version in which the hero was named Arrow Boy. Notes,
[p. 230](tci125.htm#page_230).

<span id="fn_77"></span>[67:1a](tci038.htm#fr_78) As usual in Southwest
tales, the opening enlarges as he puts down his foot.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[67:2](tci038.htm#fr_79) This is another boy.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[67:3](tci038.htm#fr_80) This is Yellow Woman's
husband.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sun Steals Shell Man's Wife](tci039)
