[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tci001)  [Next](tci003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# PREFACE

This collection of Cochiti tales was recorded in the summer of 1924.
Besides these, which were obtained through interpreters, Prof. Franz
Boas has generously added tales recorded in text and here given in close
translation. These tales are indicated in the footnotes and in the table
of contents. They give the literary style to which all the stories in
Cochiti conform but which can never be completely reproduced without
recording the text. Professor Boas will publish the accompanying texts
and grammatical analysis at another time.

The informants were all of the older generation, for in Cochiti the
first age group to be systematically sent to Government boarding school
is now about 35 years old, and below that age even the commonest tales
are known only by hearsay. Informants 1, 2, 7, and 8 (7 and 8 Professor
Boas's informants) were women, all of them well-known native narrators.
Informant 2 held an important ceremonial position. The other informants
were men. Informant 3 was a priest of importance, and except for the
taboo against imparting esoteric information to the whites, which both
Professor Boas and I found very strong in Cochiti, both he and informant
2 could, I think, have given a great body of such lore. As it is, such
references are slurred or appear in obviously abbreviated accounts.
Informant 4 was a very different individual from the others, as can be
seen in the material recorded from him. He spoke Spanish fairly, and had
been an adventurer all his life. He is very old now, but a leading
member of the principales, in great demand in those acculturated Mexican
ceremonies in which repartee must be carried on in what is considered to
be Spanish. He liked best to give "true stories"--accounts of old
hunting parties, Cochiti versions of Cortez, Montezuma, and the
Spanish-American War. His tales of the mythological heroes always
emphasized their supernatural exploits in deer and rabbit hunting, and
their success in turning the mockery that had been directed against them
against those who had mocked them.

The greater proportion of stories in this collection are those
novelistic tales that are fictionized versions of native life, and
emphasize situations of equal interest to them in their daily life and
in their mythology. In the discussion I have grouped the abstracts from
this point of view, and it appears very strikingly that the fundamental

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

material in these tales, and the fundamental factor in their formation,
is the daily life of the people. They turn to it in their fiction and
make use of it as we are accustomed to do in modem fiction. The
differences are rather in the lesser development of interest in
personality and complex psychological situations than in any
fundamentally different drive in the creation of their literary art.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Uretsiti](tci003.md)
