[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tci072)  [Next](tci074.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

# IV. ANIMAL TALES

### CROW AND HAWK <span id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_146.md)

Crow had a nest and she had been already sitting on her eggs many days.
But she got tired of sitting there, and she flew away. While she was
gone day after day, Hawk came by. She found nobody sitting on the nest.
Hawk said to herself, "The person who owns this nest no longer cares for
it. I am sorry for those eggs lying in that empty nest. I will sit on
those poor little eggs and they will be my children." She sat many days
on the eggs and nobody came to the nest. Finally the eggs began to
hatch. Still no Crow came. The little ones all hatched out and the
mother Hawk flew about getting food for them. They grew bigger and
bigger and their wings got strong. So at last the mother Hawk took the
little ones off the nest.

After all this time, the Crow remembered her nest and she came back to
it. She found the eggs all hatched and the Hawk taking care of her
little ones. One day she met Hawk out feeding with her little ones.
"Hawk." "What is it?" "You must return these little ones you are leading
around." "Why?" "Because they are mine." Hawk said, "Yes, you laid the
eggs to be sure, but you had no pity on the poor eggs. You went off and
left them. There was no one to sit upon them and I came and sat upon the
nest and hatched them. When they were hatched I fed them and now I lead
them about. They are mine and I shall not return them." Crow said, "I
shall take them back." "I shall not give them up. I have worked for them
and for many days I have fasted sitting there upon the eggs. In all that
time you did not come near your eggs. Why is it now when I have taken
care of the little ones and brought them up and they have grown that you
want them back?" Crow said to the little ones, "My children, come with
me. I am your mother." But the little ones answered, "We do not know
you. Hawk is our mother." At last when she could not make the little
ones come with her, she said, "Very well, I shall take this to court,
and we shall see who will have the right to these little ones." Hawk
answered, "That is good. I am willing. We will go to court."

So mother Crow took the mother Hawk before the king of the birds. Eagle
said to Crow, "Why did you leave your nest?" The \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

Crow hung her head and had nothing to say. At last Crow said, "When I
came back to my nest, I found my eggs already hatched and the Hawk
taking charge of the little ones. I have come to ask that the Hawk be
required to return the children to me." Eagle said to Mother. Hawk, "How
did you find this nest of eggs?" "Many times I came to this nest, and
found it empty. No one came for a long time, and at last I had pity upon
the poor little eggs. I said to myself, 'The mother who made this nest
can no longer care for these eggs. I should be glad to hatch these
little ones.' I sat upon them and they hatched. Then I went about
getting food for them. I worked hard and brought them up and they have
grown." Mother Crow interrupted mother Hawk and said, "But they are my
children. I laid the eggs." Mother Hawk answered, "It is not your turn.
We are both of us asking for justice and it will be given to us. Wait
till I have spoken." Eagle said to mother Hawk, "Is that all?" "Yes, I
have worked hard to raise my two little ones. Just when they were grown
the mother crow came back and asked to have them back again, but I shall
not give them back. It is I who fasted and worked, and they are now my
little ones." The king of the birds said, "The mother hawk is not
willing to return the little ones to the mother crow, and if you had
really had pity on your little ones, why did you leave the nest for so
many days, and now are demanding them back? The mother hawk is the
mother of the little ones, for she has fasted and hatched them, and flew
about searching out their food and now they are her children." Mother
Crow said to the King of the birds, "King, you should ask the little
ones which mother they will choose to follow. They know enough to know
which one they will take." So the king said to the little ones, "Which
mother will you choose? "Both little ones answered together, "Mother
Hawk is our mother. She is all the mother we know." Crow cried, "No, I
am your only mother." The little Crow children said, "In the nest you
had no pity on us, and you left us. Mother Hawk hatched us and she is
our mother." So it was finally settled as the little ones had chosen
that they were the children of Mother Hawk who had had pity on them in
the nest and brought them up.

Mother Crow began to weep. The king said to Mother Crow, "Do not weep.
It is your own fault that you have lost your children because you left
the nest. This is the final decision of the king of the Birds that they
shall go with the Mother Hawk." So the little ones stayed with mother
Hawk, and Mother Crow lost her little children. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[2](#fn_147.md)

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

### VARIANT <span id="fr_149"></span>[3](#fn_148.md)

On a high bank two crows had nests near each other. They used to go
hunting together. One stayed away a long, while. Her little ones
suffered from hunger. When the other crow came back with her food she
fed her own children and then she used to go to the children of the
other crow and give them food too. They grew stronger and they knew this
other crow as their mother. As they grew up, they got used to the other
crow in their mother's place.

At last their own mother returned. Her little crows had already flown
from the nest. She said, "I wonder where my children have gone. I have
brought buffalo meat for them." They were at the neighbor crow's nest
with the other little crows. The mother passed by where they were all
together. Her little crows said to their foster mother, "Look, somebody
is going to our nest." She answered, "That is your mother, children."
"No, she is not our mother. You are our mother." The (newly returned)
crow went to the other nest and said to the other crow, "I've come after
my children." "Did you remember your children? I shall not return them
to you for I have brought them up." "But I was the one who laid the
eggs. I made them in the nest." "I suppose it didn't hurt your children
to leave them alone all this time. I cared for them. I won't give them
up." "I will have them back." "I won't give them up." "I will have the
judge settle this between us." "All right, we'll see who will get back
these little ones." "I won't ask here. I will ask way across to the
south where the king is."

She went off crying. The little crows that she had hatched did not want
to go back to her, so they stayed with the mother who had brought them
up. The mother crow went off and flew south. She got to the king's house
and there was a soldier outside. "Do you want the king?" he asked.
"Yes." So the soldier said to the king, "King, they want you out-doors."
The king said to her, "Who are you?" "I am Crow." "What is it?" "I am
bringing suit. Another crow has taken away my children." "Is that so?"
The King brought her inside. As she went in, they told a soldier outside
to go for the other crow and all the children. He brought them into the
king's house and told them to sit in a row. The king said, "You are
ready now. Here are the children of both; it is your turn to answer
whatever I ask." He said to the little crows, "Which is your mother?"
The little crows said, "This is our mother." The mother that had left
her children spoke up and said, "She took them from my nest when I was
away hunting." Her two

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

little crows said, "We don't know her as our mother. This is the only
mother we know. She fed us and brought us up. She is our mother. It was
just yesterday this (stranger) crow came back. She came to get us and
wanted to take us to her nest. We don't know her as our mother. This
mother that came with us brought us up. We know her as our mother." So
the crow took the two little crows away and kept them as her own
children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_146"></span>[133:1](tci073.htm#fr_147.md) Informant 1. Notes,
[p. 236](tci125.htm#page_236.md).

<span id="fn_147"></span>[134:2](tci073.htm#fr_148.md) This judgment would
hold good in human society too. If a mother neglects her child and
another takes him in, even it the mother comes back and claims him she
would not be likely to get him back.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[135:3](tci073.htm#fr_149.md) Informant 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Coyote and Beaver Exchange Wives](tci074.md)
