[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tci048)  [Next](tci050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ARROW BOY, CHILD OF THE WITCH MAN <span id="fr_111"></span>[10](#fn_109.md)

In the beginning there was a woman all of whose children had died one
after another. She said to herself, "Why is it that I can not bring up a
child?" She prayed and said, "Kopishtaya, what can I do so that my
children shall not die?" The kopishtaya came to her and said, "My poor
child, do not cry. I will tell you what you can do. Fast for four days
and at the end of that time go to the Flint Society and ask them for
their help." She was happy and fasted for four days. At the end of the
four days she went to

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

the Flint Society and asked them to make prayer sticks for her. They met
in the morning and cut the sticks and tied the feathers. When they had
finished she said to herself, "I must go and take dinner to them." She
brought dinner into their room and they thanked her. The chief of the
Flint Society said to her, "If you believe, you shall have children and
they will live." She took the prayer sticks and early in the morning,
before sunrise, she planted them to the kopishtaya. As she was planting
she heard singing.

The kopishtaya came near and stood before her. He gave her a root for
medicine. He said to her, "The reason why your children have died is
because your husband is a witch man. He is killing his own children. You
will have a child. Rub his body with this root for medicine, and he will
live. Keep watch of your husband. He is trying to offer your baby to the
witches. Watch at night. It will not be your husband beside you. It will
be the Corn Mother he has left beside you in his place. He will be away
at the meeting of the witches. Take hold of the Corn Mother and throw it
against the wall so that it breaks in pieces. Go to the niche (where the
prayer meal is kept). You will find his human eyes laid on the shelf
covered with wool. Drop them into the pot of urine. When your husband
comes home he will be in the shape of an owl. Lie still as if you were
asleep, and in the morning you will discover that I have told you the
truth."

His wife watched at night. She threw the Corn Mother against the wall
and dropped her husband's eyes in the chamber pot. When he came in he
went to the niche to get his eyes. He found they were in the pot of
urine and he had to keep his owl's eyes. He went to the Corn Mother and
spoke to it, but it could not answer. He spoke to his wife, "Are you
asleep?" "Yes; I was sound asleep. Lie down and I will spread your
blanket." "No; I can't go into that room. Something is the matter with
me." The kopishtaya had told that woman, "Do not tell your husband what
I have told you, but send for the chief of the Flint Society to cure
him." She told her husband he must send for the chief of the Flint
Society. Her husband was not willing, but she took sacred meal and went
to get him. He came in. The man was lying on his face with his eyes
buried in his hands. He tried to turn him on his back. "What is the
matter with you?" "I don't know." The Flint chief said to the wife, "Go
and bring his sisters so that they will see what is the matter with him
and there will be no blame for you." She brought his sisters. Her
husband would not take his hands from his face. At last the medicine man
took them away from his eyes. They were owl's eyes. He died and his wife
wept and said, "What

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

shall I do? I have a little baby and my husband is dead." They buried
him and at night the witches had a meeting for him on the top of the
mountain.

The kopishtaya came to the young woman that night and he told her, "I
have come to tell you to offer sacred meal every day to the kopishtaya.
Send for your brother to stay with you in the house for these four days
until you send away the soul of your husband. At the end of that time
send for the chief of the Flint Society. Tell him to cut the earth with
the obsidian knife." She did as he had told her and at the end of four
days the Flint medicine man came to the house. He cut the ground four
times with the large flint knife.

Arrow Boy grew up. Every morning his mother offered prayer meal and he
grew very fast. She never let him go out alone. When he was a little boy
his mother said, "Let us go into the hills to hunt wood rats or rabbits.
I will cook corn dodgers." She made the corn dodgers and wrapped them in
corn husks. She filled the canteen and tied it on her back. They came to
a rabbit hole and the mother and Arrow Boy took turns in digging it out.
They heard the kopishtaya coming. He said to her, "What happened to your
husband?" "He is dead." "That is better for him to die than for you to
lose another baby. If he had lived it would not have been safe for your
little boy. He will take care of you. Now your husband's people are
trying to harm you because of his death. It is dangerous for you to stay
in the village. Go outside and live with your son."

They went to White Bank and lived there in a cave. The boy came to his
mother and said, "There is going to be a dance in Potsherd Village." His
mother said, "Let us go together." Next morning they went to Potsherd
Village. Arrow Boy said to his mother, "Watch carefully (for danger)."
They came to Potsherd Village. On the north side the houses were built
in two tiers and on the top story a man stood and saw them coming. He
said to his family, "Look, who is that who is coming? She is wearing a
black manta." The woman and the child came into the plaza. They came to
the house on the second story and they received them there and the
mother of that family gave them something to eat. She brought bread and
stew and said, "Eat." There were two daughters in that family and they
sat on either side of the boy. They loved him, but the boy was bashful
and ran away. Another young man came in. He loved the mother of the boy,
but his mother said, "No; I have my son. He is my only son and he takes
good care of me and I do not need a husband." "If you come with me you
will always eat venison for I am a great hunter. It is not far and you
can see your son often." "Let me tell my son. If he wants me to go with
you, we will both go; but I will not go alone." She spoke to her son. He
said, "My dear mother,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

you have told me that all your children died and I am the only one that
is left. How can you leave me now that I have grown a man? I want to
stay with you always."

The father of the house came into the room. He said, "Are you in the
house?" and the women answered, "Yes, we are in the house." The older of
the two girls came to the father and said, "Father, I want to marry this
boy." The younger came to him and said, "No, I want to marry him." The
boy's mother said, "If my son wants to marry one of these girls, he may,
if not, not. Let him say." Immediately the boy said, "I think I should
like to stay here and marry one of these girls. Let us live in this
house. Perhaps the kopishtaya meant us to live here always."

The boy married the elder of the two girls and lived there all his life.
The younger sister loved him also. Whenever they could be alone together
they played with each other and talked. The elder sister knew that they
were together and she said, "I am going to die." She went into the inner
room and placed a large basket in the center of the floor. She sat down
in the basket crying. Her feet began to turn into the tail of a snake.
She was crying and the tears were running down her checks. She was
already a snake. The boy's mother came to look for her, but she could
not find her. She went into the inner room and she found that her
daughter-in-law had become a great snake.

She took sacred meal in her hand and went to the chief of the Flint
Society. She said to him, "My daughter-in-law has become a snake. Come
and restore her." He came and set up his altar in the inner room. He put
the snake in the basket in front of the altar and covered it with an
embroidered ceremonial blanket. He sang all the curing songs of the
Flint Society but he could not restore her. She was a snake. He called
all the men of his society and they took her to Gaskunkotcinako ("the
girl's cave"). They left her there and people still take little pots to
this place to offer to her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[92:10](tci049.htm#fr_111.md) Informant 2. Notes,
[p. 232](tci125.htm#page_232.md).

<span id="fn_110"></span>[92:22a](tci048.htm#fr_110.md) See [p.
77](tci041.htm#page_77.md), note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Witch Wife Transforms Her Husband](tci050.md)
