[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tci022)  [Next](tci024.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

# II. HERO TALES

### THE GIANT AND THE TWINS <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md)

A giant lived at Gashpĕta (Cave Place). The Twins were at Tsiĕpĕ. He
went to get them, to cook them for his dinner. He had a basket on his
back, and he dropped them in and started back to his house. They picked
piñon gum and spread it over his head. They came along by Hainayasta
(Old Cochiti, across the river). They struck a fire and the piñon gum
blazed up. He felt the fire and ran to the river. The boys were thrown
out. He was angry, and he said, "Whenever I see those boys I'll eat
them."

He set out to find them again. When he discovered them, he put them in
his basket and said, "You got away from me, but I caught you again." He
started for his house. He brought them through Hainayasta to Fissure
Place, where he lived. He told his daughter to make the fire. He chopped
them all up and put the pot over to boil. He said, "Now I shall have a
good feast in the morning." That night they broke open the door of the
oven and got out. The giant's family were happy because in the morning
they were going to have a feast. When they went to get them, they found
that the boys were gone. The giant was very angry. He said, "I shall eat
you yet!"

When he got to Tsiĕpĕ, they were playing with bows and arrows. The giant
said to them, "You think you can get away from me." They laughed and
tried to hit him with their arrows. He put them in his basket and took
them home. His daughter made a fire, and he chopped them up fine, and
put them in the pot. He was sure that he was going to have a nice feast.
In the night the Twins opened the door and went home. In the morning he
was so happy about the feast he was going to have, but the Twins were
gone. "I shall eat you yet!" he exclaimed.

He went again to Tsiĕpĕ. He found them there playing with their bows and
arrows. He was mad. He said, "This is the last time that I am coming.
You will see what you will get. I will eat you now." He put them in his
basket and took them home with him. He said, "We'll see which is the
man!" The Twins took their stone knives and hit him in the heart and
killed him. They shut him up with stones in his cave <span
id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44.md) and went back to Tsiĕpĕ.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### VARIANT <span id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_45.md)

Long ago a giant lived in Peralta Canyon. As soon as the little children
in Cochiti were big enough to eat, he would come and throw them into the
carrying basket on his back and take them home to eat. He boiled them in
the Boiling Place of the Giant, and when they were done, he called his
children to the feast. He always knew just when the little children were
big enough and juicy enough to be best for eating. Soon there were no
children left in the pueblo.

The Twin Heroes heard of this. They said, "There should be many children
in Cochiti, and there is not one." They started off from Tsiĕpĕ to
overcome the giant. The giant was just starting to the pueblo on his
round. They came face to face. The giant said, "Who are you, children?"
"We are looking for you." He reached down and thrust them into his
basket and started for his Boiling Place. He said, "Now I can make a
meal off you two." The boys paid no attention; they were playing in his
basket. When they were halfway to his home the boys laid their plans.
Masewa jumped out and picked up big rocks and handed them up to his
brother. The giant did not notice. When the basket was full, the boys
dropped off and took the road home.

After four days the giant was coming again. The boys came out to meet
him. Again they were face to face. The giant said, "There you are,
children." "We were looking for you." He reached down and thrust them
into his basket and started for his Boiling Place. He said, "Now I can
make a meal off you." The Twins paid no attention; they were playing in
his basket. When they were halfway to his home the boys laid their
plans. Masewa climbed down and collected gum and handed it up to the
other who put it over the giant's hair and neck. When they got near his
place, and he was all covered with pitch, the Twins set fire to him. He
ran to the river to put it out, and they went off laughing. The giant
was very angry. "I will boil those boys yet for my soup!" he said.

Again in four days they saw the giant coming to the pueblo. The Twins
came from Tsiĕpĕ. They met him near the pueblo. The giant said, "There
you are, children." "We were looking for you." He reached down and
thrust them into his basket and started for his Boiling Place. He said,
"Now I can make a meal off you." The boys paid no attention; they were
playing in his basket. When they were halfway to his place the boys laid
their plans. They let the giant take them all the way to his house. He
was very angry. On the way the boys pinched the giant. They hung over
the sides of the basket and pinched him. He scolded at them, but they
paid

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

no attention to him. Finally he came to the Boiling Place. The little
giants had a big fire ready to cook their food, and the big giant put
them right in. They were plastered with mud and as soon as they touched
the water, it cooled and they were not hurt at all.

They stayed quiet until the middle of the night. Then they got out. They
picked off the plaster until they opened the oven door. They gathered
manure (sheep's and horses') and put it in their place. In the night the
giant got up and sniffed. He said, "Ha! children, we'll have fine soup
out of those two boys!" In the morning the Twins were back at Tsiĕpĕ. At
daylight the old giant woke his children so that they would be ready for
breakfast. They began breaking off the plaster. The boys had replaced it
just as it was. They found the manure. The old giant cried, "Well! Well!
What can we do? I don't see how the little boys got away from me." In
this way the Twins kept the giant from killing the children. They said,
"This is what you did to children of Cochiti; this is what will happen
to you."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[19:1](tci023.htm#fr_43.md) Informant 3. See
Dumarest, 224. Notes, [p. 212](tci124.htm#page_212.md).

<span id="fn_44"></span>[19:2](tci023.htm#fr_44.md) *Schkoio schkaka
haush*.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[20:3](tci023.htm#fr_45.md) Informant 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Giant and the Girl](tci024.md)
