[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tci042)  [Next](tci044.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE INDUSTRIOUS DAUGHTER WHO WOULD NOT MARRY <span id="fr_95"></span>[14](#fn_94.md)

An old woman and an old man were living in the village and they had an
only daughter. They were very poor. When the girl grew up and began to
think she said to herself, "What shall I do to take care of my father
and mother? I will pick up cotton that has been thrown away." When she
had picked up the scraps she combed them, spun them, and rolled the yarn
into a ball. When she had enough she knit footless stockings. She made a
pair. She told her father and mother, "Look at the pair of stockings I
made. I worked hard to make them and I think it will help us."

Then she said to herself, "Next I'll try to make openwork stockings"
(such as women wear for the deer dance; now made of twine). She picked
up more scraps of cotton. She made a pair of openwork stockings. She
hung them on the clothes pole and called her father and mother to see
what she had made. They came and they were very happy over what she had
learned to make.

Then she said, "Now I will try to make a big white manta." She went out
again and picked up more scraps of cotton and brought them into the
house. She combed them and spun them and wound the yarn into balls. She
threaded her loom and began to weave. Her father and mother were very
happy to see her weaving this white manta. When she had finished she
said, "Now I will embroider it with all different colors." She dyed her
yarn, and she took the white manta and sat by the window. She
embroidered it. By this time she had grown to be a large, handsome girl.
He young men came to talk to her while she was embroidering. They asked
her to marry them, but she would not. She said, "I take care of my
father and mother and myself." She cared nothing for any of them. All
the time she kept on embroidering the manta. When it was all embroidered
she took it to her father and mother and said, "Here is the white manta.
I have embroidered it all and I have finished it." Her mother took it
and hung it over the clothes pole.

"Now I will make a white ball-fringed sash," she said. She laid the
threads (horizontally) and she began weaving. While she was working the
boys would come to the window and watch, but she paid no attention. When
she had finished, she took it to her father and mother. Her mother hung
it along the pole.

"Now I will make a small white manta (dancer's sash)," she said. She
threaded her loom and she wove it, and then she embroidered

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

one end of it. She said, "Now this will be excellent." She embroidered
the other end. She finished it. Her mother hung it over the pole. Her
father and mother were very happy over all that she had done (of her own
initiative).

She gathered up more scraps of cotton. She said, "I am going to make a
belt." She went out to get plants to use in dyeing the yarn yellow. She
saved urine in a very large jar. When it was full she dipped some out
into a bowl. She took bluestone and pounded it up and wet it with the
urine and poured it into the big jar. She threw the yarn into the big
jar and left it there all that night and the next day. The third day she
took it out and it was blue as blue could be. She took the yellow dye
plants and she boiled them with water and dipped in the yarn. She said
to her father, "Shall I take them all out? For I might make the belt
only of blue and yellow." Her father said, "Yes; when you take the yarn
out hang it over a rafter end and in the lower loops put the grinding
arm (rubbing stone) so the yarn will dry straight. Then when you die
they will not stretch you out like that." She dyed yarn red also and she
wove, her belt and finished it. "When you finish the belt stretch it
well, so they wont stretch you when you die," her father told her. So
this is the advice they give to all Indian girls when they weave.

The girl said to her father and mother, "Now go out and sell what I have
made. Perhaps people will like to buy them." So each took up the things
she had woven and went out to sell them. They got home. Their daughter
was spinning cotton. She said, "Did you have good luck?" "Yes; we sold
them all." When she had spun all the cotton she began to thread the
loom. She was going to make another white manta, but bigger than the
first. She kept on weaving more, and more garments and the people in all
the village come to her house to buy whatever they wanted. The young men
came to buy ball-fringed sashes and the small embroidered mantas.

At last everybody in the pueblo had a complete dancing costume of his
own. Then they said, "Let us have a great dance before her house and see
which of us she will choose to dance with." So they made preparation.
They dressed for the dance and they came near her house. She was sitting
in the door embroidering a white manta. They began to dance. She said,
"Why do you think I am the only girl in the village? You are all calling
me." She didn't even lift her head. She didn't look at all and the dance
ended, and they went off. She finished embroidering the manta and gave
it to her mother and she hung it over the pole. They sat by the
fireplace, and her father said, "Rest yourself, my daughter." "I can't
help

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

working. I like to keep on always." Even as she was sitting there she
was pulling the cotton apart. She heard the noise of the rattles coming
again. She said, "They're coming again! They make a great noise!" It was
the rainbow dance. She didn't even look at the dancers, but kept on
pulling the cotton apart. Some of the dancers came to the house and
said, "We are surprised that you don't even care to look up when we
dance." They went home. She didn't go outside her house at all. She
worked all the time.

Next day the young men began to come to ask her to marry them. Each of
them brought a large manta and a small manta and a belt, but she would
not take them. "Thank you, I make those myself. I know how to make
whatever I want." "What can we do to make her marry us?" they said. At
last they said, "Let us all draw pretty things in our houses (on the
walls)." All the young men were busy painting rainbows all over their
houses, some on the walls of their houses and some on the ladders. Some
made little stone birds and set them on both sides of the rungs of the
ladders and painted them in all colors. Next day it was time for her to
come into the village and they were to take her into each house and see
which she liked best. She went through all the village, but she didn't
care for rainbows or birds or sunflowers. She said, "Anyhow I take care
of myself. I don't need anything more. I take care of my father and
mother and stay where I am."

The young men said, "Let's try and see if we can raise lots of corn."
They were to pile theirs up on top of their roofs in piles of all the
different colors, blue, white, red, dark red, and yellow and all colors.
The young men piled the corn on the roofs; there were great piles of all
colors of corn. As she came over to see it, the young men all trembled
to see which she would choose. But she didn't care for any corn. "I tell
you boys, I never want to marry. I make my own clothing and I live very
well." The boys said, "We won't court her any more for she doesn't care
for young men."

Coyote heard of this and said, "She shall see. She'll have to go with
me. I shall offer her nothing at all, but she will belong to me. I shall
go to the mountains" (to fetch a black currant branch, *epu'*).

He went to his house and he took his white buckskin moccasins, the skunk
skin to tie around his ankles, the openwork stockings, the small white
manta for his kilt and white and red yarn to tie around his arms and his
white shell beads, and his abalone shell, and his paint pot, and his
long parrot-tail feathers and his short parrot-tail feathers, and his
downy feathers, and his gourd rattle. He did

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

them all up in a bundle and started off. As he went he came to the place
where the black currants grow. <span id="fr_96"></span>[15](#fn_95.md) He
took some and said, "Come along, Payatamu. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[16](#fn_96.md)"

He came to the village where the girl lived, but he went to another
house. He said, "Hello," but no one answered for nobody was in that
house. He went into the inner room and laid down his bundle. "Now come,
Payatamu!" He stamped four times rapidly with his foot, and drew on his
white buckskin moccasins. He looked down at his feet. "Do I look pretty?
Yes, I look pretty," he said. He stamped four times and he put on his
lace stockings and he said, "Do I look pretty? Yes, I look pretty." He
stamped four times and put the skunk skin around his ankles and said,
"Do I look pretty? Yes, I look pretty." He took the wool yarn, he
stamped four times and tied it around and said, "Do I look pretty? Yes,
I look pretty." He took his white manta shirt and he stamped four times
and drew it on and said, "Do I look pretty? Yes, I look pretty." He took
his white dance sash, and he stamped four times and tied it around him
and said, "Do I look pretty? Yes, I look pretty." He took the wool
strings, and stamped four times and tied them and said, "Do I look
pretty? Yes, I look pretty." He took the white shell beads and stamped
four times and fastened them around his neck, and said, "Do I look
pretty? Yes, I look pretty." Then he took his abalone shell and stamped
four times and fastened it on, and said, "Do I look pretty? Yes, I look
pretty." He took the black shiny paint and stamped four times, and put
it over his cheeks, and said, "Do I look pretty? Yes, I look pretty." He
took the downy feathers and stamped four times and put them in his hair,
and said, "Do I look pretty? Yes, I look pretty." He took the long
parrot tail feathers, and the short parrot tail feathers, and he stamped
four times and fastened them on, and said, "Do I look pretty? Yes, I
look pretty." He stamped again and took up his gourd rattle in his right
hand and said, "Do I look pretty? Yes, I look pretty." When he was all
dressed he said, "Come, Payatamu, see if I can get that girl. I shall
not dance before her house, but in the center of Little Plaza." Before
he went out he went over and picked up his bunch of black currants in
his left hand.

He went into the center of Little Plaza and began to dance. When they
heard the sound of the rattle, everybody looked out and there they saw a
boy dancing. The girl heard somebody singing and she threw down the
white manta she was embroidering and went out. She said, "What a fine
looking boy! I have never seen him before; \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

I wonder who he is." She came into the Center of Little Plaza. She said
to herself, "He has a bunch of black currants in his left hand; I am
very fond of them." Then she said to him, "Give me the black currant
branch, I like them very much. Let me take you to my house." The boys of
the village heard her and they said, "What a dirty, miserable girl you
are! Why will you take such a little bit of black currants as that and
let him come and sleep with you? We have offered you much more than
that, but you would not look at anything we brought." The girl went
right on and brought the dancer to her house. She called to her father
and mother, "Here comes in Payatamu." Her mother exclaimed, "Oh, my dear
daughter! What a mischief you have done!" "My dear mother, he has a
branch of great black currants. You know how I like black currants and
it is a long time since I have eaten any."

Payatamu stayed the, night with her and slept with her. He had
intercourse with her. At last she was about to have a child. She gave
birth to little coyotes. She was a fine looking girl, but no one in the
village cared about her looks then.

Coyote said to the girl's father and mother, "I shall take my wife and
child to my home." They came near to High Bank. There was a big hole
there, and Coyote said, "Let me go in first." The mother asked, "How can
you go in? It is so small." The father went in first, next the two
little coyotes and then the mother peeped down. There inside was a house
just as good as her own home. He had as many mantas, and embroidered
mantas, and openwork stockings and belts as she had. She went in and
they lived there always.

### VARIANT <span id="fr_98"></span>[17](#fn_97.md)

Long ago a girl would not marry. A boy came and brought her a manta, and
a belt and moccasins, but she would not take them, for she did not want
to marry. So the boy took his bundle and went out. A second boy came and
brought her a manta, and a belt and moccasins, but she would not take
them because she did not want to marry. So the second boy took his
bundle and went out. A third boy came and brought her a manta, and a
belt and moccasins, but she would not take them because she did not want
to marry. So the third boy took his bundle and went out. Then the fourth
boy came and brought her a bundle but she would not take it. And the
fourth boy took his bundle and went out.

Coyote was living in White Mountain. He said to himself, "I will go and
try to marry her." He dressed himself to dance. He put on his moccasins
and his leggings, a dancer's skirt and a woman's

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

belt, and a loose-sleeved manta. He tied wool yarn around his wrists,
and put long parrot feathers in his hair and shorter ones on top of his
head. He hung an abalone shell on his chest. He painted his face red and
fastened a turtle-shell rattle on his leg, and took a gourd rattle in
his hand. Then he looked at himself to see if he was handsome so that
the girl would like him. "I am a handsome boy," he thought. "I shall get
the girl; I look nice!" He went to the hill to get kapolin berries and
he carried a branch of them in his left hand.

He went to the village, and he came in through the west street to the
plaza. The girl called to her father and mother, "There is a beautiful
boy ready to dance in the plaza. How I wish that I could get the bunch
of kapolin berries which he is carrying. I wonder if he would give them
to me. Father, shall I go down and ask him for his bunch of berries?"
"Yes; perhaps he will give them to you." She went, the people were
laughing at him. "She is running after Coyote," they said. When she got
near she said to him, "Boy, give me the kapolin berries?" "Yes." She
took them. He said, "Now you are my sweetheart. Wait at your house for
me and tell your father and mother that I am coming to-night to marry
you."

She married him, and she had two children, and they were half coyote and
half human. When they were grown they wanted to go with their father. So
when they were big enough to walk to White Mountain he took his two
children with him to his home, but their mother had to stay with her
people.

### VARIANT <span id="fr_99"></span>[18](#fn_98.md)

Long ago from here somewhere in the north was White House, now there was
a town. There somewhere dwelt Yellow Woman. She did not want to marry.
She was continually grinding. Now, she never saw a dance. The boys would
always go in. She just did not want to marry anyone. Then from there one
youth climbed up from the north, but the girl was always grinding. Then
he came from the north to the edge (of the hatchway). He made a shadow
where she was grinding below. The Yellow Woman saw the shadow. Then the
Yellow Woman went out. She saw a youth. "Come in!" said she to the
youth. The youth entered. She gave him wafer bread and let him cat. Then
the youth ate. He had eaten enough. The youth spoke thus, "I shall go
off," said he. "No," said Yellow Woman," stay here for three days." Then
he stayed. After three days he spoke thus, "I shall go off," said the
youth. "Go on!" said Yellow Woman. "Very well!" said the youth. "You
will

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

give birth. When you are about to give birth, go from here somewhere. Go
out of this town. Somewhere give birth!" Now, when she was about to give
birth, she went from there. Now, somewhere she gave birth to three blue
coyotes. Then that youth came again. He had great supernatural power.
Yellow Woman took care of her coyote children and the youth also (took
care of them). From that Yellow Woman were derived the blue coyotes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_94"></span>[79:14](tci043.htm#fr_95.md) Informant 2. Notes,
[p. 226](tci125.htm#page_226.md).

<span id="fn_95"></span>[82:15](tci043.htm#fr_96.md) Kapolin berries, used
ceremonially in Mexico.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[82:16](tci043.htm#fr_97.md) "Youth."

<span id="fn_97"></span>[83:17](tci043.htm#fr_98.md) Informant 1.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[84:18](tci043.htm#fr_99.md) Recorded in text by
Franz Boas. Informant 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Locust Boy](tci044.md)
