[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tci007)  [Next](tci009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SALT WOMAN IS REFUSED FOOD <span id="fr_14"></span>[9](#fn_14.md)

Old Salt Woman had a grandson. They were very poor. They came to Cochiti
and went from house to house. People turned them away. The old woman
said to her grandson, "We will go into this house," but again the people
turned them away. The people were cooking for a feast. At that time they
used no salt.

When Salt Woman and her grandson had been to all the houses, they came
to a place outside the pueblo where lots of children were playing. Salt
Woman had a magic crystal in her hand. All the children came to see.
They came to a piñon tree. Salt Woman told them to have a good time
playing under the tree. Then she told them each to take hold of a branch
of the tree and swing themselves. She used her magic crystal, and they
turned into chaparral jays (who live in piñon trees). Salt Woman said to
the jays, "Now you are changed into birds because when we were in the
pueblo nobody would invite us to stay. From now on you shall be
chaparral jays."

They went south and came to Santo Domingo. They were well treated there
and the people gave them food. After they had eaten Salt Woman said, "In
Cochiti the people of the pueblo would not let us eat. My grandchild has
suffered with hunger." When they were leaving she said, "I am very
thankful for being given food to eat. I will leave my flesh for you."
She gave them her flesh. The people of the house ate it with their bread
and meat. It tasted good--salty. This is how it happened. Salt Woman
said to the people, "If I am in your food it will always taste better.
When I left Cochiti I took all of the children outside the pueblo and we
came to a piñon tree and there I changed them into chaparral jays. They
treated me badly. I am thankful to You that you gave my grandson
something to eat. I will go southeast and there I will stay, and if any
of you want my flesh you will find it at that place. And when you come
to gather, let there be no laughing, no singing, nothing of that kind-be
quiet and clean." So she left Santo Domingo

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

and went to Salt Lake, where we get salt to-day (a three days' journey
in each direction).

### VARIANT <span id="fr_15"></span>[5](#fn_15.md)

The Indians were traveling south from White House. Before they all came
out from Shipap, Masewa was told to tell all the Indians in White House
where to live and what to call their pueblos. So they came to Cochiti,
and afterwards they went out and settled the others.

Salt Woman and Salt Man came down to Cochiti. They were told, "If they
do not receive you, you shall go on to the other villages." They started
out. Salt Woman and Salt Man (her grandson) had been told to go into
each of the houses and to greet the people there. But the people all
said, "Do not shake hands with her. She has sores all over her hands and
face." She was old, gray-haired, covered with scabby skin. As she left
each house she said, "These are not sores on my hands and face. This is
the way I was born." But nobody shook hands with her, or liked to have
her in his house. She said, "I had better leave this place and cross the
river with Salt Man." She went across and settled down in the meadow
near Peña Blanca, but people came there and threw dirt over them. She
said to Salt Man, "Let us move from here again." They moved farther off
to Mosquito Place (a little farther up beyond Santo Domingo). Again they
lived there a while, but cows and horses used to step on them, so Salt
Woman said, "Let us go again." "All right," Salt Man said, "we'll start
again and live far, far away from these people. Perhaps they do not want
salt to flavor their food." So they went way down to Salt Lake (near
Estancia). Since that time men have always had a difficult time to get
salt. They have to remove all their clothes and even beads--naked as
when they were born--and go in quiet as can be. They must not speak a
word or laugh or make fun, and then they can take all they wish. If they
speak or laugh or make fun, they will stand just where they are and die.
It is always a great deal of trouble to bring the salt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[6:9](tci008.htm#fr_14.md) Informant 1. Notes, [p.
206](tci123.htm#page_206.md).

<span id="fn_15"></span>[7:5](tci008.htm#fr_15.md) Informant 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Contest of Good-Tasting Fat](tci009.md)
