[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci046)  [Next](tci048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

### THE NEGLECTED CHILD <span id="fr_103"></span>[7](#fn_102)

Long ago here in Cochiti they were making baskets. Here in the kiva was
one woman who was also making baskets. She had two children, one small
and one big. The sister took care of the baby and carried her on her
back. Then the little one cried. Then she took her to her mother to
nurse her. Her mother said, "Take her away for a while. I shall nurse
her soon." Then she took her away. Then the baby cried again and
therefore four times she took her there. Her mother said to her again,
"Take her away for a while. After a while I will take her." Then she
took her away again. The girl became angry and the two went away from
there. They went northward. From there they went north. A woman said to
her, "Where are you going?" "We are going," said the girl. She was
crying. Then she asked her, "Where are you going?" "We are going where
(the dead) go. Mother did not nurse my sister. She is tired of crying."
"No," said she to her, "Don't go!" "Yes," said the girl. "When you reach
home do not tell mother that we are going this way." Then the woman went
straight back to the kiva. When she arrived on top she shouted downward.
Then the woman came out. She told her, "Your children have gone away.
You made them angry because you would not nurse her." Then the woman
followed them northward. She nearly caught up with them. She shouted to
them, but they did not turn back. Then they arrived somewhere where a
spruce tree was standing. They sat down on top. Then the spruce slowly
went down into the water, but the woman who was about to arrive cried.
Then she arrived, but the tree on which they were sitting was about to
go down. No more could she take them back. It went down entirely. She
arrived there and a flint was given to the woman with which to cut (the
water). She hit with it downward. Then the water opened and she saw her
children sitting on the spruce tree. The water closed around them and
she could never get back her children. They were gone forever.

### VARIANT <span id="fr_104"></span>[19](#fn_103)

A woman was making baskets in the kiva. The men were making dance
sashes. Every morning when she had had her breakfast she went to the
kiva. All the forenoon she worked. In her house her baby cried; it
wanted to be nursed. Its sister took the baby to the kiva and called
down to her mother, "Mother, baby brother is crying. Come and nurse
him." "Wait a little longer. Take care of him as best you can." The girl
and the baby. went off again. The baby

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

cried again. Again the sister took him to the kiva and called down to
their mother, "Mother, baby brother is crying. Come and nurse him."
"Wait a little longer. Take care of him as best you can." The girl and
the baby went off again. The third time she came to the kiva and called
down to her mother, "Mother, baby brother is crying. Come and nurse
him." "Wait a little longer. Take care of him as best you can." "We will
go away far." The girl went away and started to the north. She sang to
the baby--

Little Hair on Forehead, <span id="fr_105"></span>[20](#fn_104)  
My dear, my dear,  
My mother doesn't want to nurse my little brother,  
Little Hair on Forehead.  
E-e-e.

The baby quieted. They met a woman, and she. said, "Best take the baby
back." "No." She came to the lake and carried the baby on her back right
into the lake. The woman they had met went back to the mother and told
her the children were running away to the lake. The mother dropped
everything and ran after them. She got there just as they were entering
the lake. She cried, "My child, my child, bring the baby back! I will
nurse the baby for you!" But the girl went right on, and the mother was
too late. She went back to the kiva and told them that she wasn't going
to work at basket making any more. It was the reason she had lost her
children. She left her basket making forever and though her husband
tried to coax her she never went back to it.

### VARIANT <span id="fr_106"></span>[17](#fn_105)

A woman had a little, baby, but she went every day to make baskets in
the kiva and left the baby with his older sister. In the kiva all the
men and women were busy. Some were weaving black mantas, and some
ball-fringed white sashes, and some were embroidering the large white
mantas. The men and the women took each other's places at the work.
Others were combing the cotton and spinning it, and others prepared
their meals in their homes and brought them to the kiva. The mother
coiled a large, basket (plaque).

The girl took the baby down to the east to Whirlpool Place. She walked
right into the water. A cedar tree was growing in the center of the
pool. She took hold of it, and sang, and it went slowly down into the
other world. The mother came after them. She saw her children going, and
wept. She heard some one saying, "You shall have four trials to reach
your children. Take this rod (meaning not known) and strike the water
four times. If you can reach them,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

they shall return to you." She struck the pool and the water parted and
there she saw the cedar tree still standing with her children upon it.
She rushed down the path between the walls of water, but before she
reached them the water rushed together again and she had to run back.
Four times she struck the water, but each time the water came together,
and she had to fall back. At last her four trials were gone, and she
stood there weeping. She wept for her children. She died right there.

### VARIANT <span id="fr_107"></span>[21](#fn_106)

The cedar disappeared and took the children down to Shipap into a great
room where there were many katcinas dancing. They welcomed them and they
became katcinas and lived in Shipap. The mother saw the tree disappear
with her children upon it and she never recovered her children again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[88:7](tci047.htm#fr_103) Recorded in text by
Franz Boas. Informant 8. Notes, p. 228.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[88:19](tci047.htm#fr_104) Informant 4.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[89:20](tci047.htm#fr_105) Name of baby.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[89:17](tci047.htm#fr_106) Informant 1.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[90:21](tci047.htm#fr_107) Informant 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Witch and her Husband](tci048)
