[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci041)  [Next](tci043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MOTHER CORN <span id="fr_91"></span>[11a](#fn_90) GUIDES THE DESERTED CHILD TO HER PEOPLE <span id="fr_92"></span>[12](#fn_91)

The people were living at the Place of the Lion (Old Pueblo). The people
went south from there and they left a little girl behind

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

them. They put a mother corn by her side to guard her. The Corn Mother
spoke and said "My little daughter, we are all alone. Don't cry any
more; we will follow them and see if we can overtake them. Maybe your
mother doesn't love you, for she left you behind." They went up and they
followed the tracks of the people. Corn Mother said, "Take care of me,
keep tight hold so as not to drop me. If you lose me, where will you go?
There will be nobody to guide you." "All right." She put Corn Mother
under her dress.

They came to a rocky place on the edge of an arroyo. As she climbed
down, she dropped Corn Mother. One grain was knocked out. She picked her
up, but Corn Mother could not speak any more. The little girl cried, for
Corn Mother could not speak to her any more. "Where shall I go?" she
cried, "for Corn Mother does not speak any more. I have killed her."
Chipmunk came down; he heard her crying and said to her, "What is the
matter? Why are you crying?" "I dropped Corn Mother, and I have killed
her; she does not speak to me." "Don't worry, for I will get the grain
for you so that she will be able to speak." "This is the place where I
dropped her." He climbed down into the crack and came up with the
kernel. When he came out he asked her for Corn Mother. She gave her to
him and he put the grain back in place. Corn Mother spoke again. "Thank
you! Thank you!" said the little girl, "for finding my mother." "Now you
must go on your journey. Take care of Corn Mother, keep good hold of her
and do not drop her again." They kept on going. The girl asked, "Where
are we going?" "We are getting almost to Sandia." They went on until
they crossed into Mexico and there they found their people. They got to
that place where there was a temple made of Rainbow and Lightning with
lions lying side by side. The little girl found her own mother. Her
mother did not even remember that she had left a little girl behind her
in Old Pueblo.

### VARIANT: "TURKEY MOTHER" <span id="fr_93"></span>[4](#fn_92)

The people were living at the Rito de los Frijoles. They left that place
and came to Old Cochiti (on the mesa). They left a girl behind them with
the turkeys. She said to the turkeys, "My father and mother do not care
for me any more; that is why they have left me all alone." She was Duck
(Waiyuc) girl. She did not want to stay alone in that pueblo, and she
went on with her turkeys. She came to Jemez. She said, "I will not join
this pueblo because my father and mother do not love me. I will stay on
the refuse pile." <span id="fr_94"></span>[13](#fn_93) She was crying.
The people of Jemez saw her and they said, "Poor thing. \[paragraph
continues\]

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

Can't we take her into our pueblo with her turkeys?" They took her into
their pueblo and she lived there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_90"></span>[77:11a](tci042.htm#fr_91) So translated, but
the native word throughout is *kotona*, perfect corn ear.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[77:12](tci042.htm#fr_92) Informant 2. See
Dumarest, 231. Notes, [p. 228](tci125.htm#page_228).

<span id="fn_92"></span>[78:4](tci042.htm#fr_93) Informant 3. Notes, [p.
229](tci125.htm#page_229).

<span id="fn_93"></span>[78:13](tci042.htm#fr_94) The Interpreter said,
"Like Cinderella."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Industrious Daughter Who Would Not Marry](tci043)
