[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci086)  [Next](tci088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CROW'S SONG <span id="fr_170"></span>[3](#fn_169)

At the bottom of La Bajada Road there was a pueblo (an unnamed ruin).
Crow said to himself, "I shall go to that plain and sing a song for that
pueblo to make them happy." Crow went into an inner room. He said, "I
won't tell my mother, but I'll take this bunch of dancing shells." He
took them and went to the plain and started to dance (very slow
dignified steps). He sang his song (in unintelligible language). Nobody
paid any attention except old Coyote. He came running. "I heard somebody
singing nicely far off. I shall go to him and find his song." Old Crow
kept on singing. Old Coyote got near, "Are you singing?" he said. "No; I
am not singing." "Yes,; you are singing. I saw you far off. What a
pretty bunch of shells you have. Will you lend them to me? Then if I
learn the song, I shall have this kind of shells too." "I won't let
anybody have them. You have good eyes. I took out my eyes and made them
shells. Look at my eyes. I haven't any." He shut them tight. "Shall I
cut yours out and make, shells?" "With what?" "Go and find a sharp black
stone (arrowhead), I'll cut them out with that." "All right; I'll find
one, for I want to sing the song you sing." He brought this and laid it
on the ground. Crow said, "Lie down flat." Coyote did this. Crow came
with the sharp black stone and cut under his eyes. "Ouch, ouch!" "Don't
say that or the shells won't sound nice." So Coyote didn't make a sound,
though the blood rolled down his eyes. Crow held up one eye and gave it
to him. Coyote was blind on one side. Crow cut out the other eye. "Ouch,
ouch!" he cried. "Don't," said Crow. "All right," he answered. "Now, get
up." Coyote was blind on the other side. Coyote stood up, his eyes in
his hand. "Now, start your

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

song," commanded Crow. He shook his eyes and shook them, and he sang,
but they did not sound right at all. "It doesn't sound right," he said.
Crow flew away, and he called back, "Stay as you are! Do as you please!"
He watched Coyote from the air; Coyote was bumping into everything. "I
wish anybody would come along and take me home," he said. Nobody came.
He came to a high bank and walked right off. There he died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_169"></span>[151:3](tci087.htm#fr_170) Informant 2. Notes,
[p. 241](tci126.htm#page_241).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Burro and the Coyote](tci088)
