[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci014)  [Next](tci016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

### BLOODY HAND-PRINT KATCINA <span id="fr_29"></span>[5](#fn_29)

They were dancing a masked dance (bocat katsena). They danced during the
morning and at noon the dancers retired and the people ate their
dinners. A boy lived on the west side of the plaza in the houses on the
second tier. He had just washed his hair and it was very long and hung
down his back. When the people had finished eating this boy stood on the
roof of his house and watched the katcina come in for the afternoon
dance. There was another masked dancer with them and on his mask was the
print of a bloody hand. No one had ever seen him before. He came in with
the others and danced with them. When the dance was over he made
signs <span id="fr_30"></span>[17](#fn_30) and said, "I want to run a
race with one of the men of this pueblo." The chief men sent two of the
koshare to be messengers for him and he said to them, again, "I want to
run a race." Four times the koshare went to the chief men but they did
not want to agree. Again the Bloody Hand Katcina pointed to the east,
meaning, "I want to run a race in that direction." He motioned to the
boy who lived on the west side of the plaza and who had been watching
the katcinas come in for the dance. He called him to come down and race
with him. The koshare brought the boy down from the roof top. They took
him to the northeast to the big corral (the starting point of the race)
and the boy and the katcina raced with one another. They had not gone
very far when the boy took the lead. Bloody Hand was angry. He took his
thunder knife and threw it at the boy so that he died. He came up and
pulled the scalp from his head and ran off to his own house. The, people
cried and cried. Masewa told his people to take their horses and ride
him down, but he escaped. He reached the river and ran into the cave at
Koash'ke. He escaped with the scalp and since then everyone has been
afraid of this katcina.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[13:5](tci015.htm#fr_29) Informant 2. Notes, [p.
208](tci123.htm#page_208).

<span id="fn_30"></span>[13:17](tci015.htm#fr_30) Katcinas can only talk
in dumb shows and give their own peculiar cries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Recovery of the Koshare](tci016)
