[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tci004)  [Next](tci006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

### KOTCIMANYAKO SCATTERS THE STARS <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_10.md)

Long, long ago, when everything began to live again after the flood,
people came out (from Shipap) in the north. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[10a](#fn_11.md) Our Mother told the different peoples
that they were brothers, and there was no separation between them. As
they started south a little girl was left behind. Our Mother called,
"Kotcimanyako, come here," and she gave her a little bag made of white
hand-woven cotton to carry on her back. "Do not unwrap what is in this
bag no matter what happens." She promised she would keep it wrapped
carefully. Kotcimanyako started off. "Be careful, little daughter; do
not unwrap what is in your bag." Again she promised not to uncover it.
She did not know what it was she was carrying. As she went along she
began to wonder why she couldn't unwrap her bundle, why she was strictly
forbidden to peek into it. At last Kotcimanyako thought she would peep
in and see what she was carrying. She stopped. She put her bundle on the
ground and stooped over. She came to the last knot. It was overflowing.
Still she didn't know what it was. She was frightened and tried to put
them back in the bundle, but they all flew out into the sky and
scattered all over the heaven. They were all to have had different
names, and be put in special places, but now they were scattered. A few
she succeeded in getting back into her bag, and when she came to the end
of her journey, she unwrapped the few stars she still had in her bag and
they were put in their right places. For this reason we know only a few
stars by name: The Sling Shot Stars, the Pot-rest Stars, the Shield
Stars (Dipper), and a few others--those are the only ones that we have
names for.

### VARIANT <span id="fr_11"></span>[9](#fn_9.md)

In the beginning when the people started to come up from Shipap, our
Mother said, "This witch shall not come out." The witch said, "But I
want to go with the others." "You are not to go out." So the people
started to go out. One of the men was chosen to put the stars in the
sky. Coyote and all the four-legged animals in the world were in the
room. They were all paired off, male and female. Even birds were in the
room. Our Mother said to Coyote, "You are not to open the jar in the
corner. You must be careful not to take off the cover." The man who was
to put the stars out had hung the Seven Stars (Dipper), and the Three
Stars (which are the sign that the Indians are to use three stones to
support the pot for cooking). When he had put up the Pot-rest Stars, he
hung the big Morning Star (Siwasila).

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

In Shipap, Coyote could not stand still. As last he said to himself,
"I'll go to the jar and see what he is making." Our Mother was not
watching, so Coyote came to the jar, uncovered it, and all the stars
jumped out. That is why the stars are spread everywhere in the sky. Our
Mother said, "Coyote, you have done harm. In this way you shall get into
mischief everywhere you are. Some days you will go hungry; some days you
will get good things to eat; some days you will kill yourself." That is
how Coyote got his bad luck. They opened the door for all the animals to
come out, and they spread all over the world. That is why there will
always be animals all over the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[4:9](tci005.htm#fr_11.md) Informant 1.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[4:10](tci005.htm#fr_9.md) Informant 1, who told
also the following variant. Notes, [p. 204](tci123.htm#page_204.md).

<span id="fn_11"></span>[4:10a](tci005.htm#fr_10.md) For the emergence, see
text translation, [p. 249](tci128.htm#page_249.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Origin of Death](tci006.md)
