[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci066)  [Next](tci068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE WIFE WHO WAS CAST OUT BY HER HUSBAND <span id="fr_134"></span>[17](#fn_133)

At Fir Tree Pueblo lived a great hunter, but his wife did not pray nor
remain continent to help him. The hunter knew this, and he made a plan
to punish her. He said to himself, "I think this is the best plan." So
one day after he had come back from a hunt, he called his wife to sit
beside him. He said, "Sit down." She did so. The hunter asked her, "Are
you willing to do whatever I ask you?" "Yes." "All right." He cut off
her hair (i. e., so that it no longer showed the characteristic Rio
Grande bang) and painted her face, and put an her a buckskin robe. When
she was fixed just like a Plains Indian woman, he told her to go for
water. She went to get her jar and her husband put it on her back. She
returned to the pueblo with her water, and when her husband saw her
coming he called out to the people, "A Ute Indian is coming into the
pueblo. Pull up your ladders." They all hurried to do this. She got into
the pueblo and found no ladders. She could not get into any house. She
left the pueblo and went north.

She came to the Place of the Waterfalls and stayed there eight days. As
she lay by the waterfalls the spray fell upon her and impregnated her.
The eighth day she gave birth to a little boy. She took care of him and
he grew fast. His mother made bows and arrows for him. She lay again by
the waterfall, and again she had a child on the eighth day, a little
girl. She had a great number of children--a boy and a girl, then again a
boy and a girl. The eldest grew up and began to make bows and arrows for
himself. He went hunting every day to provide for his brothers and
sisters. The eldest girl also began to care for the family.

The boys and girls grew up, and the eldest boy and girl married. Each
pair of these brothers and sisters married. The men hunted deer and
turkeys, and the women cared for the houses. The eldest girl had a
child, a boy. All the girls had children. The men hunted deer to get
buckskin and the women prepared the meat. The men made many bows and
arrows. Their sons grew up and began practicing shooting arrows.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

They asked who their father was, but the mother did not tell. They
continued asking but the mother would not tell them until they had
plenty of bows and arrows. At last she began to think it was time to
tell her children where she came from. She said, "You are strong and
healthy and can fight and now I will tell you the story. I was living at
the Fir Tree Pueblo and my husband asked me to sit beside him. He, cut
my hair in the fashion of the Ute women and put a buckskin robe on me
and sent me for water. When I came back he called out to the. people of
the pueblo, 'A Ute woman is coming; pull up the ladders.' Therefore I
could not enter any house. I came out of the pueblo to the Place of
Waterfalls, and you, my eldest son, were, born by the waterfall, and
afterwards, all of you, my children. This is what my husband has done to
me. It is time now to see who can be the meanest." The boys said, "We
shall make war tomorrow on Fir Tree Pueblo." "It is for you to decide,
my sons; if you are ready, it is well." "We do not want anyone to remain
alive in the Fir Tree Pueblo. We shall destroy it utterly."

Next day all was ready and the sons went on. the war path. They
surrounded the pueblo. They called themselves Utes because, of the name
that had been given to their mother. The people of the pueblo, did not
know that they were surrounded, and by the evening they were all killed.
The Utes threw the bodies of the dead, and the pottery, from the tops of
the houses into the plaza. Corpses and potsherds were scattered
everywhere.

A parrot had been kept as pet in the pueblo. She was frightened and flew
into the innermost room and found a safe place. She stayed there till
everything was quiet. Then she heard a baby crying and made up her mind
to see if all was safe outside. She saw the corpses and the broken
pottery, and she went in again. She heard the baby crying again. She
found the baby on the cradle board behind the grinding stone. She flew
to the cradle and said, "Dear baby, so you and I are left alone of all
the pueblo? What shall we do?" She took hold of the cradle by the frame
of the hood and dragged it over by the fireplace. The baby was crying.
The parrot spoke to it, "Dear baby, let me see if everything is quiet
outside." She flew about the plaza and looked down upon it. Everything
was still, so she came back to the baby. She remembered that from one of
the rooms their mother used to bring out piñon nuts, so she went to find
where they were stored. She found them and began to crack the nuts. She
took the meats out and chewed them and fed them to the baby. Every time
the baby cried she got piñon nuts and took out the meats and

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

chewed them and fed them to the baby. The, baby grew, and in a few days
began to walk. When she began to make sounds, the parrot taught her to
talk. One day the parrot told her to take the water pot and put it on
her shoulder. The parrot sat upon the girl's left shoulder and told her
which way she should go. Whenever they went out the parrot always sat on
the girl's left shoulder and directed her.

As the girl grew older she noticed the heaps in the plaza and asked,
"What is that piled outside?" "Things are always piled up in a plaza."
The girl said to Mother Parrot, "I am afraid of the things piled up
outside." Always she kept saying this. At last the girl said, "I think
it is better for us to go away and not live here any more." "Where can
we go?" said the parrot, "there is nowhere for us to live and we were
left here in this place." But she did not tell why they were left there.
The girl said, "I am afraid." Mother Parrot used to look in the deserted
houses for bits of cloth for clothing for the girl. She used to tell her
stories so that she would not be lonesome.

The girl was grown and she was still always afraid of the heaps in the
plaza. Finally Mother Parrot said, "All right, baby girl, we shall join
some other pueblo because you don't want to stay here any longer." The
parrot told her to put an extra piece of cloth on her left shoulder for
her to sit on, so that she could tell her the way to go. The girl and
the parrot started off. The parrot sat on her shoulder and said, "Ask me
questions and I will answer." The girl said, "Mother Parrot, do not
leave me, do not jump off my shoulder." They went down the river and
came near Santo Domingo. The parrot said, "Daughter, why not join this
pueblo?" "No, not here. It is too near. Maybe some day the man-killers
will come again to our pueblo and follow us as far as this. Let us go
farther south." They came to San Felipe. The parrot said, "We are quite
far off now, why not join here?" "We are not very far yet. Let us go
farther." "We are far already. I am afraid you are getting tired with
your load." "No, you are not heavy. I am not tired. We. can go farther
yet." "All right, we will go farther yet." The girl was glad. Again they
started. She said, "I'm not tired and you are not heavy. When we, come
to the right pueblo then we will join. I will tell you. I am strong."
They went farther south and came to the pueblo of Sandia. As they came
near, the girl said, "I think we had better join here. We are farther
now." Mother Parrot said, "It is for you to decide. If you are willing,
we will make our home here. If they admit us here, we will join them."
They asked permission to join that pueblo and live all their lives
there. They became Sandia Indians.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### VARIANT: "A LOVER" <span id="fr_135"></span>[4](#fn_134)

They were living at Potsherd Place. A man was a great hunter, and his
wife was tired because he always brought home so many deer for her to
prepare. She asked him to go out to the corral with her. She said, "Do
you love me?" "Yes." "Stay right where you are." She scared him and he
turned into a dog (from the fright). He ran off the tears were running
down his cheeks. She said, "Go where you please; be hungry. You won't
get anything around here." He went off looking for food.

That evening he came to a place where the witches were cooking. He
smelled meat, and as he was looking down the hatchway he lost his
balance and fell in. He saw bones and meat in the inner room and heard
people eating. The chief said, "That dog is not a dog, but a person.
Bring him in. See who he is." They brought the dog in. They laid him
down and covered him with a white manta. They danced around him, and
when they uncovered him, he was one half man and one half dog. "He is
the hunter; he has been scared," they said. They covered him again, and
danced around him. He turned into a person.

The chief said to him, "Now it is your turn to do something to your
wife." He gave him some medicine to use against her. He went out. They
said to him, "Go and hunt." He hunted and took the deer home. When he
came to his house, he called, "Hello." "Hello!" She was happy. <span
id="fr_136"></span>[29](#fn_135) She said, "Sit down, my dear." When he
was a dog, the man's mother and father had kept asking about him, "Where
is your husband?" She would answer, "He is hunting," to put them off.

At night they were sleeping. She petted him just as if she had never
hated him. In the morning when they got up, he said, "Do you love me?"
"Yes." "Come over here and stand in front of me." He cut her hair and
made her bald-headed. He painted her head red. "Now go to get water," he
told her. She went; she put the water jar on her head. The people said,
"Somebody is coming, somebody wild! Take up the ladders." They were
scared and they ran to pull up the ladders. She went from house to
house; nobody would let her in. She went to her house and went into the
back yard. Her husband said. to her, "Now let me see if you will have as
good luck as I had. See if you can get turned back into a human shape,
too. You have done me a wrong, but I returned." She cried as hard as she
could cry.

Her husband gave her a bow and dressed her like a man. He gave her a
quiver of mountain lion's skin, and put a man's blanket

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

on her. Then he, said, "Go off and see if you have good luck." She
cried; she was ashamed. She was Yellow Woman. She went off and came to
Apushu (one of the cliff dwellings). It was raining. She went in, and
the rain fell down in little streams off the ledge and impregnated her.
She had a baby, Water's baby. He was Payatamu. She went off to the
Jicarilla country and lived there. And that is why the Jicarilla have
such a pretty red skin (because her husband painted her head red).

She had many children. They found out how her husband had treated her in
Cochiti, and they made ready to fight. The chief said, "Get ready. Make
bows and arrows." They came to Cochiti. When they got there, they killed
her husband and everybody in the village, and broke up everything. There
was nobody left but a parrot, and a baby hidden behind a grinding stone.

Parrot heard the baby cry, and turned over the grinding stone and found
her. She said, "Poor thing, poor baby." She pulled her out and said, "I
will look for food for her." She found piñon. nuts. These she cracked,
and chewed, and fed them to the baby. They lived there together. The
baby grew up. The baby did not know how to get water. One day she asked,
"Mother, why are you not like me? Why have you a long bill?" Parrot
Mother answered, "I don't know why." Then she asked, "Mother, why are
these bones of dead people around?" Parrot Mother would not tell. The
girl grew older. One day she was grinding a little, and she made pinole
and mush. She asked all the time, "Where are my real father and mother?"
She was big enough now, so Parrot Mother told her, "Your father and
mother are the bones that lie in the plaza." The girl was frightened.
She said, "We must leave this place. We can not stay here by ourselves
any longer." "All right. We will go. I can't walk, you will have to
carry me."

Parrot sat on her shoulder and they started off. They came towards Old
Cochiti (across river). Parrot said, "We'll stay here." "No, this is too
near. If the enemies come again, they might find us." They went on to
Santo Domingo. Parrot said, "We'll stay here." "No, this is too near. If
those, people come again, they might find us." They went to San Felipe.
Again Parrot said, "Let us stay here." "No, this is too near. If those
people come again, they might find us." Then they came to Sandia. Mother
Parrot said, "Let us stay in this place." "Yes, I like it. It is far
away. We shall ask if we may join their pueblo." The girl asked the
chief, and they were adopted into the village. They stayed there. The
girl grew up.

A man heard that she was there, and he came down and spoke to her while
she was getting water. He was Opati (wife-stealer

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

who lived in the mountains). He took her to his home. He said, "You have
to make blue paper bread and sweet (sprouted) pudding. If you don't have
this ready when I return, I will put you in the room with all my other
women." She called the ants to help her and they finished everything. He
came in with his deer and he found the blue bread and sweet pudding all
ready. He thought that he could do with her as he had done with all his
other wives, but he couldn't punish her. He said to her, "You are the
first one whom I have brought here who has done as I commanded." He
didn't punish her. They lived a long time together, and he brought deer
every day. She never came back to the pueblo.

### VARIANT  <span id="fr_137"></span>[30](#fn_136)

(A girl, disguised by her husband as a Jicarilla, became pregnant by
water, and after the battle, the baby girl was left with Corn Mother and
Parrot in Potsherd Place.) The baby girl grew up and Corn Mother <span
id="fr_138"></span>[30a](#fn_137) said to Parrot Mother, "Don't let her
peep through the door, for there are skeletons piled out-doors." She
kept on growing. She said to Corn Mother, "I can not stand this place
any more. Shall we go somewhere else to live?" "All right, my child, we
will go back to Cochiti." "What shall I wear, mother?" "Let me go to the
front room. Wait for me." Corn Mother went into the front room and said,
"Great Butterfly from the skies, my daughter wants a pair of moccasins."
He returned with the moccasins. Then she said, "Great Butterfly from the
skies, my daughter wants a manta." And he brought the manta. Then she
said, "Great Butterfly from the skies, my daughter wants a belt," and he
returned with it. Then she said, "Great Butterfly from the skies, my
daughter wants a white manta for her back, and a black mania for a
shawl." He returned with these and threw them all down.

The girl put on the moccasins, the manta and belt, and the white manta
and the black manta. Corn Mother said, "We shall start now. Take good
care of us, my child, wrap us up well and in your hand take your basket
of sacred meal." She put Corn Mother under her manta and Parrot Mother
perched on her shoulder, and she started from Potsherd Place. She passed
Whirlpool Place, Koashka, and went on across the river. As she was going
down the other side of the river Buzzard met them. Buzzard said, "Are
you coming, my little girl?" "Yes." "Are you coming to be adopted into
this place?" He brought them to this place, Cochiti, and they lived here
forever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_133"></span>[120:17](tci067.htm#fr_134) Informant 1. Notes,
[p. 224](tci125.htm#page_224).

<span id="fn_134"></span>[123:4](tci067.htm#fr_135) Informant 3. Notes,
pp. [223](tci125.htm#page_223), [224](tci125.htm#page_224). See [p.
95](tci049.htm#page_95).

<span id="fn_135"></span>[123:29](tci067.htm#fr_136) To recognize him,
"because now she hadn't done wrong."

<span id="fn_136"></span>[125:30](tci067.htm#fr_137) Informant 4.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[125:30a](tci067.htm#fr_138) See [p.
77](tci041.htm#page_77), note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Girl who Stepped on the Snake](tci068)
