[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci073)  [Next](tci075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COYOTE AND BEAVER EXCHANGE WIVES <span id="fr_150"></span>[3](#fn_149)

At Amatsushe they were living; Old Coyote and Old Coyote Woman lived on
one side of the hill and Old Beaver and Old Beaver Woman lived on the
other side of the hill. They visited each other every night. One night
it was snowing, deep, and Old Coyote said, "I shall go and invite my
Brother Beaver to go hunting." He said to his wife, "I'm going to Old
Brother Beaver to tell him that we shall go hunting, and make plans to
exchange our wives." He went over. When he got there, he called,
"Hello." Beaver answered, "Hello, come in and sit down." They sat
together by the fireplace to smoke. Coyote said, "I came to tell you we
are to go hunting. If we kill any rabbits we'll bring them to our wives.
I shall bring mine to your wife, and you shall bring yours to mine."
"All right." "You must go first." "No, you go first. This is your
invitation; you invited me." "All right, I shall go early in the
morning."

He said to Old Beaver Woman, "In the morning I am going hunting for
you." "All right. I shall sing the song so that you will kill many
rabbits." Old Beaver Woman started to fix the supper. She wanted it
ready for his return. He went for the whole day. It was evening, and Old
Coyote did not come home at all. Old Beaver Woman waited and waited. She
started to sing her song. She was sitting near the fireplace and she
sang,

Old Coyote, old Coyote, come sleep with me,  
Come have intercourse with me,  
Ai-oo-ai-oo (supposed to be imitative). <span
id="fr_151"></span>[4](#fn_150)

Old Beaver said, "What are you singing about? He won't kill anything,
for he isn't any hunter." Coyote killed nothing and Beaver Woman waited
and waited but Coyote never came.

Next day it was Old Beaver's turn to go hunting, He went to tell Old
Coyote Woman that she must wait for him, for he was going to hunt
rabbits for her. "All right," she said. He went and he killed so many
that he could hardly carry them. In the morning he came back to Coyote's
house and came in saying, "Old Coyote \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

Woman, here are the rabbits." She took them and said, "Thank you, thank
you, Old Man Beaver." They went straight into the inner room and Old Man
Coyote was left by himself in the front room. He was very angry. They
gave him his supper. When he had finished they went in to bed. Old
Beaver Man started to have intercourse with Old Coyote Woman. Old Coyote
Woman cried out, and Old Coyote called out, "Old Beaver, don't hurt my
wife." Old Coyote Woman answered, "Shut up, Old Man Coyote! It is
because I like it that I am crying out." When he had finished Old Beaver
Man came out and went home. He said to Old Coyote, "We won't keep bad
feelings against each other; this was your plan. I shall always wait for
you at my house whenever you want to visit me." They went back and lived
there, and they were as good neighbors as ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[136:3](tci074.htm#fr_150) Informant 2. Notes,
[p. 236](tci125.htm#page_236).

<span id="fn_150"></span>[136:4](tci074.htm#fr_151) Much laughter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Crane and Geese](tci075)
