[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci082)  [Next](tci084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FOX AND COYOTE <span id="fr_164"></span>[3](#fn_163)

Up in White Bank many coyotes and foxes were living. Fox said one day,
"I shall take a little walk," and he went up the hill to the top of the
mesa. He stayed all day. About sunset a coyote met him. Fox was on the
top of a pine tree. He looked north and he saw a big pond. Coyote got to
the pine tree. He looked up at Fox. "What a fine-looking Fox you are!"
Fox came down. Coyote said, "Let's have a race." "All right. Let's go
first to the pond over north. There's lots of water there. We can drink
first." As they got to the pond Fox looked in and saw the full moon in
the pond. He called Coyote, "Come, see here! Somebody under the water
has a big piece of cheese. He's showing it to us." Coyote came over and
looked. Sure enough he saw the big cheese. "How can we get this out?"
"Let's drink all the pond up. Then we shall get it out." "You drink
first." Fox set his paw in the water and put his mouth down, but he
didn't really drink. He fooled Coyote. He took out his paw. "Oh, look!
See all I drank!" Coyote began to drink. Sure enough he drank and drank.
He got out. "Oh, look! See all I drank! Look at my stomach. Now it's
your turn again." Fox put his paw in but he didn't drink a drop. He
fooled Coyote. He took out his paw and he said, "Oh, look! See all I
drank!" Coyote started to drink again and sure enough he drank and
drank. Fox called, "Keep it up! We've almost got it emptied. Then we'll
eat the cheese." When Coyote couldn't drink any more, he tried to come
out, but he fell down in his tracks. He vomited, "Wa, wa! wa, wa!" Then
he vomited again. "Why don't you have to vomit, too?" he said to Fox.
Fox said, "I'm going to drink a little more and when it's almost gone,
it will be your turn again." He drank. "Your turn." The Coyote had
vomited all he had drunk so he began to drink again. "That's enough,"
said the Fox. "I'll drink all that's left and then I'll take out the
cheese. When I get it I'll go to that big stone out there and put the
cheese on top." Fox went into the pond. "Just watch me. I'll pull out
the cheese." He pulled it out. He took up a white stone. "I see it,"
said the Coyote. Fox called, "I will put it far off." "No, don't put it
far off. Put it where we can both see it." "All right, we'll have the
race from here to the stone." He put the cheese on top of the stone. "Do
you see it

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

here? Does it show plain." "It shows fine." "All right. We'll start.
I'll make a line and we'll stand on it. Whoever gets to the cheese first
shall eat the whole all by himself." "All right." Fox called to start
the race. He called four times. Four times they started off. The Coyote
ran fast as he could. Fox ran slow. As Coyote got halfway he burst. So
he got no cheese.

### VARIANT <span id="fr_165"></span>[3](#fn_164)

They told Coyote, "Coyote, go over there. There's a little stream, you
can look in the water." Coyote looked in and cried, "Oh my, there's
something down there!" "Just jump in and take it out It's good cheese."
"All right." He jumped in and was drowned. They called out, "Look, look!
The Coyote got drowned." That's what he got.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_163"></span>[147:3](tci083.htm#fr_164) Informant 2. Notes,
[p. 240](tci126.htm#page_240).

<span id="fn_164"></span>[148:3](tci083.htm#fr_165) Informant 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Duck Sings for her Children](tci084)
