[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci109)  [Next](tci111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE DESTRUCTION OF WHITE SHELL PUEBLO <span id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_199)

At Kubéro (Pojoaque) the Tewa were living (who afterwards went to Hopi).
They came down against White Shell Pueblo (Hishi; old site of San
Felipe) and overcame the people and destroyed the pueblo. The people
went farther south and settled on the present site of San Felipe.

A man was living with his wife and sister at Tamitē (mesita south of
Cochiti). They did not know of the attack on White Shell \[paragraph
continues\]

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

Pueblo, and they came there and found it abandoned. Outside the pueblo
were heaps of the dead, but they heard the crying of a baby from the
houses. <span id="fr_201"></span>[1a](#fn_200) The man from Tamitē went
into the pueblo to search for the baby. He followed the sound, and
covered over by the grinding stone he found the baby. Macaw (*cawat*)
was feeding it with piñon nuts he cracked and chewed and put into the
baby's mouth. The man took the baby to his wife and sister, and they
cared for it. The women were afraid the enemy would come again and find
their settlement and destroy them; they saw a man in the distance, and
they thought it was a spy from the people of Kubéro, but it was only a
man from White Shell Pueblo who was coming back to his own home.
However, the women said, "We must leave this place and find a pueblo
where we shall be safe." They wondered which way they should go; south
to Sandia, or past Sandia Mountain to Cranquebila. They said,
"Cranquebila is the farther, and we shall be safer there." They took the
baby and went to Cranquebila and stayed there four years. The sister of
the Tamitē man married a man of Cranquebila, and they found other White
Shell Pueblo people had taken refuge there.

After a time there was no water for the crops at Cranquebila, and the
people from Tamitē decided that they would return to their home if there
were no enemies about. Therefore the Tamitē man and his sister's husband
came down to the Cochiti country and remained four days watching for any
danger. They saw no signs of enemies, and they went back to Cranquebila
and got their wives and possessions. They planted fields again and built
houses at the foot of the mesita of Tamitē. Men also who had married at
Cranquebila came to them there and built houses and planted fields, and
also those who had married at Sandia, and at Santa Ana. They built up a
pueblo at the foot of Tamitē, and the men of Santo Domingo came there
and took wives from that pueblo. The pueblo grew, and the people decided
to go to Ka'taishtia (mesa above San Felipe). They flourished there and
it became a large pueblo. The men of Cranquebila used to come there and
take wives from that pueblo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_199"></span>[186:1](tci110.htm#fr_200) Informant 4.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[187:1a](tci110.htm#fr_201) Cp. [p.
124](tci067.htm#page_124), Notes, [p. 224](tci125.htm#page_224).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Coming of the Mexicans](tci111)
