[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci099)  [Next](tci101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE BLIND ONE AND THE LAME ONE <span id="fr_188"></span>[5](#fn_187)

There, somewhere above in the southwest, lived two brothers--men. They
went hunting rats. The one could not see and the other could not walk.
The one who could not walk was carried on the back of the one who could
not see. He was the one who carried him on his back. But this one who
could not see told (the other one) where to go. He was the one who told
him. One day they went hunting rats. This one who could see was the one
to find the rats. When he found them, he told the other one who could
not see, and he was the one who took them out. One day they killed many.
They built a fire. Now the fire had burnt out. Then he told him to put
the rats on and to cook them. Then the one who could not see put them on
the fire, but this one who was sitting down gave him a stick to turn
them over with it. There was very much coal. Then the rats made a noise
of bursting, but this one was scared. The one who could not walk got up
and ran away, but the one who could not see opened his eyes and also ran
away. Then he was told, "Please, do not shut your eyes and do not sit
down again," they were told. Thus they became well. That is all.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

### VARIANT <span id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_188)

Two men were living together in the west. One was blind, and the other
was lame. The blind one carried the lame one and when they came to the
nests of the wood rats, the blind man put the lame one down and he
trapped the rats. This is the way they got their living--one to carry,
one to catch the wood rats. The lame man got the meals ready for both.
Sometimes they played tricks on each other. Sometimes the lame man told
the blind man to go in the wrong direction, and he would bump his head
against a fir tree, or fall into an arroyo. Then the lame man would
call, "Come back, brother. I sent you off in the wrong direction." In
this way they spent time. The blind man would tell the other, "Get up,
walk." He would place his brother in such a way that he could come over
to his brother. (The lame one had shortened leg tendons; he had cramps.)

One day they went out again. When they found a wood rat's nest, the
blind man set the lame man down and tried to tell the blind man just
where to get the wood rats. The blind man said, "Get up and help me." In
this way they passed the day again and got wood rats for food. They
always talked of getting cured and the blind one said, "Some day I'll
get my sight back, and you'll get your legs."

The next day they went out hunting again. The blind man said, "What
would you do if you got well!" "Yes; if you had your sight, we would
live well together." They killed big rats and were happy because they
would have a big meal again. They thought they got on very well, one of
them blind and one of them lame.

The next day they went hunting again, the blind man carrying the lame
one. They came, to the wood rat's nest and it happened that the rat was
the biggest they had ever killed. They pulled out the rat and threw it
on the coals. All the time they were saying, "Well, my brother, what
would it be like if you should get your sight!" "And you your legs!" The
rat was roasting when it suddenly burst. They were scared. The lame man
ran, the blind one opened his eyes; the bursting cured them. The blind
one told the lame one, "Don't sit down, you'll get cramps again." The
lame one said, "Don't shut your eyes. Keep them open, you'll get blind
again." So they were cured. The blind man said, "Oh brother, I can see."
The lame man said, "Oh brother, I can walk." They lived together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_187"></span>[166:5](tci100.htm#fr_188) Recorded in text by
Franz Boas. Informant 8. Notes, [p. 244](tci127.htm#page_244).

<span id="fn_188"></span>[167:2](tci100.htm#fr_189) Informant 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Six Boys](tci101)
