[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci102)  [Next](tci104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### TIED TO THE COW'S TAIL <span id="fr_193"></span>[2](#fn_192)

There were three men. Two of them were brothers, and one was a friend of
theirs. They all went out hunting together in the mountains. "We are all
three to go and hunt only deer." Next morning they started off, and came
to the high mountains. When they were almost up, the elder brother said
to the younger, "Go a little farther off. I will go in the middle and my
friend will go a. little distance beyond me and we will begin to hunt."
The elder brother got to the level mesa and there he saw a great big
grasshopper. The grasshopper hopped over to his chest and sat there. His
friend was watching. He waved to his friend and he stretched out his
arms and said, "Maybe this is the deer. He has horns! Shoot him." So his
friend shot the grasshopper. He fell dead. His friend came, running up
and cried, "I have killed a deer!" He sat on top of him and then he saw
it was his friend. He began to cry, "My dear friend, I have shot you.
You shall not die alone. I will die with you." A cow was lying a little
way off. He had a rope and he tied it around his own neck. The other end
he tied to the cow's tail. He tied it tight and then he hit the cow a
great blow. The cow was frightened and ran off. She dragged him until at
last he was all in pieces.

Up came the younger brother. He said to himself, "I see a great cloud of
dust. Perhaps it is the others chasing deer. I shall follow that track
till I get to the great dust." He got where a leg was. "Oh yes, that is
what it is, for here is the hind quarter. They're going on for more
deer." He went on and he came to another leg. "Both hind quarters." He
went on, and he found the two arms. "Fore quarters." At last he came, to
the cow standing there all tired out. The head was still tied to her by
the rope. "Oh! it is my brother!" And he said to the cow, "Why did you
kill my brother?" The cow said, "I am not the one who killed him. He
tied himself to me, and he hit me and told me to run off fast. A little
way off he had killed another man. Perhaps that was your

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

brother. I was lying down near where your brother was standing. He
called to his friend and told him a deer was on his chest. His friend
shot the deer and he killed him. You don't believe me," said the cow,
"I'll take you to the place." "All right."

He took up the head and started off. On his way he, picked up the arms,
legs, stomach, liver, heart and piled them all together. Got to the
place where his brother was killed. He saw he was shot right in the,
chest. "Look at him," said the cow. "This is where he shot him. I was
lying right there. Go and see where it was. As he killed his friend he
began to cry. Then he went back and got the rope and tied it around my
tail. He hit me and told me to run as fast as the wind. That is the way
he got killed."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[176:2](tci103.htm#fr_193) Informant 1. Notes,
[p. 245](tci127.htm#page_245).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Devil Woman](tci104)
