[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tci126)  [Next](tci128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

# V. EUROPEAN TALES

The European tales in this collection include a number that are seldom
reported from the American Indians. Among those tales, on the other
hand, that are widely distributed, John the Bear, the comradeship of the
lame man and the blind, the noodle tales and the amusingly confused tale
of the Swan Maidens stand out conspicuously.

In contrast, for instance, with Zuñi European tales, the whole
collection has been subjected to comparatively little change in the
Cochiti versions. The life that is mirrored is not pueblo life, but a
bastard version of European conditions centuries ago; robbers steal
doors and let them fall from trees on people below (in a country that
aboriginally did not have doors at all, and where rocks and not trees
are places of refuge), the halfwit ties himself to a cow's tail (where
cows are never kept), they take to court suit about a spoon, the heroes
hire out to kings, and the bride and groom go to visit his parents in a
buggy. For this reason, I have not used these tales in the discussion of
domestic life as it is mirrored in Cochiti mythology. The abstracts of
these European tales are included, rather, as an indication of the hold
of European culture in the Rio Grande.

Other obviously European tales in this collection are: The Contest of
Good-tasting Fat, [p. 7](tci008.htm#page_7); The Origin of the Cat, [p.
154](tci090.htm#page_154); The Woodrat and Mouse Challenge One Another,
[p. 155](tci091.htm#page_155); and many of the stock incidents of the
witch and coyote tales.

## NOODLE TALES

### THE LAME MAN AND THE BLIND

(4 versions; *a* Boas, p. 166; *b* Benedict, Informant 1, [p.
163](tci099.htm#page_163); *c* Benedict, informant 3, [p.
165](tci099.htm#page_165); *d* Benedict, informant 3, [p.
167](tci100.htm#page_167))

The favorite Southwest story of the lame man and the blind is recorded
in four versions, of which one is the introduction to a noodle series.

A lame and a blind man (brothers, *a*) lived together in the West. They
lived upon wood rats, which they killed together (upon birds which they
lured by bird calls produced on a taut hair, *d*). The weak lame man
directed the strong blind man, who carried him about to the traps. (They
made practical jokes about each other's infirmity, and always speculated
on how nice it would be if each were cured, *b*). One day they trapped
unusually large wood rats (got good

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

supply of birds, *d*) which burst unexpectedly when they roasted them
over the fire. Startled, the blind man opened his eyes and the lame man
ran. They had been cured, but they continued to live together.

### THE HALFWIT

(2 versions: *a* Benedict, informant 1, [p. 163](tci099.htm#page_163);
*b* Benedict, Informant 3, [p. 167](tci100.htm#page_167))

Version *b* is the continuation of the story of the lame and blind man
(version *d* above); version *a* follows the usual outline and is the
tale of a halfwit boy and his grandmother. The two versions are the same
except for order and for the final incident. I give an abstract of
version *a*.

Ginini (halfwit) lived with his old grandmother. One day she sent him
for wood, telling him to bring in "the gray" (i. e., well dried) sticks,
and to lie down whenever it got too dark to travel. He found the (gray)
bones of a horse and brought back a load. When the sun set he was at the
foot of his own ladder, so he slept there, where his grandmother found
him in the morning.

Next day she sent him to the give-away dance at Sia. He stopped at an
ant hill (*si'a*, ant), and spread out the skin and took what the ants
brought him, receiving many bites. His grandmother scolded him when he
arrived home. The next day she sent him to gather locusts on the piñon
trees. He saw a Jemez Indian gathering pitch, and he killed him for a
"locust." His grandmother made him take the body back when he brought it
to her. Next he was told to finish the hoeing in the fields. His
grandmother carefully explained how he was to do the "throwing up." He
found a snake and threw this up all day long. When his grandmother went
to see the results of his work, she found the bruised snake. She felt
pity for the snake because he had killed it.

A more unusual Southwest noodle tale is the following:

### TIED TO THE COW'S TAIL

Two brothers and a friend went hunting. They separated to find deer. A
big grasshopper jumped on the chest of one of the brothers, and was shot
by the friend, who thought it was a deer. When he saw that he had killed
his friend he felt remorseful and declared that he should not die alone.
He tied himself to a cow's tall, struck the cow a blow and was dragged
to death. The younger brother saw the dust, and, thinking it was caused
by a deer, followed. He found various members of the body, and still
considered them parts of the deer. When he came to the cow, he inquired
why she had killed him, but the cow enlightened him as to his error, and
declared that the man had taken his own life In this fashion. His
brother collected all the scattered parts of the body ([p.
176](tci102.htm#page_176)).

### JOHN THE BEAR

(2 versions: *a* Boas, p. 167; *b* Benedict, Informant 1, [p.
169](tci101.htm#page_169).)

The first part of the tale is told only in version *b*.

A man and his wife had no child. They prayed and finally the man went to
the mountains to make offerings there. A bear met him in answer to his
prayer, and exchanged beds with him for the night. The man's wife bore a

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

son whom they called Sanosa. He was half bear and half human. The boy
grew up always asking for his father. Finally his mother directed him to
the bear. He lived with him. His bear father got human food
mysteriously. Sanosa went out to get work and was employed by a king,
*b*.

With five others he worked in the mountains. Each of them took turns
cooking for the rest. An old woman used to appear when everything was
ready and eat it all up, while the man who had cooked slept. The third
day she was overcome by the half bear, who slept only on his human side.
She begged for her life, promising him six girls whom she had shut up
and would give him. She went [back](errata.htm#2) into her hole. When
the others returned they tried letting themselves down the hole on a
rope. The first two were afraid to go all the way down and shook the
rope as a signal to be hauled back. (Half Bear went down, and tied a
bell to the rope as a signal, *b*.) The half bear then went down (taking
a stone with which he was able to overcome, *a*; he killed the old woman
and found her heart of cactus, *b*). He reached the girls. They were all
hoisted up the rope, but the boy they did not bring up. After three days
he succeeded in getting out but he never found the others.

### THE THREE BROTHERS (SWAN MAIDENS)

(2 versions: *a* Boas, p. 170; *b* Benedict, informant 1, omitted.)

Three brothers set out to seek work in other pueblos. They came to a
forked road and each went a different way. The eldest met a coyote on
the road, who asked for food. This he refused and sent her to his
brother who was traveling on the middle road. He, in turn, sent her on
to the youngest brother who gave her his last piece of bread. For his
generosity the coyote advised him to go farther south to a certain
stream and follow his directions. He did so, and threw crumbs on the
water for the fishes to feed from. Presently three maidens in the form
of doves came to bathe. He seized the clothes of the youngest and
prettiest. When she was unable to find her clothes the eldest daughter
(the youngest, *b*) asked him to find her ring lost in the spring, which
he secured by the aid of the fishes. (All of the sisters gave him tokens
of marriage, *a*.) He was received by their father, the king, as the
husband of the youngest after showing the tokens, and sorting peas,
beans, and wheat by the help of ants, *a*. After a time the boy
remembered his parents, and planned to return to them with his wife.
(Her parents gave her a hollow cane to supply her needs, *b*.) They
drove in a buggy and when they came near his home they sent a message
ahead by a cottontail rabbit which was caught by the family and the
message read. The poverty stricken house was replaced that night by a
fine one, well stocked by means of the wife's magic cane, *a*, *b*.

(One of the brothers became jealous, killed his younger brother, and
told his wife that he had been shot while hunting. She was suspicious,
found him and restored him to life with the cane, and they lived happily
together again, *b*.)

### THE DEVIL MOTHER

Two sisters, Oheania and Okuronita, lived in Tiputse. The younger
sister, who married first, had a child, and when she was lying in, her
husband and sister took turns watching her so that she would not be
alone. Just before dinner her sister, who was on duty, went to get water
intending to be gone only a moment. At the river a fish called to her to
come and see the stomach she had lost when she was washing it. She ran
after it, but it was only

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

fooling her. In the meantime a devil woman came to her sister, and under
the Pretense of lousing her stuck a needle into her neck, and she was
immediately transformed into a dove, while the devil woman took her
place. In order to protect herself from discovery she said that the
light hurt her eyes and that she must have it shut out. The next day
when the sister was out doors a dove called and asked if Okuronita's
baby were well. The following day the husband caught the dove and the
sister pulled the needle from its head. The dove was immediately changed
into her proper shape. The husband went in and choked the devil woman,
and they were all very angry because they had been wasting on her good
things to eat ([p. 177](tci103.htm#page_177)).

### THE GIANT'S DAUGHTERS

The youngest son of a poor family ate too much and was not wanted by his
family, so his three elder brothers were told to lose him in the
mountains. The boy knew their plans so gathered food together. When
night came, the little boy climbed a tree to see if there were any
lights around, and saw a very faint one in the distance. They left their
oxen and traveled toward it. They came to the house of a giant who fed
them and placed them to sleep in a room with his daughters, planning all
the while to eat them. In the night the youngest brother exchanged the
fox skin bands which the boys wore over their heads for those of rabbit
skin which the girls wore. As a result of this exchange the giant killed
his own daughters, and the boys escaped. They came to the house of a
woman who gave the little boy a piece of glass to throw behind them when
they were pursued, so that it would splinter and the passage would be
difficult. They met Grandmother Spider who gave them a root to chew and
spit behind when the giant got near them. Another old woman gave them a
needle, and a fourth a piece of glass which would form a sheet of ice.
So the boys escaped through their assistance, and the giant fell on the
ice and could not get up ([p. 178](tci104.htm#page_178)).

### THE DOOR FALLS FROM THE TREE UPON THE ROBBERS

An old man and woman who were afraid of robbers decided to go where it
was safe. While on their journey, when they were eating under a tree,
they heard a noise made by approaching soldiers. They took refuge in the
tree, but were discovered by the urine of the woman. The old man had
carried the door of his house, and they let it fall to frighten the
soldiers and so escaped. They met a little boy who was about to take
them to his home, when an old witch invited them to hers. The old man
was suspicious and thought that the witch was going to steal from them.
He told her that they were seeking for their long lost boy, and stole
away in the night. At last they came to a safe place ([p.
180](tci106.htm#page_180)).

### OPEN SESAME

The younger of the three brothers who worked in the silver mines was
lazy and envious of the others, for they brought home much silver. He
followed them one day, after they refused to tell him how they secured
their loads. He hid in a pine tree, and found that they commanded the
door of the mine to open, and when they had finished, to close. After
his brothers had left he commanded the door to open, but while he was in
the mine, robbers came, found him there, killed him and took all the
money, hanging his body in the tree. He was found

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

by his brothers and carried home. On the way they met an old woman who
was inquisitive to find out whose body they were carrying. Her husband
observed her, was jealous, and struck her dead. This was reported to the
governor who sent his men to arrest the man. (Unfinished, [p.
181](tci107.htm#page_181).)

### HALF ROOSTER

Half Rooster came down with the people from the pueblo on the mesa. An
old woman gave him food, and shortly he returned saying that she had
taken his spoon. She denied this and he took it to court before the
king. On his way he met Lion, Bear, Wolf, Grinding Stone, Fire, Water.
They wanted to go with him and he took them all into his arse and
carried them along. He got to the court of the king. The king had him
shut in a den of wild horses, and he ordered Lion out to kill them; of
wild bulls, and Bear killed them; of two dangerous mules, and Wolf
killed them. They shut him in the church to freeze, and he ordered
Grinding Stone to break all the pictures and santus. They tried to bury
him in ice, but Fire melted it. They made a great pyre for him, and when
it was lit Water put it out. The king took him into his house to live
with him ([p. 182](tci107.htm#page_182)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Place of Emergence](tci128)
