[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tci121)  [Next](tci123.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

# DISCUSSION

### INTRODUCTION

These tales were recorded in a native house in Cochiti open to all
comers. This means, of course, to those who know the pueblos, that this
is a selected group of tales. It includes the hero tales, the animal
tales, the remade European tales, but only the culminating incident of
the origin tale. There is no story in this volume like the one recorded
in Washington from a visiting Acoma priest by Matthew W. Stirling, and
no elaborate ritualistic tales such as we have, for instance, from
Laguna, in Professor Boas's text of the Girl and the Witches, <span
id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_216.md) and only less clearly from San Juan in
Doctor Parsons's variant of the Deserted Child Guided by Awl. <span
id="fr_218"></span>[2](#fn_217.md) The absence of stories of these two
types in this collection is by no means to be set down to their absence
in Cochiti, but to the taboo that makes it disloyalty to tell them to
the whites, even when the white friend is accepted and valued.

The origin tale appears here only in unsatisfactory fragments, but in
spite of the fact that the Rio Grande taboo against the whites is
directed particularly against their seeing a masked dancer or a masked
dance, there is no blanket taboo against katcina tales and accounts of
katcina dancing.

The translations by Professor Boas are especially valuable in that they
give the mythological style of the Rio Grande, its prolixity, its
meticulousness in the matter of greetings and farewells, its elaborate
specifications of directions, and its comparatively simple sentences.

Besides the texts collected by Professor Boas, and the tales I
collected, the former of which appear in translation and the latter in
the form in which they were recorded in the present volume, the
abstracts discussed here include the only other folkloristic material
that is available from Cochiti, the tales gathered by Father Noël
Dumarest before 1900. <span id="fr_219"></span>[3](#fn_218.md)

I have grouped the abstracts to show: (1) the mythological concepts of
Cochiti, their notion of creation, so far as we know it, their

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

pantheon, and the first people; (2) its hero tales, identifying the
various hero personalities and their exploits; (3) the fictionalized
versions of pueblo life that constitute the great bulk of their
folklore, emphasizing the situations that have seemed to them vivid or
poignant enough to be singled out of their daily life for novelistic
treatment. With these tales I have included the little animal fables and
moral tales, which are a noticeable Cochiti development; (4) animal
tales, emphasizing the character ascribed to the animal actors; (5) the
European tales, which in their slight modification from their prototypes
are an excellent indication of the amount of European influence to which
the pueblo has been exposed; (6) the "true stories" or Cochiti versions
of history. This last group I have not abstracted.

The greater part of this body of folklore falls into the group I have
called fiction, and which consists of novelized versions of pueblo
incidents. It is of the greatest importance in the understanding of most
mythology to accept folklore of this sort for what it is. The cultures
we see reflected in bodies of myths are often so alien to us and the
plots so unfamiliar that it escapes us that the bizarre tale is really a
novelistic treatment of some often recurring situation among that
people. Or we become so engrossed in tracking the distribution of an
incident that we forget to see that in a given tribe it is made a part
of a deeply felt conjugal crisis, and in another of the shameful
abandonment of a child. We have been misled also by the comparative
ossification of European folklore, and drift easily into the assumption
that myth preserves out-dated customs or philosophy. This is a
characteristic rather of folklore that has become formal and
stereotyped, not of a living folklore. While the folkloristic impulse is
still active among any people they are likely to turn constantly to
their own daily life for themes. This is markedly true in Cochiti. In so
far as myth is of value for the study of culture, it is precisely from
this angle that we must read their tales.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_216"></span>[201:1](tci122.htm#fr_217.md) Keresan Texts, by
Franz Boas. Publications of the American Ethnological Society, Vol.
VIII, pt. 1. New York, 1928, p. 56. Quoted Boas.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[201:2](tci122.htm#fr_218.md) Tewa Tales, by Elsie
Clews Parsons. Memoirs of the American Folklore Society. New York, 1926,
p. 52. Quoted Parsons.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[201:3](tci122.htm#fr_219.md) Loc. cit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Origin Tales and Stories of the Katcinas and the
Societies](tci123.md)
