[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tci129)  [Next](tci131.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

### THE TURQUOISE CAVE <span id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_229.md)

There in the southeast at Yah’ats' somewhere below, the people are
inside. In the middle stands up a pure turquoise. The post of turquoise
standing in the middle is habitually being hewed by those who are
inside, who are in Yah’ats'. Men and girls were inside together.

There was one youth who presented turquoise to a Yellow Woman. He gave
turquoise to win her love. Then it happened thus from above to all those
who were inside, all the people. Oh my! the poor ones were shut in
somewhere below. They shouted. Then the cacique spoke thus, "Oh my! said
he, "probably you have done mischief, boys," said the chief. Here we are
all below, shut up. Now everything came down," said the chief. "Maybe
somebody gave turquoise to win love," said the chief. "For this reason I
told you it is not good to give turquoise to win love," said the chief.
Then he called Ma\*'s’ewa and O'yoyewa. Then the chief spoke thus,
"Ma\*'s’ewa and O'yoyewa, now we have all been shut up inside," said the
chief. "Some one probably gave turquoise to win love," said he. He told
Ma\*'s’ewa; he told both of them. Then Ma\*'s’ewa spoke thus. Ma\*'s’ewa
and O'yoyewa questioned all the men and boys who were inside, "Now this
here trapped all of us," said Ma\*'s’ewa. Then both asked all the boys,
"Someone gave turquoise to win love, therefore this happened below here
to our house," said Ma\*'s’ewa. Then that one boy spoke thus, "Indeed
Ma\*'s’ewa and O'yoyewa, fathers, chiefs," said he, "I beg your pardon,
Ma\*'s’ewa and O'yoyewa," said he, "I gave turquoise to that Yellow
Woman," said he. "Now it has trapped all of us here," said he. "I did
something that was not good," said that boy. Then Ma\*'s’ewa spoke thus,
"Oh wonder! oh my!" said Ma\*'s’ewa, "for that reason you told them well
that nobody should give turquoise to win love. It is not good. Now
to-day the kopishtaya trapped us below here," said Ma\*'s’ewa. "We shall
never get out. We shall remain inside," said he. "We all shall die in
here of hunger," said Ma\*'s’ewa. Then Ma\*'s’ewa told the chief,
"Indeed, this boy gave turquoise to win love. Therefore we are now all
trapped here below," said Ma\*'s’ewa. He told the chief. Then the chief
spoke thus, "Oh wonder! dear me, my children," said he. "Now you have
done mischief," said the chief. "Now the kopishtaya have trapped us here
inside, said the chief. "We shall never go out," said the chief. "We
shall die here all together of hunger," said he. "Therefore I told you
well, my children, it is not good that anyone should give this turquoise
to win love," said the chief. "It is not allowed to Yellow Woman.
Buckskin is allowed to Yellow Woman,"

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

said the chief. "Thus, now we shall never go out," said the chief.
"Below here we all together shall die of hunger and thirst," said the
chief. "Now all the kopishtaya have trapped us," said he, "the
kopishtaya, those who are very supernatural," said the chief. "These
kopishtaya who give us life," said the chief. They all were trapped
below. Then they all did thus down below. Down below they shouted. "Oh
my! the poor people below who are inside. When anyone makes moccasins
for them," said he, "when skin for shoes is given then shall we give
turquoise," they said, "somewhere down below, for if anyone asks us for
anything we shall give it to them," said those below. Then, oh my! the
poor ones, all the people died down below. They all were trapped. All
did thus down below. The kopishtaya trapped all of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_229"></span>[254:1](tci130.htm#fr_231.md) Recorded in text by
Franz Boas. See [p. 196](tci116.htm#page_196.md). Notes, [p.
236](tci125.htm#page_236.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Visit to the Underworld](tci131.md)
