[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tci124)  [Next](tci126.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

# III. NOVELISTIC TALES

The tales included in this section are all fictionized versions of
pueblo life. Insofar as we are interested, not in incident
distributions, but in myth as native comment on native life, we need to
know primarily which kind of situations in their own existence appeal to
them as plot material, how they are treated, and what cultural attitudes
they are made to express.

The tales I have grouped as hero tales are strictly a first installment
of these novelistic tales based on native life. They are separated here
only for reasons of convenience, and in the discussion of the cultural
background of the tales I have included material from both groups.

The outstanding situations in the hero tales are those of the disguised
boy triumphing over his detractors, and those of magically successful
adventure. Perhaps no situations are better adapted as wish fulfillments
to the majority of the tellers of these tales. As I have pointed out,
all the heroes indiscriminately are mocked by their fellows at the
outset of the tale, usually because they live in poverty with their
grandmothers, and are unkempt in person. They turn the people's mockery
by supernaturally successful rabbit hunts, by contests of personal
beauty (long hair), of the fatherhood of a child, of food stores, in all
of which they are considered to have magic aid. (See notes, pp.
[210](tci124.htm#page_210), [216](tci124.htm#page_216.md),
[217](tci124.htm#page_217), [218](tci124.htm#page_218.md),
[219](tci124.htm#page_219)..md)

The adventures are of similar type, only they are not always prefaced by
the mockery of the people. The separation of hero tales of this type
from the novelistic tales is entirely arbitrary as can be seen in a
comparison of the two groups. My only rule has been to, group under hero
tales the stories of the standard heroes, with emphasis upon their
mythological exploits--the bringing of the shiwana, releasing them from
imprisonment, etc.

There are two striking situations, especially marked in the hero tales,
that are not paralleled in the culture so far as we know. One of these
is the contest of food stores. Corncob Boy magically obtains four store
rooms filled with corn and gourds while his opponents paint stone to
imitate these ([p. 56](tci034.htm#page_56).md); Heluta pits his undersized
corn ear against their five full store rooms ([p.
9](tci010.htm#page_9).md). It is a widespread pueblo incident.

The other situation is the marriage to multiple wives. The hero of
course always marries the chief's daughter or daughters, and usually it
is the daughters. Corncob Boy marries Heluta's two

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

daughters ([p. 51](tci033.htm#page_51).md), Poker Boy retires into his
shrine with his two wives ([p. 50](tci032.htm#page_50).md), Arrow Boy
marries the two Eagle Girls ([p. 45](tci029.htm#page_45).md), or the two
Bear Girls ([p. 111](tci058.htm#page_111).md). This folkloristic acceptance
of polygamy is striking in a civilization where monogamy is strongly
stressed, so far as we can see, in old native culture as well as in
Catholic teaching. There is evidence of more feeling of discomfort in
Cochiti in the face of this anomaly than, for example, in Zuñi where the
same pattern is very strong. In Cochiti in a number of cases the hero
marries only the elder of two sisters. Afterwards he and the younger
sister fall in love with each other--this is always expressed as the
younger sister's stealing him--and the elder sister ceremonially commits
suicide by taking the form of a snake.

## TALES OF CONFLICT BETWEEN HUSBAND AND WIFE

### THE DESERTED WIFE KILLS HER HUSBAND AND SISTER AS A SNAKE

The younger of two sisters was stealing the husband of the other. A
rabbit hunt was called, and the younger sister went with the husband,
leaving the elder one at home to grind. The wife, wishing to know what
was occurring, took a bowl of clear water, and set it in the middle of
the floor. She looked into it, and saw the husband with her sister in
his lap. She took a basket and sat in it. She turned into a spotted
house snake. When these two came home, she bit them so that they died.
When people found her turned into a snake, she asked them to put her
somewhere where she could live always, so two medicine men took her to
Gaskunkutcinako (maiden's cave). That is why there are so many snakes
there, and why little pots are taken to her there as an offering ([p.
115](tci060.htm#page_115).md).

### THE DESERTED WIFE MAKES WAY WITH HERSELF BY BECOMING A SNAKE.

Arrow Boy shows preference for his wife's younger sister and his wife
goes into the inner room, sits in a basket and becomes a snake. The
Flint Society are summoned but can not restore her and she is taken to
"The Maiden's Cave" ([p. 95](tci049.htm#page_95).md).

In other tales the two sisters contest as to which shall have the
husband by the stock women's test in the Southwest: meal ground so fine
that it will adhere to a polished perpendicular surface. (pp.
[45](tci029.htm#page_45), [49](tci031.htm#page_49.md); notes, pp.
[216](tci124.htm#page_216), [217](tci124.htm#page_217)..md)

The conventional folkloristic pattern of multiple wives (see above)
contrasts violently with the tales of the wife's jealousy in the less
formal novelistic tales:

### THE FIGHT OF THE TWO WIVES

A Cochiti girl stole the affections of an Uwashka man. The wife, seeing
her husband take moccasins to her rival, followed him into the field,
and caught them together at sunset. She fell upon the woman, threw
stones at her and ripped off her clothes. The husband deserted his wife
([p. 114](tci059.htm#page_114).md).

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

A variant is told as introduction to the Deer and the Lost Child.

A woman whose baby was still in arms followed her husband to another
pueblo where she suspected him of carrying on an amour. She brought him
home in disgrace (pp. [75](tci041.htm#page_75.md),
[77](tci041.htm#page_77), note 1.md).

### THE HUSBAND TRANSFORMED INTO A SNAKE

In Cochiti four sisters lived together. The eldest was married. The
sisters all had babies, born at the same time, by the same father. The
wife, in order to avenge her husband's unfaithfulness, took her medicine
stone, and promising him a pretty gift, rolled it to him. He was turned
into a snake. The wife left her sisters and nobody knew where she went
([p. 96](tci050.htm#page_96).md).

### HE HUSBAND TRANSFORMED INTO A DOG

A hunter and his wife were living at Potsherd Place. The wife became
tired because he brought home so much game, took him down to the corral
and scared him so that he turned into a dog. She turned him loose to
hunt for his food (pp. [95](tci049.htm#page_95.md),
[123](tci067.htm#page_123).md).

### THE DEER AND THE LOST CHILD

(3 versions: *a* Boas, p. 72; *b* Benedict, Informant 2, [p.
75](tci041.htm#page_75.md); *c* Benedict Informant 1, [p.
77](tci041.htm#page_77).md)

The calamities that follow a couple who have been unfaithful and jealous
are pictured in this tale.

A hunter, whose wife had a new born baby, went to San Ildefonso to see
other women, instead of hunting deer. She became suspicious. One day she
followed him. When he got to Old Mesa, she came to the big arroyo, and
laid the baby on the bank while she went on. She found her husband in
one of the houses and asked him to go home with her. When they came to
the place where the baby had been left they found it gone. *b*, *c*.
(Version *a* does not give the motive of the wife.)

The father followed the deer tracks to (a cave in the mountains, *a*,
*c*, lake into the underworld, and came out into a meadow of melons,
squash, pumpkins, and corn. He came to a pond where there were many
katcinas roasting yellow corn. They jumped with fright at the popping of
the corn. They directed him to the chief of the Deer, who censured him
for his conduct and his wife's. He was shown many fawns and picked out
the littlest as his baby, *b*. He went back to the pueblo and called a
council, and asked for help, for he could not find the baby and deer. He
made prayer sticks, took sacred meal and prayed where they had
disappeared. A voice told him that the baby had been lost because of the
jealousy of his wife. The door opened and the man found his son. As they
gave the child to him, they told him that he must not let it out of his
arms on the way home, *c*. The hunter brought him home (to the Giant
Society and they shut him up with them for four days, *b*). He was not
to see his father or mother for four days. All the openings were
plastered up. The mother broke the retreat just before the fourth day,
and the child ran off as a deer and was never recovered, *a*, *b*. The
father set the child down while he went to ease himself on the way home,
and the child was lost, *c*.)

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

### THE WIFE TAKES VENGEANCE UPON HER HUSBAND AND HIS PUEBLO BY MEANS OF CHILDREN WHOM SHE BEARS MIRACULOUSLY

(3 versions: *a* Benedict, informant 3, [p. 123](tci067.htm#page_123.md);
*b* Benedict, informant 4, [p. 125](tci067.htm#page_125.md); *c* Benedict,
informant 1, [p. 120](tci066.htm#page_120)..md)

This wandering and popular tale has as its central situation the
vengeance taken by a wife upon her husband. She had been turned out of
the pueblo by him, was impregnated at a waterfall, and her numerous
children raze the pueblo from which she was expelled.

The wife became tired because he brought home so much game. She took him
down to the corral, and jumped at him so that he turned into a dog. She
turned him loose to hunt for his food. He came to a witch house. They
recognized him as a transformed human being and restored him. They gave
him medicine to use against his wife and told him how to overcome her,
*a*.

The hunter took vengeance upon his wife because she did not pray nor
remain continent while he was hunting, *c*.

He dressed her like a Ute Indian (cut her hair off, painted her hair
red, *a*) and sent her to get water. As she was returning he warned the
people against her so that she was cast out of the pueblo, *a*, *b*,
*c*.

She wandered toward the north, and was impregnated by water (at the
place of the water falls, *c*). She bore child after child until she had
a whole army who took vengeance upon the village from which she had been
cast out, and destroyed the pueblo. (They asked their mother who their
father was, *c*.)

The pueblo was utterly destroyed, only one baby girl was left alive. A
pet parrot found her and cared for her. Parrot Mother chewed piñon nuts
for her food. She did not allow the little girl to look outside the
house because corpses were piled in the plaza. When she saw them she
refused to stay there any longer, and went in search of other people,
Parrot Mother guiding her on her shoulder (carrying Mother Corn in her
hand. A great butterfly came from the sky and clothed the girl. They met
Buzzard and he guided them, *b*). They settled at Cochiti *b*, Sandia,
*a*, *c*. (Version *a* adds that an evil katcina stole her when she was
getting water, set her tasks which she accomplished, so that they lived
together happily.) See also [p. 187](tci110.htm#page_187.md), where this
incident is part of an historical tale.

The amount of initiative allowed to women in all situations of life is
very striking in these tales. This may be due in part to the fact that
three of the principal informants were women. This fact should certainly
be taken into account in connection with the detailed description of the
processes of carding, spinning, dyeing, and weaving in the tale of the
Industrious Daughter ([p. 79](tci042.htm#page_79).md). Perhaps also it is
in the same light that the numerous descriptions of the bringing in of a
deer should be considered. They are always told from the point of view
of the woman. She is called out to help bring it in, she places it in
front of the fireplace, feeds it with sacred meal, formally thanks her
husband and sets out food for him (pp. [66](tci038.htm#page_66.md),
[87](tci046.htm#page_87), etc..md). But even in this last example, my
impression is that an equal number of men story-tellers would tell the
story in the same way. Certainly in most of the stories just quoted the
amount of initiative

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

allowed to women in conjugal situations is a characteristic of the
culture, not merely a stylistic affair of story-telling. In actual life
too, as well as in the stories, it would be women who fought together in
a quarrel over a man, not men who fought in a quarrel over a woman. Just
as it is the woman who ceremonially commits suicide in the tales when
she loses her husband's affections, so in the gossip of the pueblo I
heard tales of women who died in similar cases, but none of men.

The tales of conjugal dangers arising from the fact that one of the
spouses is a witch are closely allied to the tales considered here and
should be studied in this connection. (pp. [90](tci047.htm#page_90.md)-97,
notes, [p. 232](#page_232)..md)

## TALES OF AMOROUS WOMEN

Amorous women are common in the tales.

### PURSUIT BY THE WITCH

A hunter overtaken by night followed a light and was invited in by
Yellow Woman. She offered him a skull to eat, but he only pretended to
eat it. He made a pretext of easing himself and went outside, but she
tied him with her belt so that he should not escape. He tied the belt to
his excrement and escaped. She pursued him through four kivas, where he
took refuge among the shamans performing ceremonies. Finally the Flint
Society saved him and killed the woman ([p. 101](tci052.htm#page_101).md).

### THE NAVAHO GIRL'S LOVER

The incident of the girl who used to go out to lie with a cactus is
attributed to a Navaho girl ([p. 119](tci065.htm#page_119).md).

In a similar vein it is Old Beaver Woman's pleasure in intercourse that
is stressed, not Old Coyote Man's ([p. 136](tci073.htm#page_136.md); notes,
[p. 236](#page_236).md).

### THE GIRL WHO REFUSED OFFERS OF MARRIAGE

The initiative allowed to women in Cochiti life is especially striking
in the stories of the girl who refuses to marry. The common Southwest
treatment of this theme involves the punishment of the girl. She must be
trapped into marrying Coyote or into promiscuous intercourse. This is
consistent also with Cochiti feeling.

### LOCUST BOY

The daughter of a cacique refused to marry all the young men who asked
her. They became angered, so they sent Locust Boy who was ugly and bald
to woo her. He made a wig and so transformed himself into a handsome
boy. The girl married him, but one night awoke and saw the wig and her
ugly husband. She ran away from him, but she was pregnant and when her
six children were born, they were all bald like locusts. Thus she was
punished for her refusal to marry ([p. 85](tci043.htm#page_85).md).

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

The most often told tales on this theme in Cochiti, however, are the
ones that end happily. They are not so much tales of punishment of the
girl for her presumption as of how she was blessed with a supernatural
husband or was happily rescued from danger. Even the widespread story of
this girl's marriage with Coyote has been drawn into this pattern, so
that he figures rather as a supernatural.

### THE INDUSTRIOUS DAUGHTER

The daughter of aged parents decided she must do something to help the
family. She decided to pick up the scraps of cotton which had been
thrown away, and these she combed and spun, and wound the yarn into
balls from which she knitted a pair of footless stockings. Then she made
openwork stockings from the scraps of cotton she picked up. Next she
made a white manta, and embroidered it. While she was working on this
she had many suitors whom she refused because she was caring for herself
and her parents. She continued her work, making a ball-fringed sash, a
dancer's sash-belt. She dyed her yarn in urine in which she stirred
powdered indigo stone and stretched it over the rafter beams. Then the
girl told her parents to go out and sell what she had made. They were
very successful in disposing of what she had made, and she continued to
weave sashes and mantas, which were sold to all the people in the
village. When every one in the village had a complete dancer's costume
they held a great dance before her house to see with whom she would
dance, but when the rainbow dance came she would not lift her head or
pay any attention to it, but kept on working. She would marry none of
the young men who came to ask her, saying that she knew how to make the
sashes and mantas which they brought her, in fact had made these same
ones. They tried to attract her by painting rainbows on the walls of
their houses, and decorating them with birds and sunflowers. She liked
none of these. They planted corn of many colors to win her, but she
cared for none of it, so they decided not to bother with her any more.
Coyote decided that he would win her by offering her nothing but a
branch of black currants gotten from the mountains. He went to his house
and collected all the articles of his dancing costume, and got a branch
of currants. He went to an empty house in the village and donned his
clothing, stamping four times as he put on each article and saying, "Do
I look pretty? Yes, I look pretty." Then he went to dance in the center
of Little Plaza. The girl left her work when she heard him singing, and
asked him for his branch of currants. The boys of the village were
provoked that she would let him sleep with her for such a small gift.
They were married, and after a time she gave birth to a coyote. Her
husband took his wife and child to his home, which at first seemed but a
small hole, but when she entered, the girl found it as good as her own,
and as richly supplied with clothing ([p. 79](tci042.htm#page_79).md).

### COYOTE MARRIES THE GIRL

A girl refused to marry. Four boys came in succession, each bringing a
bundle, but she would not have any one of them. Coyote was living at
White Mountain, and when he heard of this, he decided to try to marry
her. He 'dressed himself for the dance, and went to the hill to get
kapolin berries. He went to the village, and when the girl saw him, she
said to her parents that there was a beautiful boy ready to dance in the
plaza, and that he carried a branch of kapolin berries. She asked him
for them, and took him to her house.\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

They were married. She had two children who were half coyote and half
human. When they were big enough to walk, their father took them to
White Mountain with him, but their mother had to stay with her people
([p. 83](tci043.htm#page_83).md).

A shorter variant is of the same tenor. Though she bears Coyote
children, both she and Coyote bring up these children and this was the
origin of blue coyotes ([p. 84](tci043.htm#page_84).md).

### SUN IMPREGNATION

The girl who refuses to marry is impregnated by the sun. Sun makes his
child a katcina. He comes back to the pueblo, dances with his mother,
and takes her to Sun, his father. ([p. 31](tci026.htm#page_31.md), notes,
[p. 214](tci124.htm#page_214).md).

### THE TWO BROTHERS RECOVER THEIR SISTER FROM THE WITCHES

A girl who from birth had firmly refused to marry was killed by one of
her suitors who was a witch. The witches stole her from her grave and
brought her to life again that they might have promiscuous intercourse
with her and shame her. Her brothers had been watching her grave and had
followed the witches. They broke in and rescued her. She had learned her
lesson: that girls should accept their proposals of marriage. (pp.
[99](tci051.htm#page_99), [100](tci052.htm#page_100.md); notes, [p.
233](#page_233)..md)

(The usual punishment of promiscuous intercourse for girls who refuse
offers of marriage is in other tales detached from this story and
concludes the episode of the pursuit of a beautifully marked butterfly
by girls who wanted the pattern of its wings to paint on their pottery.
When they were unable to catch it, they lay down under a piñon tree and
slept. Coyote found them, and called the Payatamu to come, and all had
intercourse with the girls. The latter brought rabbits, corn, and melons
to pay the girls, but Coyote had none of these to give them, so he gave
them hairs from his whiskers which they used for pubic hair. Their
parents were glad of all the presents the girls brought home ([p.
85](tci043.htm#page_85).md).

### THE GIRL WHO TOOK UPON HERSELF THE DUTIES OF MEN

This initiative in women figures also as a special danger it is
advisable to avert. The story of the rabbit huntress is told in Cochiti
always of the girl who, having a lazy brother, assumes the duties of
hunting, and has her lesson brought home to her.

### GIRL HUNTRESS

(3 versions: *a* Boas, p. 21; *b* Benedict, informant 1 (omitted); *c*
Benedict, informant 3 (omitted)

A huntress supported her lazy brother by catching rabbits. One day after
a successful hunt she was pursued by a giant and trapped in a cave. She
gave him all her rabbits one by one while he tried to hook her with a
cane. When these were gone she gave up her clothing.

The Twin Heroes heard her cries. They followed them to the cave where
they shot the giant with their arrows. They opened the giant (returned
the

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

girl's clothing and rabbits, *b*; clothed her in embroidered white
manta, *c*) and exchanged his heart of cactus for one of turquoise. The
Twin Heroes took the girl to her house, and advised her brother to do
the hunting in the future. Afterwards the brother hunted for his family
and the sister stayed at home ([p. 21](tci023.htm#page_21).md).

### TALES OF UNNATURAL PARENTS

The evil consequences of neglecting or abandoning children are traced in
several types of tale.

### THE NEGLECTFUL MOTHER

(4 versions: *a* Boas, p. 88; *b* Benedict, informant 4, [p.
88](tci047.htm#page_88.md); *c* Benedict, Informant 1, [p.
89](tci047.htm#page_89.md); *d* Benedict, informant 6, [p.
90](tci047.htm#page_90)..md)

A mother was always making baskets in the kiva. She would not even stop
to nurse her baby. Its little sister brought it to the kiva again and
again, but she put her off. The little girl started with the baby for
the "drowning place." She told an old woman she met on the way, who
brought the word to her mother in the kiva. The mother ran after them,
but she was too late. (They were already sitting on the cedar tree in
the center of the drowning place and being drawn down into the water,
*a*, *d*. She was given four trials to reach her children by parting the
waters with a rod but failed. She died right there, *c*. She was given a
flint with which to cut the water but failed. She lost her children
forever, *a*. She left off basket making forever, *b*. Her children were
welcomed by the katcinas in the underworld and became katcinas, *d*.)

### MOTHER CORN GUIDES THE ABANDONED CHILDREN TO THEIR PARENTS

(2 versions: *a* Dumarest, p. 231; *b* Benedict, informant 2, [p.
77](tci041.htm#page_77)..md)

The story of children abandoned when their parents move on to some other
pueblo, often in famine, is a constantly recurring motif in Pueblo
folktales. In some way all these children find supernatural protection
and shame the mother (sometimes the parents) who have abandoned them.

When the people went south from the Place of the Recumbent Lion they
left two girls behind (one little girl, placing a corn mother by her
side to guard her, *b*). The elder found a Corn Mother (*kotona*,
perfect corn ear, used as fetish) and it spoke to her and told her not
to cry for they would follow the people and see if they could not
overtake them. She told her to carry her carefully and not drop her. But
when the little girl came to a spring (the edge of an arroyo and had to
climb down *b*) she dropped Corn Mother and knocked one grain out so
that she could not speak. Shrew Mouse (chipmunk, *b*) found her crying
and climbed down and recovered the kernel. She brought her a drink in an
acorn cup that proved inexhaustible. When they went on, a bear met them,
and the footprints of the bear and the turkeys are still to be seen.
They came to Jemez and found their parents visiting there at a dance.
They stood at the foot of the ladder and when their parents asked them
to come in, refused, answering, "You have considered us sweepings and
with the sweepings we will remain." When the house owners asked them to
come in, they did so, building roosts for their turkeys, *a* (not in
*b*). The child found her parents In Mexico. The mother had forgotten
she had left a child behind, *b*.

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

"Turkey Mother" is the same story with the omission of the rôle of
Mother Corn and of all supernatural elements:

The people left Rito de Frijoles and came to old Cochiti. They left a
girl behind them with the turkeys. She was Duck Girl. She did not want
to stay alone there so she went with the turkeys to Jemez. She did not
care to join their pueblo, because her parents did not love her, so she
stayed on the refuse pile. The people saw her, and feeling sorry for
her, took her into their pueblo with her turkeys ([p.
78](tci042.htm#page_78).md).

Compare also the conclusion of the story discussed, [p. 224](#page_224.md),
and the historical story of the destruction of San Felipe, [p.
186](tci109.htm#page_186.md).

### THE BEAR CHILDREN ARE KILLED WHEN THEY REAP THEIR FATHER'S CORN

(4 versions: *a* Boas, p. 111; *b* Dumarest 234; *c* Benedict, informant
1, [p. 111](tci058.htm#page_111); *d* Benedict, informant 2, omitted..md)

Version *d* is told of Arrow Boy.

A man who was a great hunter found himself one night after dark in the
mountains. At White Banks he saw a light in the cliff. A young girl
carried him up the bank on her back, and he stayed with the two girls.
Their father and mother were at Cochiti (for it was corn harvest time,
*c*, *d*; curing a sick person who had invoked the help of the Bears,
*b*).

When they heard their parents return the girls wrapped him in a skin and
hid him. The Bears came in with (bags of corn, *c*, *d*; with gifts
given for curing in Cochiti, *b*) on their backs. They took off their
dresses and became people. The younger daughter revealed the presence of
the hunter, and the parents welcomed him, treating him with great
courtesy. (When he took his leave in the morning they told him not to
harm his children and their mother when they came to get, corn in his
field, *a*, *b*).

He returned home (but his desire for the girls brought him back again,
and he brought his game to the Bear girls. Children were born to both.
After a time the hunter went to the pueblo promising to plant corn for
his children, and did not return, *c*, *d*). The Bears came to his
cornfield, but he called all the people of the pueblo, and pursued them.
The Grandfather Bear turned upon him and killed him. (He ripped his body
open and brought back his heart to the cave. So the Bear children had
their father living with them, *c*, *d*.)

### TALES OF ABDUCTION

One of the most constantly recurring situations is that of the husband
who seeks his wife who has been taken from him. There are a number of
stock incidents in these tales: the girl is ordinarily made way with
while she draws water, and her jar is left overturned by the river; she
is made to grind and do household duties on her arrival; her husband
finds her by help of Spider Old Woman who has only one snowbird head
that she keeps perpetually in her stew to flavor it because her grandson
is afraid of these birds and can not track them.

The simplest situation is that of the bad katcina, who holds the stolen
wife in durance from which she is rescued by her husband. The child has
supernatural powers from his father.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

### THE BAD KATCINA STEALS YELLOW WOMAN

(2 versions: *a* Boas, p. 66; *b* Benedict, informant 1, omitted.)

The husband and hero in version *b* is Arrow Boy.

Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> was an evil katcina who betrayed
women by tempting them to pick up something of his when they came to get
water. He took them to his home in the east. If they were not quick
enough in making wafer bread, he threw them on the ice to die.

Yellow Woman went for water and picked up a kick-stock, *a*, a prismatic
crystal, *b*, and put it in her dress.
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> came up and asked for it but she
denied having it (he said, "Look, see its colors are reflected on your
chin," *b*). He took her to his home (on which a rainbow rests, *a*).
When her husband found she was gone he followed her tracks to the river
and found her jar. Spider Old Woman spoke to him. (When he put his foot
upon the entrance to her house it enlarged and he could enter, *b*.) Her
grandson never brought food and Arrow Boy trapped birds for her stew.
Again, a sister of Spider Old Woman spoke to him and gave him a root.
His next helper was Whirlwind. Whirlwind was away when Arrow Boy arrived
and his grandmother hid him under blankets. Whirlwind came in with a
rush of wind, and when he had thrown himself down to sleep Arrow Boy
prayed over him and disenchanted him, using the root Spider Woman's
sister had given him. When Whirlwind woke his grandmother said, "Do not
harm your brother, the spider boy. For his sake you are well. He has
disenchanted you." Whirlwind took him to the house of
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup>, *b*.

When he got to his village all the people mourned with him over the evil
man who had stolen his wife. He took her back with Spider Woman's help.
Cuisi'n<sup>y</sup>inaw<sup>a</sup> pursued them with thunder and
lightning, but because Yellow Woman was carrying his own child he could
not kill her. (The curing societies were in retreat praying for Arrow
Boy, and therefore he brought her home safely, *b*.) When her child was
born he had great power because he was the child of a katcina.

### SUN STEALS THE WIFE OF SHELL MAN

The same story is told of Sun's abduction of Shell Man's wife. Sun,
however, is, as usual in Cochiti tales, where he figures as a
supernatural father, not evil:

Shell Man and his wife lived at old Cochiti. When she went out for water
Sun stole her. On his search for her Shell Man was resting in a muddy
place when something crawled on him. It was Spider Woman, who told him
where his wife was and advised him to take the old road, of the two that
led to this place, for a dangerous person would meet him on the new
road. He, however, took the new road and came to Whirlwind Man's house.
His mother received Shell Man, and when her son came back from the hunt,
Shell Man fought and killed him. On the plea of the mother he pressed
his stomach and Whirlwind Man came back to life. He then took Shell Man
to the house of Sun, where he found his wife and started back with her.
They were pursued by Sun who shot arrows at her, but could not harm her
for she was carrying his child. Whirlwind Man took them as far as his
house, then they continued their journey alone. Sun, who just missed
catching them, told the woman that her child should be chief of this
people ([p. 70](tci039.htm#page_70).md).

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

### SHELL MAN RECOVERS HIS WIFE

The story of Shell Man's recovery of his wife from Payatamu is similar,
but Payatamu has not abducted her and he is not evil. He found her when
she was lost, having run after her husband's eagle, and gave her up to,
her husband after he had won the required game of hide and seek ([p.
71](tci039.htm#page_71).md).

Shell Man's wife lost her eagle and went in pursuit, taking with her a
white manta to throw over it. She came to Payatamu, who took her to his
house. Shell Man went to seek her. He came to Spider Grandmother. Her
grandson never killed any game for her, so Shell Man went hunting for
her and brought in many small birds, so that she would not have to use
her bird head any longer for the soup. She was so pleased that she told
him his wife was in the sky, and that she would take him there it he
would bring her certain things, black paint, red paint, a white
embroidered manta, etc. She crossed two owl's feathers, ordered him to
stand in the middle, and not look. Twice he disobeyed this last
injunction, but the third time they got up, and arrived where Payatamu
lived with his mother. Shell Man, Payatamu, and the mother contested in
hide and seek for the wife. Shell Man hid where the sun comes up, the
old woman in the zenith, Payatamu in the cracks of the kiva steps, in
the first round. In the end Shell Man won and secured his wife. Spider
Grandmother took them down after some unsuccessful attempts because they
opened their eyes. Shell Man lived with his wife in Tiputse.

## TALES OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS

A group of moral tales is told of the punishment that is visited upon
people who step upon bugs and snakes and beetles. One of the stories of
people who visit the world of the dead underground, is of the man who
was taken there for a reprimand for this kind of behavior ([p.
128](tci069.htm#page_128); notes, [p. 205](tci123.htm#page_205).md).

### TIP BEETLE'S REVENGE

There was a little boy who disobeyed his father and mother, and stepped
on and killed every little animal that came near him. The spirits of the
bugs and snakes were angry, and held a meeting to plan revenge. They
first chose the swiftest snake, who refused to undertake to hurt the
boy, as did the sand snake and the rattlesnake. Finally the tip beetle
consented to try. When the boy came down the road, he saw tip beetle and
kicked him, but as he kicked him, the beetle stung the boy in the middle
of the foot. A man carried him home on his back, and that night he died.
So the little bug killed him ([p. 127](tci068.htm#page_127).md).

### THE GIRL WHO STEPPED ON THE SNAKE

(2 versions: Benedict, Informant 2, [p. 126](tci068.htm#page_126.md); *b*
Benedict, Informant 1, [p. 127](tci068.htm#page_127)..md)

Powĭshke Girl lived there with her mother. She was afraid to let her go,
out because she always harmed something, especially snakes. Snake wanted
to go out but his mother was afraid that this girl might injure him.
Both

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

mothers yielded to the pleas of their children. On the road Powĭshke
Girl saw Snake. Snake tried to get out of her way, but she threw stones
at him and hurt him. His mother heard his cries of distress, as he cried
that bowlegged Powĭshke Girl had broken his back. The mother snake took
her little snake home, and went to tell the girl's mother what her
daughter had done. But the mother said that her daughter did not pay any
attention to her advice. Powĭshke Girl did not return, but that did not
cure the little snake, *a*.

Version *b* is much slighter, and pleads the girl's lack of intent to
harm as extenuation.

## WITCH TALES

The situation that appears most often in the stories of witches is that
of the husband or wife who is in danger from the fact that his spouse,
unknown to him, is a witch. The anger of these unconfessed witches is
easily aroused, and they turn their spouses over to the witches to kill.

### WITCH WIFE

(2 versions: *a* Boas, p. 90; *b* Benedict, Informant 1, [p.
91](tci048.htm#page_91)..md)

A hunter killed many deer. His wife was (tired of making mush; *a*,
angry because she had to prepare the venison, and that made her late to
the witch meeting, *b*). She turned him over to the witches to kill.
(They planned to kill him by Whirlwind, but they were unsuccessful. A
dream warned him, *b*. The game animals took him to their house and
warned and advised him, *a*.) When he returned home his wife was gone,
but she had left a (red, i. e. witch colored, *b*) Mother Corn to take
her place. He threw it against the wall and some of the kernels fell
out. He found his wife's eyes on a little shelf in the inner room and
urinated upon them. When his wife came home in the form of an owl, she
went into the inner room to exchange her eyes, but was unable to do so.
In the morning her husband found her dead. Her body had owl eyes, *a*,
*b*.

The same story is told of a husband who is a witch. Their child is
called Arrow Boy.

A woman who had lost all her children carried dinner to the Mint Society
to ask their help. They gave her prayer sticks for the kopishtaya, and
she planted them before sunrise. She was given a root by the kopishtaya
to rub upon the body of her next child and was warned against her
husband who was a witch. They gave her directions. She threw the Corn
Mother against the wall and dropped his eyes into the chamber pot. Her
husband died and the Flint Society was called to kill him ceremonially;
they cut the ground four times with an obsidian knife ([p.
92](tci048.htm#page_92).md).

### THE WITCH TRANSFORMS HER HUSBAND INTO A DOG, AND HE AVENGES HIMSELF

One night the witch wife asked her husband to go to the corral with her
and she turned him into a dog. He remained until he was weak from lack
of food, then he went out and came to a house into which he fell. They
recognized him as Bloodclot Boy, and told him that his wife was angry
because

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

he brought home set many deer and made her late for her meetings. They
covered him with a white manta and performed their ceremony and he
returned to his own shape. They gave him a crystal to roll to his wife.
When she picked it up, she became a snake, a form which she must keep
forever, for nobody had power to turn her back ([p.
95](tci049.htm#page_95).md).

### THE WITCH HUSBAND TRIES TO KILL HIS WIFE

The elder of two sisters lay sick, and the younger became suspicious of
her brother-in-law. One night, when she went to do her accustomed
grinding, she followed him to a bank, and found that he had gone to
attend a witch meeting, and also that one of the witches was trying to
gain his affection, giving him a root to put under his wife's pillow, so
that she would not recover. In the morning her sister removed the root,
foiling the plan. The same episode was repeated on the following day, as
before. The next day the man was to make his wife get up and. to take
her to a dance at the next pueblo, leaving the younger sister at home,
if possible. On the way the witch woman, in the form of a bear, was to
kill her. The sister overheard this plan, too, and prayed to the
katcina, who gave her a magic crystal which she was to throw at the bear
woman. She did this, and the bear hugged her brother-in-law to death,
and was also killed at the same time. So the sisters returned to their
pueblo and lived there ([p. 97](tci050.htm#page_97).md).

It is not only the, husband or wife who is in constant danger from the
machinations of witches. All ordinary life is lived under this threat. A
very popular story tells of the vengeance of the witches upon the girl
who refused offers of marriage.

### THE GIRL WHO WOULD NOT MARRY IS RESCUED FROM THE WITCHES BY HER BROTHERS

(3 versions: *a* Benedict, informant 2, [p. 99](tci051.htm#page_99.md); *b*
Benedict, informant 3, [p. 100](tci052.htm#page_100.md); *c* Benedict,
informant 4, [p. 100](tci052.htm#page_100)..md)

She was the daughter of the chief and declared her intentions from the
time she was able to speak. Many sought her with gifts, but she remained
firm, *b*, *c*. She said, "My brothers will take care of me," *a*.

(A witch boy became angry at her refusal and asked the other witches to
help him injure her, *b*, *c*). They played shinny while the girl was
going for water, hit her with the ball, and she died. The witches took
her body from the grave and brought her back to life. They taunted her
with her refusal to marry, and boasted of their advantage. Her brothers
were watching her grave, and had seen the witches robbing it. They
followed and heard what was said. They entered the witches' cave and
killed most of them, and freed their sister, and took her home. (She was
alive during the night and slept in the day, *a*; she had learned her
lesson: girls were placed in this world to take suitable partners, *b*,
*c*).

The outdoor occupations of men also invite danger from the witches:

### THE DANGEROUS WITCH

A hunter overtaken by night followed a light and was Invited in by
Yellow Woman. She offered him a skull to eat but he only pretended to
eat it. He made a pretext of easing himself and went outside, but she
tied him with her

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

belt. Outside he defecated and tied the belt to his excrement and
escaped. Yellow Woman pursued him. He ran north and hid in a kiva among
the shamans.

She overtook him and he ran west and successively south and east, until
there he was saved by the Flint Society. They put him on top of a spruce
tree. Below was a dish of medicine water. She came looking for him, saw
his reflection In the water, and jumped in to get him. The Flint shaman
stirred it with his flint knife and killed Yellow Woman. The man
escaped. (Boas, p. 101.)

### THE WITCH IN THE FORM OF COYOTE APPEARS TO THE WOOD GATHERERS

A man and his son were wood gathering and their donkeys were grazing.
They saw a coyote sitting on one of them. It was a witch who had taken
that shape. They scared him away and summoned the people, who shot
Coyote. But the following day the boy who had been frightened died.
(Boas, p. 110.)

### THE LABORER MOCKED BY HIS WITCH FRIENDS

Three men were out working. Only one of them was not a witch. The latter
had to open the door for them, when they went and came at night as
coyotes and as owls. They brought bags of green corn and chili in the
winter and shared with him. They offered him a man-woman for a wife. He
accepted because he could not get any girls. When he had slept with her
the witches demanded that he pay for her. He had no money, so his wife
died. The witches made fun of him. (Boas, p. 105.)

### THE MAN WHO FAILED TO BECOME A WITCH

A witch and another man were herding sheep. When the man heard of the
wonders that occurred to the witch, the man wished to have such things
happen to him. The witch assured him that if he were really interested
he would find a teacher for him. One night the witch offered to take him
to a meeting if he were willing, so placing his hands upon the shoulders
of the witch, kneeling, and closing his eyes, he was carried to Old
Mexico to the meeting place. At the feast he discovered a baby's finger
in the food and refused to cat. After the meal a handsome man with
horns, then a beautiful woman, who was followed by an ugly man, and then
a great serpent came out, and last a he-goat; all of them tried to
frighten him. They started back, but the man kept thinking of his flock,
and called upon the forbidden name of Christ asking the other to hurry.
The angered witch threw him off, and he had to make the eight days' trip
back on foot to the camp. He failed to become a witch ([p.
105](tci054.htm#page_105).md).

### THE MAN WHO AGREED TO BECOME A WITCH IN TIME OF FAMINE

There was a great famine. The witches had plenty for they turned
themselves into mice at night and gathered corn from the corn rooms. One
of them tempted a friend who was not a witch to join them. That night
the owner of the house heard them; the witches escaped, but the friend
was caught. He told his story and the owner gave him all the corn the
witches had shelled and left behind. He took it home to his children and
they had a fine feast ([p. 104](tci053.htm#page_104).md).

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

### THE WITCH ON THE ANTELOPE HUNT

Four men went hunting antelope, and all were very successful except the
leader who was a witch. Each night he used to go out by himself, build a
fire and try to call the Gewa Indians to come and destroy his
companions. His brother-in-law became suspicious, and decided since this
man was "not thinking right" they should return home. He had a dream
that his side locks were too long and should be cut before sunrise for
his safety. He was about to do this when the witch came in, declared his
dream false, and so prevented him from doing it. The next day they were
about to return when the Gewa came. They captured the witch, but his
brother-in-law escaped, although badly wounded. On his way home he fell
in with some Mexican herders. They helped him as far as Santo Domingo
where the Indians of that place helped him the rest of the way. When the
Cochiti heard what had occurred they prepared to go against the Gewa. He
was taken into the Giant Society and cured ([p.
108](tci055.htm#page_108).md).

A very few references to witches are found in the emergence and hero
tales:

### THE WITCHES COME OUT AT THE EMERGENCE

Our Mother told the witches not to come out of Shipap into this world,
but they forced their way past ([p. 4](tci005.htm#page_4).md).

### THE GIANT SOCIETY CREATE A GIANT TO OVERCOME THE WITCHES' CHILD-KILLING GIANT

The witches killed a man and resuscitated him as a child-killing giant,
because they were offended that so many children were growing up in
Cochiti. He picked up the children in his basket and carried them off on
his back and ate them. The Giant Society ritualistically created a giant
who overcame him ([p. 17](tci021.htm#page_17.md); notes, [p.
213](tci124.htm#page_213).md).

## MISCELLANEOUS

There are a few miscellaneous situations in pueblo life that are given
in the tales with very little modification:

### THE CULPABLE SISTER

Three children were left orphans, two little children and one adolescent
girl. The older girl neglected her brother and sister and stayed out
with men. The little children found shelter and food where they could
till at last the baby boy died in his little sister's arms. The older
girl never came back from Santo Domingo ([p. 116](tci061.htm#page_116).md).

### THE BABY STOLEN BY THE EAGLE

An eagle swooped down on an isolated camp and stole first a lamb and
later a baby. A great party followed the eagle's flight and located the
nest. A man was swung over the edge of the cliff and the baby was
recovered unhurt. The father and mother moved back to the pueblo where
they would be safe and the baby grew up to find a gold mine, the gold
from which he sent to Montezuma ([p. 117](tci062.htm#page_117).md).

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

### MARRIAGE

In the old days when they were still living in White House and the
Village of the Stone Lions, a father and mother and four sons joined
them. When his mother was so old she could no longer grind for them, the
eldest son said to her, "You must have help. I will find a wife." At the
Village of the Stone Lions he asked a girl and then her father, and when
they agreed she went to his village with him.

The man and his brothers were great hunters. They took two deer to the
girl's family, and the daughters of that house made a feast. The
brothers brought their parents also. The girl's family would not let
them return, so they all lived together at the girl's home ([p.
86](tci045.htm#page_86).md).

### TABOO ON TURQUOISE AS A COURTSHIP GIFT

When the people went to mine turquoise one man gave turquoise to his
sweetheart. Buckskin is the proper gift and turquoise is taboo.
Therefore the cave fell in on them and killed them all. To-day if any
one offers them moccasins they give him turquoise ([p.
254](tci130.htm#page_254).md). This incident is told also with different
motivation; it was forbidden to chip turquoise from the pillars of the
mine, and it was this taboo that was broken ([p.
196](tci116.htm#page_196).md).

## FABLES

There is one type of animal tale that it is necessary to discuss among
the novelistic stories based on cultural situations. This is the
transparent animal fable, a type of story rarely found among the
American Indians. In Cochiti it is characteristic of these tales that
the moral is not given explicitly, but when informants are questioned
they phrase the underlying idea of the story in terms of their own
cultural life.

### THE FOSTER MOTHER

(2 versions: *a* Benedict, informant 1, [p. 133](tci073.htm#page_133.md);
*b* Benedict, informant 2, [p. 135](tci073.htm#page_135).md)

A good example of the Cochiti fable is the story of the crow who
abandoned her eggs in the nest. Hawk (another crow, *b*) had pity on
them and hatched them. After they were out of the nest Crow came back
and claimed them. The small birds refused to recognize her as their
mother, and the case was taken before the king of the birds. He left the
choice to the small birds, who elected as their mother the one who had
brought them up and provided for them.

### COYOTE, AND BEAVER EXCHANGE WIVES

It is said that in former times two hunters would arrange to bring their
catch to the other's wife and sleep with her. They took their turns on
two successive days and nights. The story that deals with this custom is
told of Beaver and Coyote.

Coyote is the proverbial bad hunter and Beaver Woman waits for him, but
he does not come. Next day It is Beaver's turn. He brings as much as he
can carry and sleeps with Coyote Woman while Coyote sits alone in the
front room. Afterwards they are as good neighbors as ever ([p.
136](tci073.htm#page_136).md).

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

### CRANE MARRIES THE GOOSE GIRL

A story, the point of which is the difference in the domestic habits of
two families which one discovers when one has married into another
family, is told of the cranes and the geese.

The Geese were living at Goose Village, the Cranes farther down the
river. One of the Goose Girls wondered what Crane did, went to
investigate and married him. She learned to eat the fish which he caught
In place of the corn picked up in the fields at Cochiti. For four days
she stayed at his house and then took him home with her where he was
received kindly. Crane brought fish for them, and taught them to like
them. Since they were too far from the source of supply, Crane and his
wife returned home. Their son went to visit them once and carried them
fish, but soon returned to live with his parents ([p.
137](tci074.htm#page_137).md).

### GRASSHOPPERS EAT THY GIRL'S FIELD

(2 versions: *a* Boas, p. 118; *b* Benedict, Informant 2, [p.
118](tci063.htm#page_118).md)

The point of this incident is of the consequences of a rash promise. In
version *b* it is followed by a romantic incident:

Yellow Woman was in her field and was delighted by a grasshopper's song.
She offered him (four ears of green corn *a*; his fill of her squashes
*b*) if he would teach it to her. (Grasshopper said, "It is not enough,
I have many children." "Take more, bring your children Into my field,"
*a*.) He taught her his song. He called all his relatives and ate her
whole field. (She killed many of the grasshoppers, *a*.)

Yellow Woman's father and mother beat her and left her naked. She
wandered off, but in his field she heard Payatamu singing to his flute.
He gave her a long stick and told her to strike him, whereupon one by
one articles of women's clothing came out of Payatamu. When she had
dressed, he took her to his grandmother who welcomed them and they lived
together, *b*.

## THE DISCREDITED LOVER

Two tales are recorded of suitors who are accepted only to be discovered
as Bat or Frog. One is of the discredited girl, the other of the
discredited boy.

### BAT BOY

Corn Tassel Girl and Turquoise Girl heard Bat Boy singing, Inviting them
to come to his meadow and gather pumpkin blossoms. When they had
gathered the flowers he took them home with him Intending to marry them.
However, he proved to be half bat and they were ashamed, and would not
sleep with him. His grandmother had warned them not to pinch him, so in
the middle of the night when all the rest were asleep, they pinched him
as hard as they could and he burst. They escaped home taking the pumpkin
blossoms to their father and mother who were very glad to get them ([p.
139](tci075.htm#page_139).md).

### FROG GIRL

When the people first came to Cochiti, a girl went down to the river to
fill her water jar. She saw a man sitting on the opposite bank who
invited her

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

to wade across and go home with him. He took her to his grandmother's
house, and she was welcomed as a daughter-in-law. The grandmother
prepared corn in the evening for the girl to grind in the morning early.
The girl rose, ground the corn, parched it, and made hard mush for
breakfast, and the grandmother was very happy. For four days the girl
ground in the morning. Again the grandmother shelled the corn for her,
but as the girl ground, the corn seemed as hard as rock. She began to
cry, and the grandmother thought she was singing. She remembered the
village from which she came and was homesick. So In the morning she took
her moccasins and as she passed her grandmother she urinated on her, and
then went back to the river, where she lived forever (as a frog or
toad). When her grandmother awoke she could not find her ([p.
140](tci076.htm#page_140).md).

### BEAR IS PUNISHED BY DEATH

(2 versions: *a* Benedict, Informant 1, [p. 142](tci077.htm#page_142.md);
*b* Benedict, Informant 3, [p. 142](tci077.htm#page_142).md)

Both versions of this tale describe, in an animal setting, official
decisions of capital punishment. In both cases it is Bear that is the
guilty person against whom the judgment is pronounced, but the crimes
differ. In version *a* Grizzly Bear's strength has so run away with him
that he has killed a culprit that he was ordered only to frighten. In
version *b* he has merely refused to attend the council called by Bear
Chief in preparation for a contest with the Mountain Lions. Version *b*
is followed by the incident of how the animals held a war dance after
they had killed a bear--in Cochiti bringing in a bear was celebrated in
the same way as bringing in a scalp,

The queen of the animals ordered that Grizzly Bear frighten a man who
had been disobedient, but he killed him. Lion was appointed to carry out
Bear's punishment, and he roped the bear with his tall and climbed with
him to the top of a, pine tree. He split a tree and put the bear In the
crevice. They were glad he was dead because he had no control over
himself when he was angry, *a*.

Bear Chief summoned the Bears in preparation for a contest with the
Mountain Lions to determine which was the stronger. Grizzly Bear refused
to come and Lion was ordered to kill him at sunrise. The Lion won, and
the council ordered that Bear be hung on a tree because he had done
wrong, *b*. (Version b continues with the war dance the animals held for
the dead bear. They had no bear medicine bundle but one of them stole
one from its owner. They brought in the war dance for the person who had
killed the bear and initiated him into the Warrior Society, *ompe*).

### PROPERTY CONTEST OF WOODRAT AND MOUSE

The point of this tale ([p. 155](tci091.htm#page_155.md); notes, [p.
243](tci126.htm#page_243).md) is that great and easily procured riches have
often accompanying dangers that even the score.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Animal Tales](tci126.md)
