[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio02)  [Next](dio04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii"></span> <span id="ii.ii.i"></span>

### <span id="ii.ii.i-p0.1"></span>PREFACE TO THE "DIVINE NAMES."

<span id="ii.ii.i-p1"></span>THE Treatise on "Divine Names" was written
by Dionysius, at the request of Timothy, and at the instigation of
Hierotheus, to express, in a form more easily understood, the more
abstract Treatise of Hierotheus, who was his chief instructor after St.
Paul. Its purpose is to explain the epithets in Holy Scripture applied
alike to the whole Godhead--Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. It does not
pretend to describe the unrevealed God, Who is beyond expression and
conception, and can only be known through that union with God, "by which
we know, even as we are known." Holy Scripture is the sole authority,
beyond which we must neither think nor speak of Almighty God. The
Treatise, being written by one of the most learned Greeks, the
phraseology is, naturally, that of Plato and Aristotle ; but Plato and
Aristotle are not authorities here. When Plato treated his Hebrew
instructor with such reverence, and was so versed in the Pentateuch, we
need not be sensitive as to the admission of Plato’s authority. But, as
a matter of fact, on the question of Exemplars <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) and some other points, the opinions of Plato
are expressly refuted. The phrase of Luther, "Platonising, rather than
Christianising," proves only a very <span id="page_x">p. x</span> <span
id="ii.ii.i-Page_x"></span>meagre acquaintance with Dionysius. The Greek
language is moulded in a marvellous manner to express the newly revealed
Christian Faith in its most exalted form, in a style which Daillé
confesses to be always of the same "colour;" and Pearson, "always like
itself." Jahn has followed Dionysius step by step in order to trace the
connection between the language of Plato and Dionysius, for the purpose
of exploding the puerile supposition that such complex writings as these
could have been evolved from the elementary treatises of Proclus and
Plotinus. Most probably, some of the lost writings of Dionysius are in
part preserved in those writers and in Clement of Alexandria; but
Dionysius is the Master, not Pupil! The works are very distinct and
precise upon the Divinity of Christ, and the Hypostatic Union. Like St.
Paul, Dionysius affirms that He, Who made all things, is God; and
further that Jesus is God, by some startling phraseology. He speaks of
James, "the Lord’s brother <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) ," as
"brother of God" David, from whom was born Christ after the flesh, is
called "father of God <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) ." When speaking
of the entombment of the Blessed Virgin, he speaks of her body as the
"Life-springing" and "God-receptive body;" thus testifying that Jesus,
born of a pure Virgin, is Life and God. He describes the miracles of
Jesus as being, as it were, the new and God-incarnate energy of God
become Man. The newly-coined words <span id="page_xi">p. xi</span> <span
id="ii.ii.i-Page_xi"></span>indicate an original thinker moulding the
Greek language to a newly acquired faith. There are two words, "Agnosia"
and "Divine Gloom," which illustrate a principle running through these
writings,--that the negative of abstraction denotes the superlative
positive. "Divine Gloom" is the darkness from excessive light; "Agnosia"
is neither ignorance nor knowledge intensified: but a supra-knowledge of
Him, Who is above all things known. It is "the most Divine knowledge of
Almighty God, within the union beyond mind, when the mind, having stood
apart from all existing things, and then, having dismissed itself, has
been united to the superluminous rays--thence and there, being
illuminated by the unsearchable wisdom." In the *Mystic Theology,*
Dionysius exhorts Timothy thus,--"But, thou, O dear Timothy, leave
behind both sensible perception, and intellectual efforts, and all
objects of sense and intelligence; and all things being and not being,
and be raised aloft as far as attainable, <span
id="ii.ii.i-p1.6"></span>ἀγνώστως--unknowingly <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) ,--to the union with Him above every essence
and knowledge. For by the resistless and absolute ecstacy from thyself,
in all purity, thou wilt be carried high to the superessential ray of
the Divine darkness, when thou hast cast away all, and become liberated
from all." Thus, we must pass beyond all things known, and all things
being, and lie passive under the illuminating ray of God, if we would
attain the highest conception of Him, <span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>
<span id="ii.ii.i-Page_xii"></span>"Who passeth all understanding." God
"unknown" is still the God of Dionysius, and He is still to be
worshipped unknowingly. There is a tradition that Dionysius erected the
altar in Athens "to God unknown," as author of the inexplicable
darkness, which he observed in Egypt, and found afterwards from St. Paul
to have been contemporaneous with the Crucifixion. Did St. Paul adapt
his discourse at Athens to the conversion of Dionysius?

<span id="ii.ii.i-p2"></span>The only heresiarch, whom Dionysius
mentions by name, is Elymas, the Sorcerer, Simon Magus, a man of great
intellectual attainments and a considerable author. Flavius Clemens and
Eugenius, Bishop of Toledo, were disciples of Simon before their
conversion to Christ. The tenets of Elymas are described by Hippolytus.
He formed an eclectic system from the Old Testament and the Christian
Faith, and with Cerinthus and Carpocrates originated many heresies to
which the apostolic epistles allude, and which in later times became
prominent in the Church. In refuting these heresies, by manifestation of
the truth, Dionysius anticipated many errors--ancient and modern.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p3"></span>Jerome informs us (Scr. <span
id="ii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>Ecc. 46<span id="ii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>) that
Pantaenus <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) , one of the most celebrated
Christian philosophers of Alexandria, was sent, A.D. 193, by Demetrius,
Bishop of that city, to India, at the request of a <span
id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span> <span
id="ii.ii.i-Page_xiii"></span>delegation from India for that purpose.
Pantaenus discovered, on his arrival, that St. Bartholomew (one of the
twelve) had preached the coming of Jesus Christ, in that country.
Pantaenus found a copy of the Hebrew Gospel of St. Matthew in India.
Now, by the extract, contained in the Scholia of Maximus, from the
Scholia of Dionysius of Alexandria (250) upon the Divine Names, and also
by the extract from a letter of the same Dionysius, recently discovered
in the British Museum <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) (Nos. 12151-2.md),
we know that the writings of Dionysius the Areopagite were known and
treasured in Alexandria a few years after the death of Pantaenus. Can we
reasonably doubt that Pantaenus took the writings of Dionysius, and the
more abstract works of Hierotheus, to India? Have we not here an
explanation of the remarkable similarity between the Hindu philosophy,
as expressed by Sankara <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) in the eighth,
and Râmânuja in the thirteenth century, and the "Divine Names?" Sankara
treats of the Supreme as "absolutely One;" Râmânuja as "non-dual, with
qualification." Both these truths are combined and expressed in
Dionysius.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p4"></span>I cannot but believe that many of the
beautiful expressions about Vishnu, the Redeemer, in the Râmâyana of
Tulsidâs are Christian Truths under a Hindu dress <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) . Many learned Hindus affirm that it is
<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> <span
id="ii.ii.i-Page_xiv"></span>needless for them to become Christian,
because they have a more exalted conception of the Supreme God than
Christians themselves. I submit that the "Divine Names" will be
instrumental in bringing India to the Christian Faith, in the best and
only effectual way--by communities and not by individuals--through the
most learned and devout, and not through the most ignorant.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p5"></span>Dionysius was first converted, and then,
through him, those who naturally and properly followed his lead.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p6"></span>LUCIUS FLAVIUS DEXTER.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p7"></span>Dexter was a friend of Jerome. Jerome even
addresses him as "<span id="ii.ii.i-p7.1"></span>filius amicus," and
describes him as "<span id="ii.ii.i-p7.2"></span>clarus apud saeculum et
Christi fidei deditus."

<span id="ii.ii.i-p8"></span>Dexter became Prefect of the Pretorian
Oriental Guards, and was one of the most illustrious statesmen of his
time. He resided two years in Toledo. From the archives of the Church of
Toledo and other cities he compiled a chronicle from A.D. 1 to A.D. 430,
giving a brief summary of the Church events in Spain. That chronicle he
dedicated to Jerome, who, enrolled both Chronicle and Author amongst his
"illustrious men." It was at the request of Dexter that Jerome wrote his
book on Ecclesiastical Writers. Among the earliest Bishops of Toledo,
Dexter describes a remarkable man,--Marcellus,--surnamed Eugenius, on
account of his noble birth.

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span> <span id="ii.ii.i-Page_xv"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.i-p9"></span>Bivarius says he was of the house and
family of Caesar, being uncle to the Emperor Hadrian. Marcellus was
consecrated Bishop by Dionysius the Areopagite at Aries, and sent to
Toledo. Respecting him, Dexter records that Dionysius dedicated the
books of the Divine Names to him, u.c. 851, A.D. 98. Dexter further
records that Dionysius surnamed Marcellus, Timothy, on account of his
excellent disposition. Polycrates, Bishop of Ephesus, relates that
Timothy, Bishop of Ephesus, to whom the works of Dionysius were
originally dedicated, was martyred during the reign of Nerva, A.D.
96-97. Upon the return of Dionysius to Gaul, after his visit to St.
John, released from Patmos, we find him calling his friend Marcellus,
Timothy, and presenting the books of the "Divine Names "to him, A.D. 98;
in order that he might still have a Timothy on earth,-- "<span
id="ii.ii.i-p9.1"></span>in vivis"--although his first Timothy, "<span
id="ii.ii.i-p9.2"></span>migravit ad Christum," A.D. 97.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p10"></span>This touch of nature, preserved in a
chronicle, written more than 1400 years ago, by an illustrious
statesman, who was son of a Bishop celebrated for learning and sanctity,
may fairly be deemed, by an unprejudiced mind, reasonable proof that the
"Divine Names" were written previous to A.D. 98.

<span id="ii.ii.i-p11"></span>N.B. As the result of some research I
affirm that our Saviour’s last commission is the Key to Church history
in the first century. As He commanded the Apostles to preach the Gospel
throughout the world, so the Gospel *was* preached when St. Paul wrote
his <span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> <span
id="ii.ii.i-Page_xvi"></span>Epistle to the Colossians, Chap. I. v. 23
(<span id="ii.ii.i-p11.1"></span>τοῦ κηρυχθέντος ἐν πάσῃ κτίσει), and
with such success amongst the most learned and noble, that, but for the
cruel massacre of Flavius <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) Clemens and
his family for the Christian Faith, there would have been a Christian
Emperor in the first century. As Jesus said, "Ye shall be witnesses of
Me unto the *uttermost parts* of the earth" (<span
id="ii.ii.i-p11.3"></span>[Acts 1:8](../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.ii.i-p11.3"></span>), so the Apostles planted the Church of
Christ in Gaul, Spain and Britain, with its threefold ministry; and by
the end of the second century there was an organised Church throughout
each of those territories <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) .

<span id="ii.ii.i-p12"></span>Dr. Schneider informs me "that in Germany
they now admit that the external proofs are in favour of genuineness of
Dionysius, but they confine themselves to the internal proofs. They
pretend that the doctrine is too clear and precise to have been written
in the apostolic age."

<span id="ii.ii.i-p13"></span>How could the chief Areopagite, the
convert and companion of St. Paul, and the familiar friend of St. John,
Theologus, have understood theology!!

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> <span id="ii.ii.i-Page_xvii"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[vii:2](dio03.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p1.1"></span> C. V. § 2.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[x:3](dio03.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p1.2"></span><span id="ii.ii.i-p1.3"></span>Ἀδελφόθεος.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[x:4](dio03.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p1.4"></span><span id="ii.ii.i-p1.5"></span>Θεοπάτορ.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xi:5](dio03.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p1.7"></span>As beyond knowledge.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xii:6](dio03.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p3.2"></span>Conversion of India, p. 12. Pressensé, The
Earlier Years of Christianity, Vol. II. p. 271. The History of Mathurâ
(Muttra), by F. S. Growse, on the glorification of the Divine Name.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xiii:7](dio03.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p3.3"></span>Vidieu, p. 73.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xiii:8](dio03.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p3.4"></span>Sankara’s doctrine, Sir Monier Williams,
"Brahmanism," p. 55. Râmânuja’s explained, "Brahmanism," p. 119, &c. J.
Murray.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xiii:9](dio03.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p4.1"></span>At Council of Nicea in 325, Johannes, the
Metropolitan of Persia, signed also as "of the great India." Merv was an
Episcopal See, A.D. 334. Con. of India, pp. 15--31.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xvi:10](dio03.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p11.2"></span>Burton, Ecc. Hist., Vol. I. p. 367.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xvi:11](dio03.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="ii.ii.i-p11.4"></span>Mansi I. 698, Jaffi. Regesta Rom. Pon. 2nd
Ed., p. 10, by Ewald.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput I.](dio04.md)
