[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio03)  [Next](dio05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii"></span>

## <span id="ii.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE,

## <span id="ii.ii.ii-p0.2"></span>ON DIVINE NAMES.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i"></span>

### <span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p0.1"></span>CAPUT I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p1"></span>TO MY FELLOW PRESBYTER, TIMOTHY,  
DIONYSIUS THE PRESBYTER.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p2"></span>What is the purpose of the discourse,
and what the tradition concerning Divine Names.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p3"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p4"></span>Now then, O Blessed One, after the
*Theological Outlines* <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) , I will
pass to the interpretation of the Divine Names, as best I can.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p5"></span>But, let the rule of the Oracles be here
also prescribed for us, viz., that we shall establish the truth of the
things spoken concerning God, not in the persuasive words of man’s
wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit-moved power of the
Theologians, by aid of which we are brought into contact with things
unutterable and unknown, in a manner unutterable and unknown, in
proportion to the superior union of the reasoning and intuitive faculty
and operation within us. By no means then is it permitted to speak, or
even to think, anything, concerning the superessential and hidden Deity,
beyond those things divinely revealed to us in the sacred Oracles <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) . For Agnosia, <span id="page_2">p.
2</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.i-Page_2"></span>(supra-knowledge) of its
superessentiality above reason and mind and essence--to, it must we
attribute the superessential science, so far aspiring to the Highest, as
the ray of the supremely Divine Oracles imparts itself, whilst we
restrain ourselves in our approach to the higher glories by prudence and
piety as regards things Divine. For, if we must place any confidence in
the All Wise and most trustworthy Theology, things Divine are revealed
and contemplated in proportion to the capacity of each of the minds,
since the supremely Divine Goodness distributes Divinely its
immeasurableness (as that which cannot be contained) with a justice
which preserves those whose capacity is limited. For, as things
intelligible cannot be comprehended and contemplated by things of sense,
and things uncompounded and unformed by things compounded and formed;
and the intangible and unshaped formlessness of things without body, by
those formed according to the shapes of bodies; in accordance with the
self-same analogy of the truth, the superessential Illimitability is
placed above things essential, and the Unity above mind above the Minds;
and the One above conception is inconceivable to all conceptions; and
the Good above word is unutterable by word--Unit making one every unit,
and superessential essence and mind inconceivable, and Word unutterable,
speechlessness <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) and
inconception <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) , and
namelessness--being after the manner of no existing being, and Cause of
being to all, but Itself not being, <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.i-Page_3"></span>as beyond every essence, and as It may
manifest Itself properly and scientifically concerning Itself.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p6"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p7"></span>Concerning this then, as has been said,
the superessential and hidden Deity, it is not permitted to speak or
even to think beyond the things divinely revealed to us in the sacred
Oracles. For even as Itself has taught (as becomes Its goodness) in the
Oracles, the science and contemplation of Itself in Its essential Nature
is beyond the reach of all created things, as towering superessentially
above all. And you will find many of the Theologians, who have
celebrated It, not only as invisible and incomprehensible, but also as
inscrutable and untraceable, since there is no trace of those who have
penetrated to Its hidden infinitude. The Good indeed is not entirely
uncommunicated to any single created being, but benignly sheds forth its
superessential ray, persistently fixed in Itself, by illuminations
analogous to each several being, and elevates to Its permitted
contemplation and communion and likeness, those holy minds, who, as far
as is lawful and reverent, strive after It, and who are neither
impotently boastful towards that which is higher than the harmoniously
imparted Divine manifestation, nor, in regard to a lower level, lapse
downward through their inclining to the worse, but who elevate
themselves determinately and unwaveringly to the ray shining upon them;
and, by their proportioned love <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.i-Page_4"></span>of permitted illuminations, are elevated
with a holy reverence, prudently and piously, as on new wings.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p8"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p9"></span>Following then, these, the supremely
Divine standards, which also govern the whole holy ranks of the
supercelestial orders,--whilst honouring the unrevealed of the Godhead
which is beyond mind and matter, with inscrutable and holy reverence of
mind, and things unutterable, with a prudent silence, we elevate
ourselves to the glories which illuminate us in the sacred Oracles, and
are led by their light to the supremely Divine Hymns, by which we are
supermundane  
ly enlightened and moulded to the sacred Songs of Praise, so as both to
see the supremely Divine illuminations given to us by them, according to
our capacities, and to praise the good-giving Source of every holy
manifestation of light, as Itself has taught concerning Itself in the
sacred Oracles. For instance, that It is cause and origin and essence
and life of all things; and even of those who fall away from It, both
recalling and resurrection; and of those who have lapsed to the
perversion of the Divine likeness, renewal and reformation; of those who
are tossed about in a sort of irreligious unsteadiness, a religious
stability; of those who have continued to stand, steadfastness; of those
who are being conducted to It, a protecting Conductor; of those being
illuminated, illumination; of those being perfected, source of
perfection; of those being deified, source of deification; of those
being<span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.i-Page_5"></span>
simplified, simplification; of those being unified, unity; of every
origin superessentially super-original origin; and of the Hidden, as far
as is right, beneficent communication; and, in one word, the life of the
living, and essence of things that be; of all life and essence, origin
and cause; because Its goodness produces and sustains things that be, in
their being.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p10"></span>SECTION IV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p11"></span>These things we have learned from the
Divine Oracles, and you will find all the sacred Hymnology, so to speak,
of the Theologians arranging the Names, of God with a view to make known
and praise the beneficent progressions of the Godhead. Hence, we see in
almost every theological treatise the Godhead religiously celebrated,
both as Monad and unity, on account of the simplicity and oneness of Its
supernatural indivisibility from which, as an unifying power, we are
unified, and when our divided diversities have been folded together, in
a manner supermundane, we are collected into a godlike unit and
divinely-imitated union; but, also as Triad, on account of the
tri-personal manifestation of the superessential productiveness, from
which all paternity in heaven and on earth is, and is named; also, as
cause of things existing, since all things were brought into being on
account of Its creative goodness, both wise and good, because all
things, whilst preserving the properties of their own nature<span
id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.i-Page_6"></span> unimpaired,
are filled with every inspired harmony and holy comeliness, but
pre-eminently, as loving towards man, because It truly and wholly
shared, in one of Its Persons (subsistencies), in things belonging to
us, recalling to Itself and replacing the human extremity, out of which,
in a manner unutterable, the simplex Jesus was composed, and the
Everlasting took a temporal duration, and He, Who is superessentially
exalted above every rank throughout all nature, became within our
nature, whilst retaining the unchangeable and unconfused steadfastness
of His own properties. And whatever other divinely-wrought
illuminations, conformable to the Oracles, the secret tradition of our
inspired leaders bequeathed to us for our enlightenment, in these also
we have been initiated; *now* indeed, according to our capacity, through
the sacred veils of the loving-kindness towards man, made known in the
Oracles and hierarchical traditions, which envelop things intellectual
in things sensible, and things superessential in things that are; and
place forms and shapes around the formless and shapeless, and multiply
and fashion the supernatural and formless simplicity in the variedness
of the divided symbols; but, *then,* when we have become incorruptible
and immortal, and have reached the Christlike and most blessed repose,
according to the Divine saying, we shall be "ever with the Lord,"
fulfilled, through all-pure contemplations, with the visible
manifestation of God covering us with glory, in most brilliant
splendours, as the disciples in the<span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.i-Page_7"></span> most Divine Transfiguration, and
participating in His gift of spiritual light, with unimpassioned and
immaterial mind; and, even in the union beyond conception, through the
agnostic and most blessed efforts after rays of surpassing brilliancy,
in a more Divine imitation of the supercelestial minds. For we shall be
equal to the angels, as the truth of the Oracles affirms, and sons of
God, being sons of the resurrection. But now, to the best of our
ability, we use symbols appropriate to things Divine, and from these
again we elevate ourselves, according to our degree, to the simple and
unified truth of the spiritual visions; and after our every conception
of things godlike, laying aside our mental energies, we cast ourselves,
to the best of our ability, towards the superessential ray, in which all
the terms of every kind of knowledge pre-existed in a manner beyond
expression, which it is neither possible to conceive nor express, nor
entirely in any way to contemplate, on account of Its being
pre-eminently above all things, and super-unknown, and Its having
previously contained within Itself, superessentially, the whole
perfections of all kinds of essential knowledge and power, and Its being
firmly fixed by Its absolute power, above all, even the supercelestial
minds. For, if all kinds of knowledge are of things existing, and are
limited to things existing, that, beyond all essence, is also elevated
above all knowledge.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p12"></span>SECTION V.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p13"></span>And yet, if It is superior to every
expression and every knowledge, and is altogether placed above<span
id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.i-Page_8"></span> mind and
essence,--being such as embraces and unites and comprehends and
anticipates all things, but Itself is altogether incomprehensible to
all, and of It, there is neither perception nor imagination, nor
surmise, nor name, nor expression, nor contact, nor science;--in what
way can our treatise thoroughly investigate the meaning of the Divine
Names, when the superessential Deity is shewn to be without Name, and
above Name?

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p14"></span>But, as we said when we put forth the
*Theological Outlines,* it is not possible either to express or to
conceive what the One, the Unknown, the Superessential self-existing
Good is,--I mean the threefold Unity, the alike God, and the alike Good.
But even the unions, such as befit angels, of the holy Powers, whether
we must call them efforts after, or receptions from, the super-Unknown
and surpassing Goodness, are both unutterable and unknown, and exist in
those angels alone who, above angelic knowledge, are deemed worthy of
them. The godlike minds (men) made one by these unions, through
imitation of angels as far as attainable (since it is during cessation
of every mental energy that such an union as this of the deified minds
towards the super-divine light takes place) celebrate It most
appropriately through the abstraction of all created things--enlightened
in this matter, truly and super-naturally from the most blessed union
towards It--that It is Cause Indeed of all things existing, but Itself
none of them, as being superessentially elevated above all. To none,
indeed, who are lovers of the Truth above all Truth, is it permitted to
celebrate<span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.i-Page_9"></span> the supremely-Divine Essentiality--that
which is the super-subsistence of the super-goodness,--neither as word
or power, neither as mind or life or essence, but as pre-eminently
separated from every condition, movement, life, imagination, surmise,
name, word, thought, conception, essence, position, stability, union,
boundary, infinitude, all things whatever. But since, as sustaining
source of goodness, by the very fact of Its being, It is cause of all
things that be, from all created things must we celebrate the benevolent
Providence of the Godhead; for all things are both around It and for It,
and It is before all things, and all things in It consist, and by Its
being is the production and sustenance of the whole, and all things
aspire to It--the intellectual and rational, by means of
knowledge--things inferior to these, through the senses, and other
things by living movement, or substantial and habitual aptitude.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p15"></span>SECTION VI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p16"></span>The theologians, having knowledge of
this, celebrate It, both without Name and from every Name. Without name,
as when they say that the Godhead Itself, in one of those mystical
apparitions of the symbolical Divine manifestation, rebuked him who
said, "What is thy name?" and as leading him away from all knowledge of
the Divine Name, said this, "and why dost thou ask my Name? "and this
(Name) "is wonderful," And is not this in reality the wonderful Name,
<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.i-Page_10"></span>that which is above every Name--the
Nameless--that fixed above every name which is named, whether in this
age or in that which is to come? Also, as "many named," as when they
again introduce It as saying, "I am He, Who is--the Life--the Light--the
God--the Truth." And when the wise of God themselves celebrate Him, as
Author of all things, under many Names, from all created things--as
Good--as Beautiful--as Wise--as Beloved--as God of gods--as Lord of
lords--as Holy of Holies--as Eternal--as Being--as Author of Ages--as
Provider of Life--as Wisdom--as Mind--as Word--as Knowing--as
preeminently possessing all the treasures of all knowledge--as Power--as
Powerful--as King of kings--as Ancient of days--as never growing
old--and Unchangeable--as Preservation--as Righteousness--as
Sanctification -- as Redemption--as surpassing all things in
greatness--and as in a gentle breeze.--Yea, they also say that He is in
minds, and in souls, and in bodies, and in heaven and in earth, and at
once, the same in the same--in the world--around the world--above the
world--supercelestial, superessential, sun,
star--fire--water--spirit--dew--cloud--self-hewn stone and rock--all
things existing--and not one of things existing.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p17"></span>SECTION VII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p18"></span>Thus, then, the "Nameless "befits the
cause of all, which is also above all, as do all the names of things
existing, in order that there may be strictly a kingly rule over the
whole; and that all things <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.i-Page_11"></span> may be around It and dependent upon It,
as cause, as beginning, as end. And Itself, according to the Divine
saying, may be the "all in all," and truly sung as of all, producing,
directing and perfecting and sustaining guard, and shrine, and turning
towards Itself, and that uniformly, irresistibly and pre-eminently. For
It is not only cause of sustenance, or life, or perfection,--so that
from this or that forethought alone the Goodness above Name should be
named, but It previously embraced in Itself all things existing,
absolutely and without limit, by the complete benefactions of His one
and all-creating forethought, and by all created things in joint accord
It is celebrated and named.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p19"></span>SECTION VIII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p20"></span>Further also, the Theologians do not
honour alone the Names of God which are given from universal or
particular Providences, or objects of His forethought; but also from
certain occasional Divine Visions, in the sacred temples or elsewhere,
which enlightened the initiated or the Prophets, they name the
surpassing bright Goodness which is above Name, after one or other
causes and powers, and clothe It in forms and shapes of man, or fire, or
electron, and celebrate Its eyes and ears, and locks of hair, and
countenance, and hands, and back, and wings, and arms, and hinder parts
and feet. Also they assign to It crowns <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) and seats, and drinking vessels and
bowls, and certain other things mystical, concerning which, in our
*Symbolic Theology,* we will speak as best we can. But <span
id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.i-Page_12"></span> now,
collecting from the Oracles so much as serves the purpose of our present
treatise, and using the things aforesaid, as a kind of Canon, and
keeping our eyes upon them, let us advance to the unfolding of the Names
of God, which fall within the range of our understanding, and, what the
hierarchical rule always teaches us throughout every phase of theology,
let us become initiated (to speak authoritatively) in the godlike
contemplations with a god-enlightened conception. And let us bring
religious ears to the unfoldings of the Holy Names of God, implanting
the Holy in the Holy, according to the Divine tradition, and removing it
from the laughter and jeers of the uninitiated; yea, rather, if certain
men really are such, purifying them from their fighting against God in
this matter. Be it thine, then, to guard these things, O excellent
Timothy, according to the most holy leading, and to make the things
Divine neither spoken nor known to the uninitiated. For myself, may
Almighty God give me to celebrate, in a manner worthy of God, the
numerous beneficent Names of the uncalled and unnamed Deity; and may He
not take away a word of truth from my mouth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xvii:12](dio04.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.i-p4.1"></span>Cap. 3. Mystic Theology.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xvii:13](dio04.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.i-p5.1"></span>Ib. c. I. s. 3.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[2:14](dio04.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.i-p5.2"></span>*alogia.*

<span id="fn_14"></span>[2:15](dio04.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.i-p5.3"></span><span id="ii.ii.ii.i-p5.4"></span>ἀνοησία.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[11:16](dio04.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.i-p20.1"></span>Letter to Titus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput II.](dio05.md)
