[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio08)  [Next](dio10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vi"></span>

### <span id="ii.ii.ii.vi-p0.1"></span>CAPUT VI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vi-p1"></span>Concerning Life.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vi-p2"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vi-p3"></span>Now let us sing the Eternal Life, from
which comes the self-existing Life, and every life; and from which, to
all things however partaking of life, is distributed the power to live
appropriately to each. Certainly the life; and the immortality of the
immortal Angels, and the very indestructibility of the angelic perpetual
motion, both is, and is sustained from It, and by reason of It.
Wherefore, they are also called living always and immortal; and again,
not immortal, because not from themselves have they their immortality
and eternal life; but from the vivifying Cause forming and sustaining
all life; and as we said of Him, Who is, that He is Age even of the
self-existing Being, so also here again (we say) that the Divine Life,
which is above life, is <span id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.vi-Page_84"></span> life-giving and sustaining even of the
self-existing Life; and every life and life-giving movement is from the
Life which is above every life, and all source of all life. From It,
even the souls have their indestructibility, and all living creatures,
and plants in their most remote echo of life, have their power to live.
And when It is "taken away," according to the Divine saying, all life
fails, and to It even things that have failed, through their inability
to participate in It, when again returning, again become living
creatures.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vi-p4"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vi-p5"></span>And It gives chiefly to the
self-existing Life to be a life, and to every life, and to the
individual life, that each should be conformable to that which nature
intended it to be. And to the supercelestial lives It gives the
immaterial and godlike, and unchangeable immortality; and the unswerving
and undeviating perpetual movement; whilst extending Itself through
excess of goodness, even to the life of demons <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) . For, neither has this its being from
another cause, but from It life has both its being and its continuance.
Further, It bequeaths even to men the angelic life, so far as is
possible to compound being, and through an overflowing love towards man
turns, and calls us back to Itself, even when we are departing from It;
and, what is still more Divine, promises to transfer even our whole
selves (I mean souls, and bodies their yoke-fellows), to a perfect life
<span id="page_85">p. 85</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.vi-Page_85"></span>
and immortality;--a fact which perhaps seems to Antiquity contrary to
nature, but to me, and to thee, and to the truth, both Divine and above
nature. But, by "above nature," I understand our visible nature, not the
all-powerful nature of the Divine Life. For, to this, as being nature of
all the living creatures, and especially the more Divine, no life is
against nature, or above nature. So that the contradictory statements of
Simon’s folly on this matter, let them be far repelled from a Divine
assembly, and from thy reverent soul. For this escaped him, as I
imagine, whilst thinking to be wise, that the right-thinking man ought
not to use the visible reason of the sensible perception, as an ally
against the invisible Cause of all; and this must be our reply to him,
that his statement is against nature, for to It nothing is contrary.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vi-p6"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vi-p7"></span>From It, both all living creatures and
plants draw their life and nourishment; and whether you speak of
intellectual, or rational, or sensible, or nourishing, or growing, or
whatever, life, or source of life, or essence of life, from It, which is
above every life, it both lives and thrives; and in It, as Cause,
uniformly pre-existed. For the super-living, and life-springing Life is
Cause both of all life, and is generative, and completive, and dividing
of life, and is to be celebrated from every life, in consequence of its
numerous generation of all lives, as Manifold, and contemplated, and
sung by every life; and as <span id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.vi-Page_86"></span> without need, yea, rather, superfull of
life, the Self-living, and above every life, causing to live and
super-living, or in whatever way one might extol the life which is
unutterable by human speech.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[84:47](dio09.htm#fr_46) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.vi-p5.1"></span><span id="ii.ii.ii.vi-p5.2"></span>[Rom.
xi. 29](../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)<span
id="ii.ii.ii.vi-p5.2"></span>, "For the gifts of God are without
repentance."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput VII.](dio10)
