[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio07)  [Next](dio09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v"></span>

### <span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p0.1"></span>CAPUT V.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p1"></span>Concerning Being--in which also
concerning Exemplars.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p2"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p3"></span>LET us now then pass to the name
"Being"--given in the Oracles as veritably that of Him, Who veritably
is. But we will recall to your remembrance this much, that the purpose
of our treatise is not to make known the superessential Essence--*qua*
superessential--(for this is inexpressible, and unknowable, and
altogether unrevealed, and surpassing the union itself), but to
celebrate the progression of the supremely Divine Source of Essence,
which gives essence to all things being. For the Divine Name of the
Good, as making known the whole progressions of the Cause of all, is
extended, both to things being, and things not being, and is above
things being, and things not being. But the Name of Being is extended to
all things being, and is above things being;--and the Name of Life is
extended to all things living, and is above things living; and the Name
of Wisdom is extended to all the intellectual and rational and sensible,
and is above all these.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p4"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p5"></span>The treatise, then, seeks to celebrate
these, the Names of God, which set forth His Providence. For it does not
profess to express the very superessential Goodness, and Essence, and
Life, and <span id="page_74">p. 74</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.v-Page_74"></span> Wisdom, of the very superessential
Deity, Which is seated above all Goodness, and Deity, and Essence, and
Wisdom, and Life,--in secret places, as the Oracles affirm. But it
celebrates the beneficial Providence, which has been set forth as
preeminently Goodness and Cause of all good things, and as Being, and
Life, and Wisdom,--the Cause essentiating and vivifying, and
wise-making, of those who partake of essence, and life, and mind, and
reason, and sense. But it does not affirm that the Good is one thing,
and the Being another; and that Life is other than Wisdom; nor that the
Causes are many, and that some deities produce one thing and others
another, as superior and inferior; but that the whole good progressions
and the Names of God, celebrated by us, are of one God; and that the one
epithet makes known the complete Providence of the one God, but that the
others are indicative of His more general and more particular
providences.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p6"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p7"></span>Yet, some one might say, for what reason
do we affirm that Life is superior to Being, and Wisdom to Life? Things
with life no doubt are above things that merely exist--things sensible
above those which merely live,--and things rational above these,--and
the Minds <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md) above the rational, and
are around God, and are more near to Him. Yet, things which partake of
greater gifts from God, must needs be <span id="page_75">p. 75</span>
<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-Page_75"></span> better and superior to the rest.
But if any one assumed the intellectual to be without being, and without
life, the statement might hold good. But if the Divine Minds are both
above all the rest of beings, and live above the other living beings,
and think and know, above sensible perception and reason, and, beyond
all the other existing beings, aspire to, and participate in, the
Beautiful and Good, they are more around the Good, participating in It
more abundantly, and having received larger and greater gifts from It.
As also, the rational creatures excel those of sensible perception, by
their superiority in the abundance of reason, and these, by their
sensible perception, and others, by their life. And this, as I think, is
true, that the things which participate more in the One and
boundless-giving God, are more near to Him, and more divine, than those
who come behind them (in gifts).

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p8"></span>SECTION IV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p9"></span>Now, since we are speaking of these
things, come then, and let us praise the Good, as veritably Being, and
giving essence to all things that be. He, Who is, is superessential,
sustaining Cause of the whole potential Being, and Creator of being,
existence, subsistence, essence, nature; Source and Measure of ages, and
Framer of times, and Age of things that be, Time of things coming into
being, Being of things howsoever being, Birth of things howsoever born.
From Him, Who is, is age, and essence, and being, and time, and birth,
and thing born; the realities <span id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.v-Page_76"></span> in things that be, and things howsoever
existing and subsisting. For Almighty God is not relatively a Being, but
absolutely and unboundedly, having comprehended and anticipated the
whole Being in Himself. Wherefore, He is also called King of the ages,
since the whole being both is, and is sustained, in Him and around Him.
And He neither was, nor will be, nor became, nor becomes, nor will
become--yea rather, neither is. But He is the Being to things that be,
and not things that be only, but the very being of things that be,
absolutely from before the ages. For He is the Age of ages--the Existing
before the ages.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p10"></span>SECTION V.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p11"></span>Summing up, then, let us say, that the
being to all beings and to the ages, is from the Preexisting. And every
age and time is from Him. And of every age and time, and of everything,
howsoever existing, the Pre-existing is Source and Cause. And all things
participate in Him, and from no single existing thing does He stand
aloof. And He is before all things, and all things in Him consist. And
absolutely, if anything is, in any way whatsoever, it both is, and is
contemplated, and is preserved in the Pre-existing. And, before all the
other participations in Him, the being is pre-supposed. And
self-existent Being has precedence of the being self-existent Life; and
the being self-existent Wisdom; and the being self-existent Divine
Likeness; and the other beings, in whatever gifts <span id="page_77">p.
77</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.v-Page_77"></span> participating, before
all these participate in being; yea, rather, all self-existent things,
of which existing things participate, participate in the self-existent
Being. And there is nothing existent, of which the self-existent Being
is not essence and age. Naturally, then, more chiefly than all the rest,
Almighty God is celebrated as Being, from the prior of His other gifts;
for pre-possessing even pre-existence, and super-existence, and
super-possessing being, He pre-established all being, I mean
self-existent being; and subjected everything, howsoever existing, to
Being Itself. And then, all the sources of beings, as participating in
being, both are, and are sources, and first are, and then are sources.
And, if you wish to say, that the self-existent Life is source of living
things, as living; and the self-existent Similitude, of things similar
as similar; and the self-existent Union, of things united, as united;
and the self-existent Order, of things ordered, as ordered and of the
rest, as many as, by participating in this or that, or both, or many,
are this or that, or both, or many, you will find the self-existent
participations themselves, first participating in being, and by their
being, first remaining;--then being sources of this or that, and by
their participating in being, both being, and being participated. But,
if these *are* by their participation of being, much more the things
participating in them.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p12"></span>SECTION VI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p13"></span>The self-existent Super-goodness then,
as projecting the first gift of self-existent being, is <span
id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.v-Page_78"></span>
celebrated by the elder and first of the participations; and being
itself is from It, and in It; as also the sources of things being, and
all the things that be, and the things howsoever sustained by being, and
that irresistibly, and comprehensively and uniformly. For even in a
monad, every number preexists in the form of a unit, and the monad holds
every number in itself singly. And every number is united in the monad,
but so far as it advances from the monad, so far it is distributed and
multiplied. And in a centre, all the lines <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) of the circle coexist within one union,
and the point holds all the straight lines in itself, uniformly united,
both to each other, and to the one source from which they proceeded, and
in the centre itself they are completely united; but standing slightly
distant from it, they are slightly separated; but when more apart, more
so. And in one word, the nearer they are to the centre, the more they
are united to it and to each other? and the more they stand apart from
it, the more they stand apart from each other.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p14"></span>SECTION VII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p15"></span>But all the proportions of nature
individually are comprehended in the whole nature of the whole, within
one unconfused union; and in the soul, the powers of each several part
are provident of the whole body in a uniform fashion. There is nothing
out of place then, that, by ascending from obscure images to the Cause
of all, we should <span id="page_79">p. 79</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.v-Page_79"></span> contemplate, with supermundane eyes, all
things in the Cause of all, even those contrary to each other, after a
single fashion and unitedly. For It is Source of things existing, from
which are both being itself, and all things however being; every source,
every term, every life, every immortality, every wisdom, every order,
every harmony, every power, every protection, every stability, every
endurance, every conception, every word, every sensible perception,
every habit, every standing, every movement, every union, every
mingling, every friendship, every agreement, every difference, every
limit, and whatever other things existing by being, characterize all
things being.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p16"></span>SECTION VIII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p17"></span>And from the same Cause of all, are the
higher and lower intellectual <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md)
essences of the godlike angels; and those of the souls; and the natures
of the whole Cosmos; all things whatsoever said to be either in others,
or by reflection. Yea, even the all holy and most honoured Powers
veritably being, and established, as it were, in the vestibule of the
superessential Triad, are from It, and in It; and have the being and the
godlike being; and after them, as regards Angels, the subordinate,
subordinately, and the remotest, most remotely, but as regards
ourselves, supermundanely. And the souls, and all the other beings,
according to the same rule, have their being, and their well-being; and
are, and are well; by having from the Pre-existing their being <span
id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.v-Page_80"></span> and
their well-being. And in It are both being and well-being; and from It,
beginning; and in It, guarded; and to It, terminated. And the
prerogatives of being he distributes to the superior beings, which the
Oracles call even eternal. But being itself never at any time fails all
existing beings. And even self-existent being is from the Pre-existent,
and of Him is being, and He is not of being;--and in Him is being, and
He is not in being; and being possesses Him, and not He possesses being;
and He is both age and beginning, and measure of being; being
essentiating Source, and Middle and End, of pre-essence, and being and
age and all things. And for this reason, by the Oracles, the veritably
Pre-existing is represented under many forms, according to every
conception of beings, and the "Was" and the "Is," and the "Will be," and
the "Became," and the "Becomes," and the "Will become," are properly
sung respecting Him. For all these, to those who think worthily of God,
signify by every conception His being superessentially, and Cause in
every way of things existing. For He is not this, but not that; nor is
He in some way, but not in some other; but He is all things, as Cause of
all, and containing and pre-holding in Himself all governments, all
controls, of all existing things. And He is above all, as
superessentially super-being before all. Wherefore, also, all things are
predicated of Him and together, and He is none of them all; of every
shape, of every kind, without form, without beauty, anticipating in
Himself, beginnings and middles, <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.v-Page_81"></span> and ends of things existing,
irresistibly and preeminently; and shedding forth without flaw, (the
light of) being to all, as beseems a One and super-united Cause. For, if
our sun, at the same time that he is one and sheds a uniform light,
renews the essences and qualities of sensible creatures, although they
are many and various, and nourishes and guards, and perfects and
distinguishes, and unites, and fosters, and makes to be productive, and
increases, and transforms, and establishes, and makes to grow, and
awakens, and gives life to all; and each of the whole, in a manner
appropriate to itself, participates in the same and one sun; and the one
sun anticipated in himself, uniformly, the causes of the many
participants; much more with regard to the Cause of it and of all
things, ought we to concede that It first presides over, as beseems One
superessential Oneness, all the exemplars, of things existing; since He
produces even essences, as beseems the egression from essence. But, we
affirm that the exemplars are the methods in God, giving essence to
things that be, and pre-existing uniformly, which theology calls
predeterminations, and Divine and good wills, which define and produce
things existing; according to which (predeterminations) the
Superessential both predetermined and brought into existence everything
that exists.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p18"></span>SECTION IX.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p19"></span>But, if the Philosopher Clemens thinks
good, that the higher amongst beings should be called <span
id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.v-Page_82"></span>
exemplars in relation to something, his statement advances, not through
correct and perfect and simple names. But, when we have conceded even
this, to be correctly said, we must call to mind the Word of God, which
says, "I have not shewn thee these things for the purpose of going after
them, but that through the proportionate knowledge of these we may be
led up to the Cause of all, as we are capable."

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p20"></span>We must attribute, then, all existing
things to It, as beseems One Union pre-eminent above all, since by
starting from Being, the essentiating Progression and Goodness, both
penetrating all, and filling all things with Its own being, and
rejoicing over all things being, pre-holds all things in Itself,
rejecting all duplicity by an one superfluity of simplicity. But It
grasps all things in the same way, as beseems its super-simplified
Infinity, and is participated in by all uniquely, even as a voice,
whilst being one and the same, is participated in by many ears as one.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p21"></span>SECTION X.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.v-p22"></span>The Pre-existing then is beginning and
end of existing things; beginning indeed as Cause, and end as for whom;
and term of all, and infinitude of all infinitude; and term, especially,
of things that are, as it were, opposed. For in One, as we have often
said, He both pre-holds and sustains all existing things, being present
to all, and everywhere, both as regards the one, and the same, and as
the every same, and issuing forth to all, and abiding in Himself; and
standing and moving, and neither standing nor <span id="page_83">p.
83</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.v-Page_83"></span> moving; neither having
beginning, or middle, or end; neither in any of the existing things, nor
being any of the existing things. And neither does any of the things
eternally existing, or those temporarily subsisting, entirely come up to
Him, but He towers above time and eternity, and all things eternal and
temporal. Wherefore also, He is Eternity itself, and things existing,
and the measures of things existing, and things measured through Him and
from Him. But let us speak of these things more opportunely on another
occasion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[74:44](dio08.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.v-p7.1"></span>Angels.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[78:45](dio08.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.v-p13.1"></span>i.e. the radii.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[79:46](dio08.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.v-p17.1"></span>Maximus, *Scholia,* cap. 4, sec. i.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput VI.](dio09.md)
