[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio09)  [Next](dio11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vii"></span>

### <span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p0.1"></span>CAPUT VII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p1"></span>Concerning Wisdom, Mind, Reason,
Truth, faith.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p2"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p3"></span>COME then, if you please, let us sing
the good and eternal Life, both as wise, and as wisdom’s self; yea,
rather, as sustaining all wisdom, and being superior to all wisdom and
understanding. For, not only is Almighty God superfull of wisdom, and of
His understanding there is no number, but He is fixed above all reason
and mind and wisdom. And, when the truly divine man, the common sun of
us, and of our leader, had thought this out, in a sense above nature, he
says, "the foolishness of God is wiser than men," (meaning) not only
that all human intelligence is a sort of error, when tried by the
stability and durability of the Divine and most perfect conceptions, but
that it is even usual with the theologians to deny, with respect to God,
things of privation, in an opposite sense. Thus, the Oracles declare,
the All-luminous Light, invisible, and Him, Who is often sung, and of
many names, to be unutterable and without name, and Him, Who is present
to all, and is found of all, to be incomprehensible and past finding
out. In this very way, even now, the <span id="page_87">p. 87</span>
<span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-Page_87"></span> Divine Apostle is said to have
celebrated as "foolishness of God," that which appears unexpected and
absurd in it, (but) which leads to the truth which is unutterable and
before all reason. But, as I elsewhere said, by taking the things above
us, in a sense familiar to ourselves, and by being entangled by what is
congenial to sensible perceptions, and by comparing things Divine with
our own conditions, we are led astray through following the Divine and
mystical reason after a mere appearance. We ought to know that our mind
has the power for thought, through which it views things intellectual,
but that the union through which it is brought into contact with things
beyond itself surpasses the nature of the mind. We must then contemplate
things Divine, after this Union, not after ourselves, but by our whole
selves, standing out of our whole selves, and becoming wholly of God.
For it is better to be of God, and not of ourselves. For thus things
Divine will, be given to those who become dear to God. Celebrating then,
in a superlative sense, this, the irrational and mindless and foolish
Wisdom, we affirm that It is Cause of all mind and reason, and all
wisdom and understanding; and of It is every counsel, and from It every
knowledge and understanding; and in It all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge are hidden. For, agreeably to the things already spoken, the
super-wise, and all-wise Cause is a mainstay <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md) even of the self-existing Wisdom, both
the universal and the individual.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-Page_88"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p4"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p5"></span>From It the contemplated and
contemplating powers of the angelic Minds have their simple and blessed
conceptions; collecting their divine knowledge, not in portions, or from
portions, or sensible perceptions, or detailed reasonings, or arguing
from something common to these things, but purified from everything
material and multitudinous, they contemplate the conceptions of Divine
things intuitively, immaterially and uniformly, and they have their
intellectual power and energy resplendent with the unmixed and undefiled
purity, and see at a glance the Divine conceptions indivisibly and
immaterially, and are by the Godlike One moulded, as attainable by
reason of the Divine Wisdom, to the Divine and Super-wise Mind and
Reason. And souls have their reasoning power, investigating the truth of
things by detailed steps and rotation, and through their divided and
manifold variety falling short of the single minds, but, by the
collection of many towards the One, deemed worthy, even of conceptions
equal to the angels, so far as is proper and attainable to souls. But,
even as regards the sensible perceptions themselves, one would not miss
the mark, if one called them an echo of wisdom. Yet, even the mind of
demons, *qua* mind, is from It; but so far as a mind is irrational, not
knowing, and not wishing to attain what it aspires to, we must call it
more properly a declension from wisdom. But, since the Divine Wisdom is
called source, and cause, and mainstay, <span id="page_89">p. 89</span>
<span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-Page_89"></span> and completion and guard, and
term of wisdom itself, and of every kind, and of every mind and reason,
and every sensible perception, how then is Almighty God Himself, the
super-wise, celebrated as Mind and Reason and Knowledge? For, how will
He conceive any of the objects of intelligence, seeing He has not
intellectual operations? or how will He know the objects of sense,
seeing He is fixed above all sensible perception? Yet the Oracles affirm
that He knoweth all things, and that nothing escapes the Divine
Knowledge. But, as I have been accustomed to say many times before, we
must contemplate things Divine, in a manner becoming God. For the
mindless, and the insensible, we must attribute to God, by excess--not
by defect, just as we attribute the irrational to Him Who is above
reason; and imperfection, to the Super-perfect, and Pre-perfect; and the
impalpable, and invisible gloom, to the light which is inaccessible on
account of excess of the visible light. So the Divine Mind comprehends
all things, by His knowledge surpassing all, having anticipated within
Himself the knowledge of all, as beseems the Cause of all; before angels
came to being, knowing and producing angels; and knowing all the rest
from within; and, so to speak, from the Source Itself, and by bringing
into being. And, this, I think, the sacred text teaches, when it says,
"He, knowing all things, before their birth." For, not as learning
existing things from existing things, does the Divine Mind know, but
from Itself, and in Itself, as Cause, it pre-holds and pre-comprehends
<span id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-Page_90"></span>
the notion and knowledge, and essence of all things; not approaching
each several thing according to its kind, but knowing and containing all
things, within one grasp of the Cause; just as the light, as cause,
presupposes in itself the notion of darkness, not knowing the darkness
otherwise than from the light. The Divine Wisdom then, by knowing
Itself, will know all things; things material, immaterially, and things
divisible, indivisibly, and things many, uniformly; both knowing and
producing all. things by Itself, the One. For even, if as becomes one
Cause, Almighty God distributes being to all things that be, as beseems
the self-same, unique Cause, He will know all things, as being from
Himself, and pre-established in Himself, and not from things that be
will He receive the knowledge of them; but even to each of them, He will
be provider of the knowledge of themselves, and of the mutual knowledge
of each other. Almighty God, then, has not one knowledge, that of
Himself, peculiar to Himself, and another, which embraces in common all
things existing; for the very Cause of all things, by knowing Itself,
will hardly, I presume, be ignorant of the things from Itself, and of
which It is Cause. In this way then, Almighty God knows existing things,
not by a knowledge of things existing, but by that of Himself. For the
Oracles affirm, that the angels also know things on the earth, not as
knowing them by sensible perceptions, although objects of sensible
perception, but by a proper power and nature of the Godlike Mind. <span
id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-Page_91"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p6"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p7"></span>In addition to these things, we must
examine how *we* know God, Who is neither an object of intellectual nor
of sensible perception, nor is absolutely anything of things existing.
Never, then, is it true to say, that *we* know God; not from His own
nature (for that is unknown, and surpasses all reason and mind), but,
from the ordering of all existing things, as projected from Himself, and
containing a sort of images and similitudes of His Divine exemplars, we
ascend, as far as we have power, to that which is beyond all, by method
and order in the abstraction and pre-eminence of all, and in the Cause
of all. Wherefore, Almighty God is known even in all, and *apart* from
all. And through knowledge, Almighty God is known, and through agnosia.
And there is, of Him, both conception, and expression, and science, and
contact, and sensible perception, and opinion, and imagination, and
name, and all the rest. And He is neither conceived, nor expressed, nor
named. And He is not any of existing things, nor is He known in any one
of existing things. And He is all in all, and nothing in none. And He is
known to all, from all, and to none from none. For, we both say these
things correctly concerning God, and He is celebrated from all existing
things, according to the analogy of all things, of which He is Cause.
And there is, further, the most Divine Knowledge of Almighty God, which
is known, through not knowing (<span
id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p7.1"></span>αγνοσια) during the union above mind; when
the mind, having stood apart from all existing <span id="page_92">p.
92</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-Page_92"></span> things, then having
dismissed also itself, has been made one with the super-luminous rays,
thence and there being illuminated by the unsearchable depth of wisdom.
Yet, even from all things, as I said, we may know It, for It is,
according to the sacred text, the Cause formative of all, and ever
harmonizing all, and (Cause) of the indissoluble adaptation and order of
all, and ever uniting <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) the ends of
the former to the beginnings of those that follow, and beautifying the
one symphony and harmony of the whole.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p8"></span>SECTION IV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p9"></span>But Almighty God is celebrated in the
holy Oracles as "Logos"; not only because He is provider of reason and
mind and wisdom, but because He anticipated the causes of all,
solitarily in Himself, and because He passes through all, as the Oracles
say, even to the end of all things; and even more than these, because
the Divine Word surpasses every simplicity, and is set free from all, as
the Superessential. This "Logos "is the simple and really existing
truth, around which, as a pure and unerring knowledge of the whole, the
Divine Faith *is--*the enduring foundation of the believers--which
establishes them in the truth, and the truth in them, by an unchangeable
identity, they having the pure knowledge of the truth of the things
believed. For, if knowledge unites the knowing and the known, but
ignorance is ever a cause to the ignorant person of <span
id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.vii-Page_93"></span>
change, and of separation from himself, nothing will move one who has
believed in the truth, according to the sacred Logos, from true Faith’s
Sanctuary upon which he will have the steadfastness of his unmoved,
unchangeable identity. For, well does he know, who has been united to
the Truth, that it is well with him although the multitude may admonish
him as "wandering." For it probably escapes them, that he is wandering
from error to the truth, through the veritable faith. But, he truly
knows himself, not, as they say, mad, but as liberated from the unstable
and variable course around the manifold variety of error, through the
simple, and ever the same, and similar truth. Thus then the early
leaders <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) of our Divine Theosophy are
dying every day, on behalf of truth, testifying as is natural, both by
every word and deed, to the one knowledge of the truth of the
Christians, that it is of all, both more simple and more Divine, yea
rather, that it is the sole true and one and simple knowledge of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[87:48](dio10.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p3.1"></span>See Caput XI., Section VI.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[92:49](dio10.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p7.2"></span>True theory of evolution.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[93:50](dio10.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.vii-p9.1"></span>First persecution of Nero.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput VIII.](dio11.md)
