[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio13)  [Next](dio15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi"></span>

### <span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p0.1"></span>CAPUT XI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p1"></span>Concerning Peace, and what is meant by
the self-existent Being; what is the self-existent Life, and what the
self-existent Power, and such like expressions.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p2"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p3"></span>COME, then, let us extol the *Peace*
Divine, and Source of conciliation, by hymns of peace! For this it is
which unifies all, and engenders, and effects the agreement and
fellowship of all. Wherefore, even all things aspire to it, which turns
their divided multiplicity into the thorough Oneness, and unifies the
tribal war of the whole into a homogeneous dwelling together, by the
participation of the divine Peace. With regard, then, to the more
reverend of the conciliating powers, these indeed are united to
themselves and to each other, and to the one Source of Peace of the
whole; and the things (that are) under them, these they unite also to
themselves and <span id="page_113">p. 113</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.xi-Page_113"></span> to each other, and to the One and
all-perfect Source and Cause of the Peace of all, which, passing
in-divisibly to the whole, limits and terminates and secures everything,
as if by a kind of bolts, which bind together things that are separated;
and do not permit them, when separated, to rush to infinity and the
boundless, and to become without order, and without stability, and
destitute of God, and to depart from the union amongst themselves, and
to become intermingled m each other, in every sort of confusion.
Concerning then, this, the Divine Peace and Repose, which the holy
Justus calls unutterableness, and, as compared with every known
progression, immobility, how it rests and is at ease, and how it is in
itself, and within itself, and entire, and to itself entire is
super-united, and when entering into itself, and multiplying itself,
neither loses its own Union, but even proceeds to all, whilst remaining
entire within, by reason of excess of its Union surpassing all, it is
neither permitted, nor attainable to any existing being, either to
express or to understand. But, having premised this, as unutterable and
unknowable, as being beyond all, let us examine its conceived and
uttered participations, and this, as possible to men, and to us, as
inferior to many good men.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p4"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p5"></span>First then, this must be said, that It
is mainstay of the self-existent Peace, both the general and the
particular; and that It mingles all things with each other within their
unconfused union, as beseems <span id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.xi-Page_114"></span> which, united indivisibly, and at the
same time they severally continuously unmingled stand, as regards their
own proper kind, not muddled through their mingling with the opposite,
nor blunting any of their unifying distinctness and purity. Let us then
contemplate a certain One and simple nature of the peaceful Union,
unifying all things to Itself, and to themselves, and to each other; and
preserving all things in an unconfused grasp of all, both unmingled and
mingled together; by reason of which the divine Minds, being united,,
are united to their own conceptions, and to the things conceived; and
again they ascend to the unknowable contact of things fixed above mind;
by reason of which, souls, by uniting their manifold reasonings, and
collecting them together to an One intellectual Purity, advance in a
manner proper to themselves, by method and order, through the immaterial
and indivisible conception, to the union above conception; by reason of
which, the one and indissoluble connection of all is established, within
its Divine Harmony, and is harmonized by complete concord and agreement
and fellowship, being united without confusion, and held together
without division. For the fulness of the perfect Peace passes through to
all existing things, as beseems the most simple, and unmingled presence
of Its unifying power, making all One. and binding the extremes through
the intermediate to the extremes, which are yoked together in an one
connatural friendship; and bestowing the enjoyment of Itself, even to
the furthest extremities of the whole, <span id="page_115">p. 115</span>
<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-Page_115"></span> and making all things of one
family, by the unities, the identities, the unions, the conjunctions of
the Divine Peace, standing of course indivisibly, and showing all in
one, and passing through all, and not stepping out of Its own identity.
For It advances to all, and imparts Itself to all, in a manner
appropriate to them, and there overflows an abundance of peaceful
fertility; and It remains, through excess of union, super-united,
entire, to and throughout Its whole self.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p6"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p7"></span>But how, some one may say, do all
things aspire to peace, for many things rejoice in diversity and
division, and would not, at any time, of their own accord, be willingly
in repose. Now, if in saying this, he affirms, that the identity of each
existing thing is diversity and division, and that there is no existent
thing whatever, which at any time is willing to destroy this (identity),
neither would we in any way contradict this, but would declare even this
an aspiration after peace. For all things love to dwell at peace, and to
be united amongst themselves, and to be unmoved and unfallen from
themselves, and the things of themselves. And the perfect Peace seeks to
guard the idiosyncrasy of each unmoved and unconfused, by its
peace-giving forethought, preserving everything unmoved and unconfused,
both as regards themselves and each other, and establishes all things by
a stable and <span id="page_116">p. 116</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.xi-Page_116"></span> unswerving power, towards their own
peace and immobility.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p8"></span>SECTION IV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p9"></span>And if all things in motion desire, not
repose, but ever to make known their own proper movement, even this is
an aspiration after the Divine Peace of the whole, which preserves all
things from falling away of their own accord, and guards the
idiosyncrasy and moving life of all moving things unmoved and free from
falling, so that the things moved, being at peace amongst themselves,
and always in the same condition, perform their own proper functions.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p10"></span>SECTION V.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p11"></span>But if, in affirming the diversity as
a falling from peace, he insists that peace is not beloved by all,
verily there is no existing being which has entirely fallen from every
kind of union; for, the altogether unstable and infinite, and
unestablished, and without limit, is neither an actual thing, nor in
things actual. But if he says, that those are inimical to peace, and
good things of peace, who rejoice in strife and anger and changes and
disturbances, even these are controlled by obscure images of a peaceful
aspiration; being vexed by tumultuous passions, and ignorantly aspiring
to calm them, they imagine that they will pacify themselves by the
gratification of things which ever elude them, and they are disturbed by
the non-attainment of the pleasures which overpowered them. What would
any one say of the peaceful stream of <span id="page_117">p. 117</span>
<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-Page_117"></span> love towards man in Christ,
according to which we have learned no longer to wage war, either with
ourselves, or each other, or with angels, but that with them, according
to our power, we should also be fellow-workers in Divine things, after
the purpose of Jesus, Who worketh all in all, and forms a peace
unutterable and pre-determined from Eternity, and reconciles us to
Himself, in Spirit, and through Himself and in Himself to the Father;
concerning which supernatural gifts it is sufficiently spoken in the
*Theological Outlines,* whilst the Oracles of the sacred inspiration
furnish us with additional testimony.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p12"></span>SECTION VI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-p13"></span>But, since you once asked me by
letter, what in the world I consider the self-existent Being, the
self-existent Life, the self-existent Wisdom, and said that you debated
with yourself how, at one time, I call Almighty God, self-existent Life,
and at another, Mainstay of the self-existent Life, I thought it
necessary, O holy man of God, to also free you from this difficulty, so
far as lay in my power. And first then, in order that we may now resume
that which I have said a thousand times already, there is no
contradiction in saying that Almighty God is self-existent Power, or
self-existent Life, and that He is Mainstay of the self-existent Life or
Peace or Power. For the latter, He is named from things existing, and
specially from the first existing, as Cause of all existing things; and
the former, as being above all, even the first existing of beings, being
<span id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.xi-Page_118"></span> above superessentially. But you say,
what in the world do we call the self-existent Being, or the
self-existent Life, or whatever we lay down to be absolutely and
originally and to have stood forth primarily from God? And we reply,
this is not crooked but straight, and has a simple explanation. For we
do not say that the self-existent Being, as Cause of the being of all
things, is a sort of Divine or angelic essence (for the Superessential
alone is Source and Essence and Cause of the existence of all things,
and of the self-existent Being), nor that another Deity, besides the
Super-divine, produces Life for all that live, and is a Life Causative
of the self-existent Life; nor to speak summarily, that essences and
personalities originate and make existing things, so that superficial
people have named them both gods, and creators of existing
things,--whom, to speak truly and properly, neither they themselves knew
(for they are non-existent), nor their fathers,--but we call
self-existent Being, and self-existent Life, and self-existent Deity, as
regards at least Source, and Deity, and Cause, the One Superior and
Superessential Source and Cause; but as regards Impartation, the
providential Powers, that issue forth from God the unparticipating,
(these we call) the self-existent essentiation, self-existent living,
self-existent deification, by participating in which according to their
own capacity, things existing, both are, and are said to be, existing,
and living, and full of God--and the rest in the same way. Wherefore
also, He is called the good Mainstay of the first of these, then <span
id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.xi-Page_119"></span> of
the whole of them, then of the portions of them, then of those who
participate in them entirely, then of those who participate in them in
part. And why must we speak of these things, since some of our divine
instructors in holy things, affirm that the Super-good and Super-divine
self-existent Goodness and Deity, is Mainstay even of the self-existent
Goodness and Deity; affirming that the good-making and deifying gift
issued forth from God; and that the self-existent beautifying stream, is
self-existent beauty, and whole beauty, and partial beauty, and things
absolutely beautiful, and things partially beautiful, and whatever other
things are said and shall be said after the same fashion, which declare
that providences and goodnesses issuing forth from God the
unparticipating, in an ungrudging stream, are participated by existing
things, and bubble over in order that distinctly the Cause of all may be
beyond all, and the Superessential and Supernatural may, in every
respect, be above things of any sort of essence and nature whatever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput XII.](dio15)
