[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio10)  [Next](dio12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii"></span>

### <span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p0.1"></span>CAPUT VIII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p1"></span>Concerning power, justice,
preservation, redemption, in which also concerning inequality.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p2"></span>SECTION I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p3"></span>BUT since the theologians sing the
Divine truth fulness and super-wise wisdom, both as power and <span
id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-Page_94"></span> as
justice, and designate It preservation and redemption, come then, let us
unfold these Divine Names also, as best we can. Now, that the Godhead is
pre-eminent above, and surpasses every power, howsoever being and
conceived, I do not suppose any of those nourished in the Divine Oracles
does not know. For on many occasions the Word of God attributes the
Lordship to It, even when distinguishing It from the supercelestial
powers themselves. How then do the theologians sing it also as a Power,
which is pre-eminent above every power? or how ought we to understand
the name of power as applied to It?

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p4"></span>SECTION II.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p5"></span>We say, then, that Almighty God is
Power, as pre-having, and super-having, every power in Himself, and as
Author of every power, and producing everything as beseems a Power
inflexible and unencompassed, and as being Author of the very existence
of power, either the universal or particular, and as boundless in power,
not only by the production of all power, but by being above all, even
the self. existent Power, and by His superior power, and by His bringing
into existence, *ad infinitum,* endless powers other than the existing
powers; and by the fact that the endless powers, even when brought into
existence without end, are not able to blunt the super-endless
production of His power-making power; and by the unutterable and
unknown, and inconceivable nature of His all-surpassing power, which,
<span id="page_95">p. 95</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-Page_95"></span>
through abundance of the powerful, gives power even to weakness, and
holds together and preserves the remotest of its echoes; as also we may
see even with regard to the powerful insensible perception, that the
super-brilliant lights reach even to obscure visions, and they say, that
the loud sounds enter even into ears which are not very well adapted to
the reception of sounds. For that which does not hear at all is not
hearing; and that which does not see at all is not sight.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p6"></span>SECTION III.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p7"></span>The distribution, then, of boundless
power, from Almighty God, passes to all beings, and there is no single
being which is utterly deprived of the possession of some power; but it
has either intellectual, or rational, or sensible, or vital, or
essential power; yea even, if one may say so, self-existent being has
power to be from the superessential Power.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p8"></span>SECTION IV.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p9"></span>From It, are the godlike powers of
the angelic ranks; from It, they have their immutability, and all their
intellectual and immortal perpetual movements; and their equilibrium
itself, and their undiminishable aspiration after good, they have
received from the Power boundless in goodness; since It commits to them
the power to be, and to be such, and to aspire always to be, and the
power itself to aspire to have the power always. <span id="page_96">p.
96</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-Page_96"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p10"></span>SECTION V.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p11"></span>But the gifts of the unfailing Power
pass on, both to men and living creatures, and plants, and the entire
nature of the universe; and It empowers things united for their mutual
friendship and communion, and things divided for their being each within
their own sphere and limit, without confusion, and without mingling; and
preserves the order and good relations of the whole, for their own
proper good, and guards the undying lives of the individual angels
inviolate; and the heavenly and the life-giving and astral bodies <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) and orders without change: and makes the
period of time possible to be; and disperses the revolutions of time by
their progressions, and collects them together by their returns; and
makes the powers of fire unquenchable, and the rills of water unfailing;
and sets bounds to the aerial current, and establishes the earth upon
nothing; and guards its life-giving throes from perishing; and preserves
the mutual harmony and mingling of the elements without confusion, and
without division; and holds together the bond of soul and body; and
arouses the nourishing and growing powers of plants; and sustains the
essential powers of the whole; and secures the continuance of the
universe without dissolution, and bequeaths the deification Itself, by
furnishing a power for this to those who are being deified. And in a
word, there is absolutely no single thing which is deprived of <span
id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-Page_97"></span> the
overruling surety and embrace of the Divine Power. For that which
absolutely has no power, neither is, nor is anything, nor is there any
sort of position of it whatever.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p12"></span>SECTION VI.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p13"></span>Yet Elymas, the Magician, says, "if
Almighty God is All-powerful, how is He said by your theologian, not to
be able to do some thing "? But he calumniates the Divine Paul, who
said, "that Almighty God is not able to deny Himself." Now in advancing
this, I very much fear lest I should incur ridicule for folly, as
undertaking to pull down frail houses, built upon the sand by little
boys at play; and as being eager to aim at the theological intelligence
of this, as if it were some inaccessible mark. For, the denial of
Himself, is a falling from truth, but the truth is an existent, and the
falling from the truth is a falling from the existent. If, then, the
truth is an existent, and the denial of the truth a falling from the
existent, Almighty God cannot fall from the existent, and non-existence
is not; as any one might say, the powerless is not powerful; and
ignorance, by privation, does not know. The wise man, not having
understood this, imitates those inexperienced wrestlers, who, very
often, by assuming that their adversaries are weak, according to their
own opinion, and manfully making a show of fight with them, when absent,
and courageously beating the air with empty blows, think that they have
overcome their antagonists, and proclaim themselves <span
id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-Page_98"></span>
victors (though) not yet having experienced their rivals’ strength. But
we, conjecturing the meaning of the Theologian to the best of our
ability, celebrate the Super-powerful God, as Omnipotent, as blessed,
and only Lord; as reigning in the kingdom of Eternity itself; as in no
respect fallen from things existing;--but rather, as both super-having
and pre-having all existing things, as beseems Power superessential; and
as having bequeathed to all things being, the power to be, and this
their being in an ungrudging stream, as beseems abundance of surpassing
power.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p14"></span>SECTION VII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p15"></span>But further, Almighty God is
celebrated as justice, as distributing things suitable to all, both due
measure, and beauty, and good order, and arrangement, and marking out
all distributions and orders for each, according to that which truly is
the most just limit, and as being Cause for all of the free action of
each. For the Divine Justice arranges and disposes all things, and
preserving all things unmingled and unconfused, from all, gives to all
existing beings things convenient for each, according to the due falling
to each existing thing. And, if we speak correctly, all those who abuse
the Divine Justice, unconsciously convict themselves of a manifest
injustice. For they say, that immortality ought to be in mortals, and
perfection in the imperfect, and imposed necessity in the free, and
<span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-Page_99"></span>
identity in the variable, and perfect power in the weak, and the
temporal should be eternal, and things moveable by nature, unchangeable,
and that temporary pleasures should be eternal; and in one word, they
assign the properties of one thing to another. They ought to know that
the Divine Justice in this respect is really a true justice, because it
distributes to all the things proper to themselves, according to the
fitness of each existing thing, and preserves the nature of each in its
own order and capacity.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p16"></span>SECTION VIII.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p17"></span>But some one may say, it is not the
mark of justice to leave pious men without assistance, when they are
ground down by evil men. To which we must reply, that, if those whom you
call pious do indeed love things on earth, which are zealously sought
after by the earthly, they have altogether fallen from the Divine Love.
And I do not know how they could be called pious, when they unjustly
treat things truly loveable and divine, which do not at once surpass in
influence in their estimation things undesirable and unloveable. But, if
they love the realities, they who desire certain things ought to rejoice
when they attain the things desired. Are they not then nearer the
angelic virtues, when, as far as possible, by aspiration after things
Divine, they withdraw from the affection for earthly things, by being
exercised very manfully to this, in their perils, on behalf of the
beautiful? So that, it is true <span id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.viii-Page_100"></span> to say, that this is rather a
property of the Divine Justice--not to pamper and destroy the bravery of
the best, by the gifts of earthly things, nor, if any one should attempt
to do this, to leave them without assistance, but to establish them in
the excellent and harsh condition, and to dispense to them, as being
such, things meet for them.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p18"></span>SECTION IX.

<span id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p19"></span>This Divine Justice, then, is
celebrated also even as preservation of the whole, as preserving and
guarding the essence and order of each, distinct and pure from the rest;
and as being genuine cause of each minding its own business in the
whole. But, if any one should also celebrate this preservation, as
rescuing savingly the whole from the worse, we will entirely accept this
as the *cantique* of the manifold preservation, and we will deem him
worthy to define this even as the principal preservation of the whole,
which preserves all things in themselves, without change, undisturbed
and unswaying to the worse; and guards all things without strife and
without war, each being regulated by their own methods; and excludes all
inequality and minding others’ business, from the whole; and maintains
the relations of each from falling to things contrary, and from
migrating. And since, without missing the mark of the sacred theology,
one might celebrate this preservation as redeeming all things existing,
by the goodness which is preservative of all, from falling away from
their own proper goods, so far <span id="page_101">p. 101</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.viii-Page_101"></span> as the nature of each of those who
are being preserved admits; wherefore also the Theologians name it
redemption, both so far as it does not permit things really being to
fall away to non-existence, and so far as, if anything should have been
led astray to discord and disorder, and should suffer any diminution of
the perfection of its own proper goods, even this it redeems from
passion and listlessness and loss; supplying what is deficient, and
paternally overlooking the slackness, and raising up from evil; yea,
rather, establishing in the good, and filling -up the leaking good, and
arranging and adorning its disorder and deformity, and making it
complete, and liberating it from all its blemishes. But let this suffice
concerning these matters, and concerning Justice, in accordance with
which the equality of all is measured and defined, and every inequality,
which arises from deprivation of the equality, in each thing severally,
is excluded. For, if any one should interpret inequality as distinctions
in the whole, of the whole, in relation to the whole, Justice guards
even this, not permitting the whole, when they have become mingled
throughout, to be thrown into confusion, but keeping all existing things
within each particular kind, in which each was intended by nature, to
be. <span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span
id="ii.ii.ii.viii-Page_102"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[96:51](dio11.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p11.1"></span><span
id="ii.ii.ii.viii-p11.2"></span>οὐσίας

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput IX.](dio12.md)
