[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio49)  [Next](dio51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.vii"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.vii-p0.1"></span>CAPUT VII.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p1"></span>Concerning the Seraphim and Cherubim and
Thrones, and concerning their first Hierarchy.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p2"></span>Section I.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p3"></span>We, whilst admitting this as the
arrangement of the holy Hierarchies, affirm, that every appellation of
the celestial Minds denotes the Godlike characteristic of each; and
those who know Hebrew affirm, that the holy designation of the Seraphim
denotes either that they are kindling or burning; and that of Cherubim,
a fulness of knowledge or stream of wisdom. Naturally, then, the first
(order) of the Heavenly Hierarchies is ministered by the most exalted
Beings, holding, as it does, a rank which is higher than all, from the
fact, that it is established immediately around God, and that the
first-wrought Divine manifestations and perfections pass earlier to
<span id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span id="iv.ii.vii-Page_25"></span> it,
as being nearest. They are called, then, "Burning," and Thrones, and
Stream of Wisdom--by a name which sets forth their Godlike conditions.
The appellation of Seraphim plainly teaches their ever moving around
things Divine, and constancy, and warmth, and keenness, and the seething
of that persistent, indomitable, and inflexible perpetual motion, and
the vigorous assimilation and elevation of the subordinate, as giving
new life and rekindling them to the same heat; and purifying through
fire and burnt-offering, and the light-like and light-shedding
characteristic which can never be concealed or consumed, and remains
always the same, which destroys and dispels every kind of obscure
darkness. But the appellation of the Cherubim denotes their knowledge
and their vision of God, and their readiness to receive the highest gift
of light, and their power of contemplating the super-Divine comeliness
in its first revealed power, and their being filled anew with the
impartation which maketh wise, and their ungrudging communication to
those next to them, by the stream of the given wisdom. The appellation
of the most exalted and pre-eminent Thrones denotes their manifest
exaltation above every grovelling inferiority, and their supermundane
tendency towards higher things; and their unswerving separation from all
remoteness; and their invariable and firmly-fixed settlement around the
veritable Highest, with the whole force of their powers; and their
receptivity of the supremely Divine approach, in the absence of all
passion and earthly <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span
id="iv.ii.vii-Page_26"></span> tendency, and their bearing God; and the
ardent expansion of themselves for the Divine receptions.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p4"></span>Section II.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p5"></span>This, then, is the revelation of their
names, so far as we can give it; and we ought to say what we think their
Hierarchy is. For I suppose we have sufficiently shewn above, that the
purpose of every Hierarchy is an unswerving devotion to the divine
imitation of the Divine Likeness, and that every Hierarchical function
is set apart for the sacred reception and distribution of an undefiled
purification, and Divine Light, and perfecting science.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p6"></span>And now I pray that I may speak worthily
of the most exalted Minds--how the Hierarchy amongst them is exhibited
through the Oracles.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p7"></span>One must consider, then, that the
Hierarchy is akin, and in every respect like, to the first Beings, who
are established after the Godhead, who gave them Being, and who are
marshalled, as it were, in Its very vestibule, who surpass every unseen
and seen created power. We must then regard them as pure, not as though
they had been freed from unholy stains and blemishes, nor yet as though
they were unreceptive of earthly fancies, but as far exalted above every
stain of remissness and every inferior holiness, as befits the highest
degree of purity--established above the most Godlike powers, and
clinging unflinchingly to their own self-moved and same-moved rank in
their invariable love of God, conscious in no respect whatever of any
declivity to a worse <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="iv.ii.vii-Page_27"></span> condition, but having the unsullied
fixity of their own Godlike identity--never liable to fall, and always
unmoved; and again, as "contemplative," not contemplators of
intellectual symbols as sensible, nor as being led to the Divine Being
by the varied texture of holy representations written for meditation,
but as being filled with all kinds of immaterial knowledge of higher
light, and satiated, as permissible, with the beautifying and original
beauty of super-essential and thrice manifested contemplation, and thus,
being deemed worthy of the Communion with Jesus, they do not stamp
pictorially the deifying similitude in divinely-formed images, but, as
being really near to Him, in first participation of the knowledge of His
deifying illuminations; nay more, that the imitation of God is given to
them in the highest possible degree, and they participate, so far as is
allowable to them, in His deifying and philanthropic virtues, in the
power of a first manifestation; and, likewise as "perfected," not as
being illuminated with an analytic science of sacred variety, but as
being filled with a first and pre-eminent deification, as beseems the
most exalted science of the works of God, possible in Angels. For, not
through other holy Beings, but being ministered from the very Godhead,
by the immediate elevation to It, by their power, and rank, surpassing
all, they are both established near the All-Holy without any shadow of
turning, and are conducted for contemplation to the immaterial and
intelligible comeliness, as far as permissible, and are initiated into
the scientific <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="iv.ii.vii-Page_28"></span> methods of the works of God, as being
first and around God, being ministered, in the highest degree, from the
very source of consecration.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p8"></span>Section III.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p9"></span>This, then, the theologians distinctly
shew (viz.) that the subordinate Orders of the Heavenly Beings are
taught by the superior, in due order, the deifying sciences; and that
those who are higher than all are illuminated from Godhead itself, as
far as permissible, in revelations of the Divine mysteries. For they
introduce some of them as being religiously instructed, by those of a
higher rank, that He, Who was raised to Heaven as Man, is Lord of the
Heavenly Powers and King of Glory; and others, as questioning Jesus
Himself, as desiring to be instructed in the science of His Divine work
on our behalf, and Jesus Himself teaching them immediately, and shewing
to them, at first hand, His beneficent work out of love to man. For "I,"
He says, "am speaking of righteousness and judgment of Salvation." Now I
am astonished that even the first of the Beings in Heaven, and so far
above all, should reverently strive after the supremely Divine
illuminations, as intermediate Beings. For they do not ask directly,
"Wherefore are Thy garments red? " but they first raise the question
among themselves, shewing that they desire to learn, and crave the
deifying knowledge, and not anticipating the illumination given after a
Divine procedure. <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="iv.ii.vii-Page_29"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p10"></span>The first Hierarchy, then, of the
Heavenly Minds is purified, and enlightened, and perfected, by being
ministered from the very Author of initiation, through its elevation to
It immediately, being filled, according to its degree, with the
altogether most holy purification of the unproachable Light of the
pre-perfect source of initiation, unstained indeed by any remissness,
and full of primal Light, and perfected by its participation in
first-given knowledge and science. But to sum up, I may say this, not
inappropriately, that the reception of the supremely Divine Science is,
both purification, and enlightenment, and perfecting,--purifying, as it
were, from ignorance, by the knowledge of the more perfect revelations
imparted to it according to fitness, and enlightening by the self-same
Divine knowledge, through which it also purifies, that which did not
before contemplate the things which are now made manifest through the
higher illumination; and perfecting further, by the self-same Light,
through the abiding science of the mysteries made clearly manifest.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p11"></span>Section IV.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p12"></span>This, then, according to my science, is
the first rank of the Heavenly Beings which encircle and stand
immediately around God; and without symbol, and without interruption,
dances round His eternal knowledge in the most exalted ever-moving
stability as in Angels; viewing purely many and blessed contemplations,
and illuminated with simple <span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span
id="iv.ii.vii-Page_30"></span> and immediate splendours, and filled with
Divine nourishment,--many indeed by the first-given profusion, but one
by the unvariegated and unifying oneness of the supremely Divine
banquet, deemed worthy indeed of much participation and co-operation
with God, by their assimilation to Him, as far as attainable, of their
excellent habits and energies, and knowing many Divine things
pre-eminently, and participating in supremely Divine science and
knowledge, as is lawful. Wherefore the Word of God has transmitted its
hymns to those on earth, in which are Divinely shewn the excellency of
its most exalted illumination. For some of its members, to speak after
sensible perception, proclaim as a "voice of many waters," "Blessed is
the glory of the Lord from His place" and others cry aloud that frequent
and most august hymn of God, "Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord of Sabaoth, the
whole earth is full of His glory." These most excellent hymnologies of
the supercelestial Minds we have already unfolded to the best of our
ability in the "Treatise concerning the Divine Hymns," and have spoken
sufficiently concerning them in that Treatise, from which, by way of
remembrance, it is enough to produce so much as is necessary to the
present occasion, namely, "That the first Order, having been
illuminated, from this the supremely Divine goodness, as permissible, in
theological science, as a Hierarchy reflecting that Goodness transmitted
to those next after it," teaching briefly this, "That it is just and
right that the <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="iv.ii.vii-Page_31"></span> august Godhead -- Itself both above
praise, and all-praiseworthy--should be known and extolled by the
God-receptive minds, as is attainable; for they as images of God are, as
the Oracles say, the Divine places of the supremely Divine repose; and
further, that It is Monad and Unit tri-subsistent, sending forth His
most kindly forethought to all things being, from the super-heavenly
Minds to the lowest of the earth; as super-original Origin and Cause of
every essence, and grasping all things super-essentially in a resistless
embrace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput VIII.](dio51)
