[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio55)  [Next](dio57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xiii"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.xiii-p0.1"></span>CAPUT XIII.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p1"></span>For what reason the Prophet Isaiah is
said to have been purified by the Seraphim.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p2"></span>Section I.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p3"></span>Come, then, let us examine this as best
we can, why the Seraphim is said to be sent to one of the Theologians;
for some one may object, that not one of the inferior Angels, but he,
the enrolled amongst the most reverend Beings, cleanses the Prophet.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p4"></span>Section II.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p5"></span>Some, then, affirm that, according to
the definition already given of the mutual relation of all the Minds,
the Logion does not name one of the highest around God, as having come
for the cleansing of the Theologian, but that some one of the Angels,
placed over us as a sacred Minister of the Prophet’s cleansing, is
called by the same name. as the Seraphim, on the ground that the removal
of the faults spoken of, and the restoration of him who was cleansed for
the Divine mission, was through fire; and they say that the Logion
speaks simply of one of the Seraphim, not one of those who are
established around God, but one of the Powers set over us for the
purpose of cleansing.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p6"></span>Section III.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p7"></span>Now another man brought forward to me a
by no means foolish defence of the present position. <span
id="page_47">p. 47</span> <span id="iv.ii.xiii-Page_47"></span> For he
said that that great one, whoever he was,--the Angel who formed this
vision for the purpose of teaching the theologian Divine
things,--referred his own cleansing function to God, and after God, to
the first working Hierarchy. And was not this statement certainly true?
For he who said this, affirmed that the supremely Divine Power in
visiting all, advances and penetrates all irresistibly, and yet is
invisible to all, not only as being superessentially elevated above all,
but as secretly transmitting its providential energies to all; yea,
rather, it is manifested to all the intellectual Beings in due degree,
and by conducting Its own gift of Light to the most reverend Beings,
through them, as first, It distributes in due order to the subordinate,
according to the power of each Division to bear the vision of God; or to
speak more strictly, and through familiar illustrations (for if they
fall short of the Glory of God, Who is exalted above all, yet they are
more illustrating for us), the distribution of the sun’s ray passes with
easy distribution to first matter, as being more transparent than all,
and, through it with greater clearness, lights up its own splendours;
but when it strikes more dense materials, its distributed brilliancy
becomes more obscure, from the inaptitude of the materials illuminated
for transmission of the gift of Light, and from this it is naturally
contracted, so as to almost entirely exclude the passage of Light.
Again, the heat of fire transmits itself chiefly to things that are more
receptive, and yielding, and conductive <span id="page_48">p. 48</span>
<span id="iv.ii.xiii-Page_48"></span> to assimilation to itself; but, as
regards repellent opposing substances, either it leaves none, or a very
light, trace of its fiery energy; and further, when through substances
favourable to its proper action, it comes in contact with things not
congenial,--first, it perchance makes things easily changed to heating
hot, and through them heats proportionately either water or something
else which is not easily heated. After the same rule, then, of Nature’s
well-ordered method, the regulation of all good order, both visible and
invisible, manifests supernaturally the brightness of its own gift of
Light, in first manifestation to the most exalted Beings, in abundant
streams, and through these, the Beings after them partake of the Divine
ray. For these, as knowing God first, and striving preeminently after
Divine virtue, and to become first-workers, are deemed worthy of the
power and energy for the imitation of God, as attainable, and these
benevolently elevate the beings after them to an equality, as far as
possible, by imparting ungrudgingly to them the splendour which rests
upon themselves, and these again to the subordinate, and throughout each
Order, the first rank imparts its gift to that after it, and the Divine
Light thus rests upon all, in due proportion, with providential
forethought. There is, then, for all those who are illuminated, a Source
of illumination, viz., God, by nature, and really, and properly, as
Essence of Light, and Cause of Being, and Vision itself; but, by
ordinance, and for Divine imitation, the relatively <span
id="page_49">p. 49</span> <span id="iv.ii.xiii-Page_49"></span> superior
(is source) for each after it, by the fact, that the Divine rays are
poured through it to that. All the remaining Angelic Beings, then,
naturally regard the highest Order of the Heavenly Minds as source,
after God, of every God-knowledge and God-imitation, since, through
them, the supremely Divine illumination is distributed to all, and to
us. Wherefore, they refer every holy energy of Divine imitation to God
indeed as Cause, but to the first Godlike Minds, as first agents and
teachers of things Divine.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p8"></span>The first Order, then, of the holy
Angels possesses, more than all, the characteristic of fire, and the
streaming distribution of supremely Divine wisdom, and the faculty of
knowing the highest science of the Divine illuminations, and the
characteristic of Thrones, exhibiting their expansion for the reception
of God; and the ranks of the subordinate Beings possess indeed the
empyrean, the wise, the knowing, the God-receptive, faculty, but
subordinately, and by looking to the first, and through them, as being
deemed worthy of the Divine imitation in first operation, are conducted
to the attainable likeness of God. The aforesaid holy characteristics,
then, which the Beings after them possess, through the first, they
attribute to those Beings themselves, after God, as Hierarchs.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p9"></span>Section IV.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p10"></span>He who said this, used to affirm, that
this vision was shewn to the Theologian, through one of the <span
id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span id="iv.ii.xiii-Page_50"></span>holy and
blessed Angels set over us, and that from his illuminating direction, he
was elevated to that intellectual contemplation in which he saw the most
exalted Beings seated (to speak symbolically) under God, and with God,
and around <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) God, and the
super-princely <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) Eminence elevated
unspeakably above them and all, seated on high in the midst of the
superior Powers. The Theologian then learned, from the things seen,
that, as compared with every super-essential pre-eminence, the Divine
Being was seated incomparably above every visible and invisible power,
yea, even that It is exalted above all, as the Reality of all things, as
Absolute--not even like to the first of created Beings;--further also,
that It is source and essentiating Cause, and unalterable Fixity of the
undissolved continuance of all things, from, Which is both the being and
the well-being of the most exalted Powers themselves. Then he revealed
that the Godlike powers of the most holy Seraphim, themselves, whose
sacred appellation signifies the Fiery, concerning which we shall
shortly speak as best we can, conducted the elevations of the empyrean
power to the Divine likeness. And, the holy Theologian, by viewing the
description of free and most exalted elevation of the sixfold wings to
the Divine Being in first, middle, and last conceptions, and further,
their endless feet and many faces, and their extended wings--one under
their feet, and the other over their faces, as seen in vision, and the
perpetual movement of their middle wings--was <span id="page_51">p.
51</span> <span id="iv.ii.xiii-Page_51"></span>brought to the
intelligible knowledge of the things seen, since there was manifested to
him the power of the most exalted minds for deep penetration and
contemplation, and the sacred reverence which they have, supermundanely,
for the bold and courageous and unattainable scrutiny into higher and
deeper mysteries; and of the incessant and high-flying perpetual
movement of their Godlike energies in due proportion. But he was also
taught the hidden mysteries of that supremely Divine and much esteemed
Hymn of Praise--whilst the Angel who formed the vision imparts, as far
as possible, his own sacred knowledge to the Theologian. He also taught
him this, that the participation, as far as attainable, in the supremely
Divine and radiant purity, is a purification to the pure however pure;
and it being accomplished from the very Godhead by most exalted causes,
for all the sacred Minds by a superessential hiddenness, is in a manner
more clear, and exhibits and distributes itself, in a higher degree, to
the highest powers around It; but with regard to the second, or us, the
lowest mental powers, as each is distant from, as regards the Divine
likeness, so It contracts its brilliant illumination to the single
unknowable of its own hiddenness. And it illuminates the second,
severally, through the first; and, if one must speak briefly, it is
firstly brought from hiddenness to manifestation through the first
powers. This, then, the Theologian was taught by the Angel who was
leading him to Light--that purification, and all the supremely Divine
operations, <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-Page_52"></span>illuminating through the first Beings,
are distributed to all the rest, according to the relation of each for
the deifying participations. Wherefore he reasonably attributed to the
Seraphim, after God, the characteristic of purification by fire. There
is nothing, then, absurd, if the Seraphim is said to purify the Prophet.
For, as God purifies all, by being cause of every purification, yea,
rather (for I use a familiar illustration) just as our Hierarch, when
purifying or enlightening through his Leitourgoi or Priests, is said
himself to purify and enlighten, since the Orders consecrated through
him attribute to him their own proper sacred operations; so also the
Angel who effected the purification of the Theologian attributes his own
purifying science and power to God, indeed, as Cause, but to the
Seraphim as first-operating Hierarch; as any one might say with Angelic
reverence, whilst teaching one who was being purified by him, "There is
a preeminent Source, and Essence, and Worker, and Cause of the cleansing
wrought upon you from me, He Who brings both the first Beings into
Being, and holds them together by their fixity around Himself, and keeps
them without change and without fall, moving them to the first
participations of His own Providential energies (for this, He Who taught
me these things used to say, shews the mission of the Seraphim), but as
Hierarch and Leader after God, the Marshal of the most exalted Beings,
from whom I was taught to purify after the example of God -- this is he,
who cleanses thee through me, through whom the Cause and Creator <span
id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span id="iv.ii.xiii-Page_53"></span> of all
cleansing brought forth His own provident energies from the Hidden even
to us." These things, then, he taught me, and I impart them to thee. Let
it be a part of thy intellectual and discriminating skill, either, to
acquit each of the causes assigned from objection, and to honour this
before the other as having likelihood and good reason, and perhaps, the
truth; or, to find out from yourself something more allied to the real
truth, or to learn from another; (God, of course, giving expression, and
Angels supplying it;) and to reveal to us, the friends of Angels, a view
more luminous if it should be so, and to me specially welcome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_214"></span>[50:215](dio56.htm#fr_214) <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p10.1"></span><span id="iv.ii.xiii-p10.2"></span>[John 1.
1](../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p10.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[50:216](dio56.htm#fr_215) <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p10.3"></span>Or super-original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput XIV.](dio57)
