[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio50)  [Next](dio52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.viii"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.viii-p0.1"></span>CAPUT VIII.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p1"></span>Concerning Lordships and Powers and
Authorities, and concerning their middle Hierarchy.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p2"></span>Section I.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p3"></span>Let us now pass to the middle Order of
the Heavenly Minds, gazing, as far as we may, with supermundane eyes
upon those Lordships, and the truly terrible visions of the Divine
Authorities and Powers. For each appellation of the Beings above us
manifests their God-imitating characteristics of the Divine Likeness. I
think, then, that the explanatory name of the Holy Lordships denotes a
certain unslavish elevation, free from all grovelling subserviency, as
becomes the free, not submitting itself in any way whatever to one of
the tyrannical dissimilarities, as a cruel Lordship; superior to every
kind of cringing slavery, indomitable to every subserviency, and
elevated above every dissimilarity, ever aspiring to <span
id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span id="iv.ii.viii-Page_32"></span> the true
Lordship, and source of Lordship; and moulding, as an image of goodness,
itself, and those after it, to its Lordly bearing, as attainable,
turning itself wholly to none of the things that vainly seem, but to the
Lordly Being, and ever sharing in the Lordly Likeness of God, to its
utmost ability; and the appellation of the Holy Powers denotes a certain
courageous and unflinching virility, for all those Godlike energies
within them--not feebly weak for the reception of any of the Divine
illuminations vouchsafed to it--vigorously conducted to the Divine
imitation, not forsaking the Godlike movement through its own
unmanliness, but unflinchingly looking to the superessential and
powerful-making power, and becoming a powerlike image of this, as far as
is attainable, and powerfully turned to this, as Source of Power, and
issuing forth to those next in degree, in gift of Power, and in likeness
to God; and that the appellation of the Holy Authorities, of the same
rank as the Divine Lordships and Powers, (denotes) the beautiful and
unconfused good order, with regard to the Divine receptions, and the
discipline of the supermundane and intellectual authority, not using the
authoritative powers imperiously for base purposes, but conducted
indomitably, with good order, towards Divine things, and conducting
those after it benignly, and assimilated, as far as permissible, to the
Authoritative Source of authority, and making this visible, as is
possible to Angels, in the well-ordered ranks of the authoritative power
within it. The middle Order of the Heavenly Minds having these Godlike
characteristics, is purified and illuminated <span id="page_33">p.
33</span> <span id="iv.ii.viii-Page_33"></span> and perfected in the
manner described, by the Divine illuminations vouchsafed to it at second
hand, through the first Hierarchical Order, and passing through this
middle as a secondary manifestation.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p4"></span>Section II.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p5"></span>No doubt, as regards that message, which
is said to pass through one angel to another, we may take it as a symbol
of a perfecting completed from afar, and obscured by reason of its
passage to the second rank. For, as men skilled in our sacred
initiations say, the fulness of Divine things manifested directly to
ourselves is more perfecting than the Divine contemplations imparted
through others. Thus, I think, the immediate participation of the
Angelic ranks elevated in first degree to God, is more clear than those
perfected through the instrumentality of others. Wherefore by our
sacerdotal tradition, the first Minds are named perfecting, and
illuminating, and purifying Powers of the subordinate, who are
conducted, through them, to the superessential Origin of all things, and
participate, as far as is permissible to them, in the consecrating
purifications, and illuminations, and perfections. For, this is divinely
fixed absolutely by the Divine source of order that, through the first,
the second partake of the supremely Divine illuminations. This you will
find declared by the theologians in many ways. For, when the Divine and
Paternal Love towards man whilst chastening, in a startling manner, His
people Israel, for their religious preservation, after delivering them
<span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span id="iv.ii.viii-Page_34"></span> to
terrible and savage nations for correction, by various leadings of His
guided people to better things, both liberated them from their misery,
and mildly led them back, through His compassion, to their former state
of comfort; one of the theologians, Zechariah, sees one of the first
Angels, as I think, and near God, (for the Angelic appellation is
common, as I said, to them all), learning from God Himself the
comforting words, as they are called, concerning this matter; and
another Angel, of inferior rank, advancing to meet the first, as for
reception and participation of enlightenment: then, by him instructed in
the Divine purpose as from a Hierarch, and charged to reveal to the
theologian that Jerusalem should be abundantly occupied by a multitude
of people. And another theologian, Ezekiel, says that this was
righteously ordained by the glorious Deity Itself, seated above the
Cherubim. For Paternal Love towards man, conducting Israel as we have
said through chastisement to better things, by a righteousness worthy of
God, deemed right to separate the guilty from the guiltless. This is
first revealed to one after the Cherubim; him who was bound about the
loins with a sapphire, and wore displayed the robe coming down to the
feet, as a Hierarchical symbol. But the Divine Government enjoins the
other Angels, who bore the battle-axes, to be instructed from the
former, as to the Divine judgment in this matter. For, to one, He said
that he should <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span
id="iv.ii.viii-Page_35"></span> go through the midst of Jerusalem, and
place the sign upon the forehead of the innocent men, but to the others;
"Go into the city after him and strike, and draw not back your eyes, but
to every one upon whom is the sign draw not near."

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p6"></span>What would any one say concerning the
Angel, who said to Daniel, "The word has gone forth?" or concerning him
the first, who took the fire from the midst of the Cherubim, or what is
more remarkable than this for shewing the good order amongst the Angels,
that the Cherubim casts the fire into the hands of him who wears the
sacred vestment; or concerning Him Who called the most divine Gabriel,
and said to him, "Make this man understand the vision," or whatever else
is recorded by the holy theologians concerning the Godlike order of the
Heavenly Hierarchies; by being assimilated to which, as far as possible,
the discipline of our Hierarchy will have the Angelic comeliness, as it
were, in reflection, moulded through it, and conducted to the
superessential Source of order in every Hierarchy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput IX.](dio52)
