[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio51)  [Next](dio53.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ix"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.ix-p0.1"></span>CAPUT IX.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p1"></span>Concerning the Principalities, Archangels,
and Angels, and concerning their last Hierarchy.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p2"></span>Section I.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p3"></span>There remains for our reverent
contemplation a Division which completes the Angelic Hierarchies, <span
id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="iv.ii.ix-Page_36"></span> that
divided into the Godlike Principalities, Archangels, and Angels. And I
think it necessary, to declare first the meaning of their sacred
appellations to the best of my ability. For that of the Heavenly
Principalities manifests their princely and leading function, after the
Divine example, with order religious and most befitting the Princely,
and their being wholly turned to the super-princely Prince, and leading
others in princely fashion, and being moulded, as far as possible, to
that prince-making Princedom Itself, and to manifest its superessential
princely order, by the regularity of the princely powers.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p4"></span>Section II.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p5"></span>The (Order) of the Holy Archangels is of
the same rank with the heavenly Principalities. For there is one
Hierarchy and Division, as I said, of them and the Angels. But since
there is not a Hierarchy which does not possess first and middle and
last powers, the holy order of Archangels occupies the middle position
in the Hierarchy between the extremes, for it belongs alike to the most
holy Principalities and to the holy Angels; to the Principalities
because it is turned in a princely fashion to the superessential
Princedom, and is moulded to It as far as attainable, and unites the
Angels after the fashion of its own well-regulated and marshalled and
invisible leadings; and it belongs to the Angels, because it is of the
messenger Order, receiving hierarchically the Divine illuminations from
<span id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span id="iv.ii.ix-Page_37"></span> the
first powers, and announcing the same to the Angels in a godly manner,
and, through Angels, manifesting to us, in proportion to the religious
aptitude of each of the godly persons illuminated. For the Angels, as we
have already said, complete the whole series of Heavenly Minds, as being
the last Order of the Heavenly Beings who possess the Angelic
characteristic; yea, rather, they are more properly named Angels by us
than those of higher degree, because their Hierarchy is occupied with
the more manifest, and is more particularly concerned with the things of
the world. For the very highest Order, as being placed in the first rank
near the Hidden One, we must consider as directing in spiritual things
the second, hiddenly; and that the second, which is composed of the holy
Lordships and Powers and Authorities, leads the Hierarchy of the
Principalities and Archangels and Angels, more clearly indeed than the
first Hierarchy, but more hiddenly than the Order after it, and the
revealing order of the Principalities, Archangels, and Angels, presides,
through each other, over the Hierarchies amongst men, in order that the
elevation, and conversion, and communion, and union with God may be in
due order; and, further, also that the procession from God vouchsafed
benignly to all the Hierarchies, and passing to all in common, may be
also with most sacred regularity. Hence, the Word of God has assigned
our Hierarchy to Angels, by naming Michael as Ruler of the Jewish
people, and others over other nations. For the <span id="page_38">p.
38</span> <span id="iv.ii.ix-Page_38"></span> Most High established
borders of nations according to number of Angels of God.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p6"></span>Section III.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p7"></span>But if any one should say, "How then were
the people of the Hebrews alone conducted to the supremely Divine
illuminations?" we must answer, that we ought not to throw the blame of
the other nations wandering after those which are no gods upon the
direct guidance of the Angels, but that they themselves, by their own
declension, fell away from the direct leading towards the Divine Being,
through self-conceit and self-will, and through their irrational
veneration for things which appeared to them worthy of God. Even the
Hebrew people are said to have suffered the same thing; for He says,
"Thou I hast cast away knowledge of God, and hast gone after thine own
heart." For neither have we a life governed by necessity, nor on account
of the free will of those who are objects of providential care, are the
Divine rays of the providential illumination blunted; but the inaptitude
of the mental visions makes the overflowing light-gift of the paternal
goodness, either altogether unparticipated or inpenetrable to their
resistance, or makes the participations of the one fontal ray, diverse,
small, or great, obscure, or brilliant, although that ray is one and
simple, and always the same and ever overflowing; for even if, over the
other nations (from <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span
id="iv.ii.ix-Page_39"></span> whom we also have emerged to that
boundless and bounteous sea of Divine Light, which is readily-expanded
for the ready reception of all), certain not alien gods were wont to
preside; yet there is one Head of all, and to this, the Angels, who
religiously direct each nation, conduct those who follow them. Let us
consider Melchizedek as being a Hierarch, most dear to God; (not of gods
which are not, but of the truly most high God); for the godly-wise did
not call Melchizedek simply dear to God, but also Priest, in order that
they may clearly shew to the wise, that not only was he himself turned
to the true God, but further that he was guide to others, as Hierarch of
the elevation to the true and only Godhead.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p8"></span>Section IV.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p9"></span>Let me also recall this to your
Hierarchical judgment--that both to Pharaoh, from the Angel who presided
over the Egyptians, and to the Babylonian Prince, from his own Angel,
the watchful and ruling care of the Providence and Lordship over all,
was interpreted in visions; and for those nations, the worshippers of
the true God were appointed leaders, for the interpretation of things
shaped by Angelic visions revealed from God through Angels to holy men
akin to the Angels, Daniel and Joseph. For there is one Prince and
Providence over all. And never must we think that the Godhead is leader
of Jews by lot, and that Angels, <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span
id="iv.ii.ix-Page_40"></span> independently, or as of equal rank, or in
opposition, or that certain other gods, preside over the other nations.
But that particular phrase of the Divine Word must be accepted according
to the following sacred intention; not as though God had divided
government amongst men, with other gods, or Angels, and had been elected
by lot to the government and leadership of Israel, but in this
sense--whilst the one Providence of Highest over all, assigned all
mankind, savingly, to the directing conduct of their own Angels, yet
Israel, almost alone in comparison with all, turned himself to the
Light-gift, and recognition of the true Lord-Hence the Word of God, as
shewing that Israel elected himself for the worship of the true God,
says this, "He became Lord’s portion;" and as indicating that he was
assigned equally with the other nations, to one of the holy Angels, for
the recognition, through him, of the Head of all, said "That Michael
became leader of the (Jewish) people," demonstrating distinctly that
there is one Providence of the whole, superessentially established above
all the powers, unseen and seen, and that all the Angels who preside
over each nation, elevate, as far as possible, those who follow them
with a willing mind, to It as their proper Head. <span id="page_41">p.
41</span> <span id="iv.ii.ix-Page_41"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Caput X.](dio53.md)
