[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dio64)  [Next](dio66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486434591/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite, tr. by John Parker, \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.vii"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.vii-p0.1"></span>CAPUT VII.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>I.
Concerning things performed over those fallen asleep.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p2"></span>Section I.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p3"></span>These things having been defined, I
think it necessary also to describe the things religiously performed by
us over those who have fallen asleep. For neither is this also the same
between the holy and the unholy; but, as the form of life of each is
different, so also, when approaching death, those who have led a
religious life, by looking steadfastly to the unfailing promises of the
Godhead (inasmuch as they have observed their proof, in the resurrection
proclaimed by it), come to the goal of death, with firm and unfailing
hope, in godly rejoicing, knowing that at the end of holy contests their
condition will be altogether in a perfect and endless life and safety,
through their future entire resurrection <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) . For the holy souls, which may
possibly fall <span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_146"></span>during this present life to a change for
the worse, in the regeneration, will have the most Godlike transition to
an unchangeable condition. Now, the pure bodies which are enrolled
together as yoke-fellows and companions of the holy souls, and have
fought together within their Divine struggles in the unchanged
steadfastness of their souls throughout the divine life, will jointly
receive their own resurrection; for, having been united with the holy
souls to which they were united in this present life, by having become
members of Christ, they will receive in return the Godlike and
imperishable immortality, and blessed repose. In this respect then the
sleep of the holy is in comfort and unshaken hopes, as it attains the
goal of the Divine contests.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p4"></span>Section II.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p5"></span>Now, amongst the profane, some <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) illogically think to go to a
non-existence; others <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) that the
bodily blending with their proper souls will be severed once for all, as
unsuitable to them in a Divine life and blessed lots, not considering
nor being sufficiently instructed in Divine science, that our most
Godlike life in Christ has already begun <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) . But others <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) assign to souls union with other
bodies, committing <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) , as I think,
this injustice to them, that, after (bodies) have laboured together with
the godly <span id="page_147">p. 147</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_147"></span>souls, and have reached the goal of
their most Divine course, they relentlessly deprive them of their
righteous retributions. And others <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) (I do not know how they have strayed
to conceptions of such earthly tendency) say, that the most holy and
blessed repose promised to the devout is similar to our life in this
world, and unlawfully reject, for those who are equal to the Angels,
nourishments appropriate to another kind of life. None of the most
religious men, however, will ever fall into such errors as these; but,
knowing that their whole selves will receive the Christ-like
inheritance, when they have come to the goal of this present life, they
see more clearly their road to incorruption already become nearer, and
extol the gifts of the Godhead, and are filled with a Divine
satisfaction, no longer fearing the fall to a worse condition, but
knowing well that they will hold firmly and everlastingly the good
things already acquired. Those, however, who are full of blemishes, and
unholy stains, even though they have attained to some initiation, yet,
of their own accord, have, to their own destruction, rejected this from
their mind, and have rashly followed their destructive lusts, to them
when they have come to the end of their life here, the Divine regulation
of the Oracles will no longer appear as before, a subject of scorn <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) , but, when they have looked with
different eyes upon the pleasures of their passions destroyed, and when
they have pronounced <span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_148"></span>blessed the holy life from which they
thoughtlessly fell away, they are, piteously and against their will,
separated from this present life, conducted to no holy hope, by reason
of their shameful life <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) .

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p6"></span>Section III.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p7"></span>Now, whilst none of these attain the
repose of the holy men, he himself, when coming to the end of his own
struggles, is filled with a holy consolation, and with much satisfaction
enters the path of the holy regeneration. The familiar friends, however,
of him who has fallen asleep, as befits their divine familiarity and
fellowship, pronounce him blessed, whoever he is, as having reached the
desired end crowned with victory, and they send up odes of thanksgiving
to the Author of victory, praying also that they may reach the same
inheritance. Then they take him and bring him to the Hierarch, as to a
bequest of holy crowns; and he right gladly receives him, and performs
the things fixed by reverend men, to be performed over those who have
piously fallen asleep.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p8"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p8.1"></span>II.
Mysterion over those who have religiously fallen asleep.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p9"></span>The Divine Hierarch collects the
reverend Choir, and if the person who has fallen asleep were of the
sacerdotal rank, he lays him down before the Divine Altar, and begins
with the prayer and thanksgiving <span id="page_149">p. 149</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_149"></span>to God; but if he belonged to the rank
of the chaste Monks, or the holy people, he lays him down near the
hallowed sanctuary, before the sacerdotal entrance. Then the Hierarch
finishes the prayer of thanksgiving to God; and next, the Leitourgoi,
after reading the unfailing promises concerning our holy resurrection,
contained in the Divine Oracles, reverently chant the odes of the same
teaching and power, from the Oracles of the Psalter <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) . Then the first Leitourgos dismisses
the catechumens, and calls aloud the names of the holy people, who have
already fallen asleep; amongst whom he deems the man, who has just
terminated his life, worthy of mention in the same rank, and urges all
to seek the blessed consummation in Christ; then the Divine Hierarch
advances, and offers a most holy prayer over him, and after the prayer
both the Hierarch himself salutes the defunct, and after him, all who
are present. When all have saluted, the Hierarch pours the oil upon the
fallen asleep, and when he has offered the holy prayer for all, he
places the body in a worthy chamber, with other holy bodies of the same
rank.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p10"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p10.1"></span>III.
Contemplation.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p11"></span>Section I.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p12"></span>Now, if the profane should see or hear
that these things are done by us, they will, I suppose, split with
laughter, and commiserate us on our, folly. But <span id="page_150">p.
150</span> <span id="iv.iii.vii-Page_150"></span>there is no need to
wonder at this. For, as the Oracles say, "If they will not believe,
neither shall they understand <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) ."
And as for us, who have contemplated the spiritual meaning of the things
done, whilst Jesus leads us to the light, let us say, that, not without
reason, does the Hierarch conduct to, and place the man fallen asleep,
in the place of the same rank; for it shews reverently, that, in the
regeneration, all will be in those chosen inheritances, for which they
have chosen their own life here <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276)
. For example, if any one led a Godlike and most holy life here, so far
as the imitation of God is attainable by man, he will be, in the age to
come, in divine and blessed inheritances; but if he led a life inferior
to the divine likeness in the highest degree, but, nevertheless, a holy
life, even this man will receive the holy and similar retributions. The
Hierarch, having given thanks for this Divine righteousness, offers a
sacred prayer, and extols the worshipful Godhead, as subjugating the
unjust and tyrannical power against us all, and conducting us back to
our own most just possessions (or judgments).

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p13"></span>Section II.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p14"></span>Now, the Chants and Readings of the
supremely Divine promises are explanatory of the most blessed
inheritances, to which those, who have attained a Divine perfection,
shall be eternally appointed, and <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>
<span id="iv.iii.vii-Page_151"></span>descriptive of him who has
religiously fallen asleep, and stimulative of those, who are still
living, to the same perfection.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p15"></span>Section III.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p16"></span>Observe, however, that not all the
ranks under purification are customarily dismissed, but only the
catechumens are expelled from the holy places, for this class is
entirely uninitiated in every holy Rite, and is not permitted to view
any of the religious celebrations, great or small, inasmuch as it has
not participated in the faculty of contemplating the holy mysteries,
through the Birth from God, which is Source and gift of light. The rest,
however, of the ranks under purification, have already been under
instruction in sacred tradition; but, as they have foolishly returned to
an evil course it is incumbent to complete their proper elevation in
advance, and they are reasonably dismissed from the supremely Divine
contemplations and communions, as in holy symbols; for they will be
injured, by partaking of them unholily, and will come to a greater
contempt of the Divine Mysteries and themselves.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p17"></span>Section IV.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p18"></span>Naturally, however, they are present at
the things now done, being clearly taught by seeing both the
fearlessness of death amongst us, and the last honour of the saints
extolled from the unfailing Oracles, and that the sufferings threatened
to the unholy <span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_152"></span> like themselves will be endless; for it
will perhaps be profitable for them to have seen him, who has
religiously finished his course, reverently proclaimed by the public
proclamation of the Leitourgoi, as being certainly companion of the
Saints for ever. And, perchance, even they will come to the like
aspiration, and will be taught from the science of the Liturgy, that the
consummation in Christ is blessed indeed.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p19"></span>Section V.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p20"></span>Then the Divine Hierarch, advancing,
offers a holy prayer over the man fallen asleep. After the prayer, both
the Hierarch himself salutes him, and next all who are present. Now the
prayer beseeches the supremely Divine Goodness to remit to the man
fallen asleep all the failings committed by reason of human infirmity,
and to transfer him in light and land of living, into the bosom of
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob: in a place where grief and sorrow and
sighing are no more. It is evident, then, as I think, that these, the
rewards of the pious, are most blessed. For what can be equal to an
immortality entirely without grief and luminous with light. Especially
if all the promises which pass man’s understanding, and which are
signified to us by signs adapted to our capacity, fall short, in their
description, of their actual truth. For we must <span id="page_153">p.
153</span> <span id="iv.iii.vii-Page_153"></span> remember that the
Logion is true, that "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath
entered into the heart of man to conceive, the things which God hath
prepared for them that love Him." "Bosoms" of the blessed Patriarchs,
and of all the other pious men, are, in my judgment, the most divine and
blessed inheritances, which await all godly men, in that consummation
which grows not old, and is full of blessedness.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p21"></span>Section VI.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p22"></span>But thou mayst, perhaps, say that these
things are correctly affirmed by us, indeed, but want to know for what
reason the Hierarch beseeches the supremely Divine Goodness, for the
remission of the faults committed by the man fallen asleep, and his most
glorious inheritance, amongst godly men of the same rank. For, if every
one shall receive, by the Divine justice, equivalents for what he has
done in the present life, whether it be good or different, and the man
fallen asleep has finished his own activities in this present life, from
what prayer offered by the Hierarch will he be transferred to another
inheritance, than that due to and equivalent for his life here? Now,
well do I know, following the Oracles, that each one will have the
inheritance equivalent; for the Lord says, he has closed respecting him,
and each one shall receive the things done in his body according to that
he hath done, whether it <span id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_154"></span> be good, or whether it be bad." Yea,
the sure traditions of the Oracles teach us that the prayers, even of
the just, avail only for those who are worthy of pious prayers during
this present life, let alone (by no means) after death. What forsooth
did Saul gain from Samuel? and what did the intercession of the Prophet
profit the people of the Hebrews? For, as if any one, when the sun is
shedding its own splendour upon unblemished eyes, seeks to enjoy the
solar splendour by obliterating his own powers of vision; so does he
cling to impossible and extravagant expectations, who beseeches the
intercessions of holy men, and, by driving away the holy efforts natural
to the same, plays truant from the most luminous and beneficent
commandments, through heedlessness of the Divine gifts.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p23"></span>Nevertheless, according to the Oracles,
I affirm that the intercessions of the pious are, in every respect,
profitable in this present life, after the following fashion. If any
one, longing for holy gifts, and having a religious disposition for
their reception, as recognizing his own insufficiency, approaches some
pious man, and should prevail upon him to become his fellow-helper, and
fellow-suppliant, he will be benefitted in every respect, thereby, with
a benefit superior to all; for he will attain the most Divine gifts he
prays for, since the supremely Divine Goodness assists him, as well as
his pious <span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_155"></span> judgment of himself, and his reverence
for devout men, and his praiseworthy craving for the religious requests
requested, and his brotherly and Godlike disposition. For this has been
firmly fixed by the supremely Divine decrees, that the Divine gifts are
given, in an order most befitting God, to those who are meet to receive
them, through those who are meet to distribute them.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p24"></span>If any one, then, should despise this
sacred regulation, and betaking himself to a wretched self-conceit,
should deem himself sufficient for the supremely Divine Converse, and
look down upon pious men, and if he should further request requests,
unworthy of God, and not holy, and if he should have his aspiration for
things divine not sustained, and correlative to himself, he will fail in
his ignorant request, through his own fault. Now, with reference to the
prayer mentioned, which the Hierarch prays over the man fallen asleep,
we think it necessary to mention the tradition which has come to us from
our inspired leaders. The Divine Hierarch, as the Oracles say, is
interpreter of the supremely Divine awards; for he is messenger of the
Lord God Omnipotent. He has learned then, from the God-transmitted
Oracles, that to those who have passed their life piously, the most
bright and divine life is given in return, according to their due, by
the most just balances, the Divine Love towards man overlooking, through
its goodness, the stains which have come to them through human <span
id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_156"></span>infirmity, since no one, as the Oracles
say, is pure from blemish.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p25"></span>Section VII.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p26"></span>Now, the Hierarch knew these things to
have been promised by the infallible Oracles; and he asks, that these
things may come to pass, and that the righteous returns be given to
those who have lived piously, whilst being moulded beneficently to the
Divine imitation, he beseeches gifts for others, as favours to himself;
and, whilst knowing that the promises will be unfailing, he makes known
clearly to those present, that the things asked by him, according to a
holy law, will be entirely realized for those who have been perfected in
a Divine life. For the Hierarch, the expounder of the supremely Divine
Justice, would never seek things, which were not most pleasing to the
Almighty God, and divinely promised to be given by Him <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) . Wherefore, he does not offer these
prayers over the unholy fallen asleep, not only because in this he would
deviate from his office of expounder, and would presumptuously arrogate,
on his own authority, a function of the Hierarchy, without being moved
by the Supreme Legislator, but because he would both fail to obtain his
abominable prayer, and he, not unnaturally, would hear from the just
Oracle, "Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss." Therefore, the
Divine Hierarch beseeches things divinely promised, and <span
id="page_157">p. 157</span> <span id="iv.iii.vii-Page_157"></span>dear
to God, and which will, in every respect, be given, demonstrating both
his own likeness to the good loving God, and declaring explicitly the
gifts which will be received by the devout. Thus, the Hierarchs have
discriminating powers, as interpreters of the Divine Awards, not as
though the All-Wise Deity, to put it mildly, were slavishly following
their irrational impulses, but, as though they, as expounders of God,
were separating, by the motion of the Divine Spirit, those who have
already been judged by God, according to due. For "receive," he says,
"the Holy Spirit, whose faults ye may have remitted, they are remitted;
whose ye may have retained, they are retained." And to him who was
illuminated with the Divine revelations of the most Holy Father, the
Oracles say, "Whatsoever thou shalt have bound upon the earth, shall be
bound in the heavens; and whatsoever thou shalt have loosed on earth,
shall be loosed in the heavens," inasmuch as he, and every Hierarch like
him, according to the revelations of the Father’s awards through him,
receives those dear to God, and rejects those without God, as announcing
and interpreting the Divine Will. Further, as the Oracles affirm, he
uttered that sacred and divine confession, not as self-moved, nor as
though flesh and blood had revealed it, but moved by God Who revealed to
him the spiritual meaning of Divine things. The inspired Hierarchs then
must so exercise their separations and all their Hierarchical <span
id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span id="iv.iii.vii-Page_158"></span>powers
as the Godhead, the Supreme Initiator, may move them; and the others
must so cling to the Hierarchs as moved by God, in what they may do
hierarchically, "For he who despiseth you," He says, "despiseth Me <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) ."

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p27"></span>Section VIII.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p28"></span>Let us now proceed to that, which
follows the prayer mentioned. When the Hierarch has finished it, he
first salutes the fallen asleep, and next, all who are present; for dear
and honoured by all Godlike men is he who has been perfected in a Divine
life. After the salutation, the Hierarch pours the oil upon the man
fallen asleep. And remember, that during the sacred Birth from God,
before the most Divine Baptism, a first participation of a holy symbol
is given to the man initiated--the oil of Chrism--after the entire
removal of the former clothing; and now, at the conclusion of all, the
Oil is poured upon the man fallen asleep. Then indeed the anointing with
the Oil summoned the initiated to the holy contests; and now the Oil
poured upon him shews the fallen asleep to have struggled, and to have
been made perfect, throughout those same contests.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p29"></span>Section IX.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p30"></span>When the Hierarch has finished these
things, he places the body in an honourable chamber, with <span
id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span id="iv.iii.vii-Page_159"></span>other
holy bodies of the same rank. For if, in soul and body, the man fallen
asleep passed a life dear to God, there will be honoured, with the
devout soul, the body also, which contended with it throughout the
devout struggles. Hence the Divine justice gives to it, together with
its own body, the retributive inheritances, as companion and
participator in the devout, or the contrary, life. Wherefore, the Divine
institution of sacred rites bequeaths the supremely Divine
participations to them both--to the soul, indeed, in pure contemplation
and in science of the things being done, and to the body, by sanctifying
the whole man, as in a figure with the most Divine Muron, and the most
holy symbols of the supremely Divine Communion, sanctifying the whole
man, and announcing, by purifications of the whole man, that his
resurrection will be most complete.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p31"></span>Section X.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p32"></span>Now, as regards the consecrating"
invocations, it is not permitted to explain them in writing, nor may we
bring their mysterious meaning, or the powers from God working in them,
from secrecy to publicity; but, as our sacred tradition holds, by
learning these, through quiet instructions, and being perfected to a
more Godlike condition and elevation, through Divine love and religious
exercises, thou wilt be borne by the consecrating enlightenment to their
highest science. <span id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_160"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p33"></span>Section XI.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p34"></span>Now the fact that even children, not
yet able to understand the things Divine, become recipients of the holy
Birth in God, and of the most holy symbols of the supremely Divine
Communion, seems, as you say, to the profane, a fit subject for
reasonable laughter, if the Hierarchs teach things Divine to those not
able to hear, and vainly transmit the sacred traditions to those who do
not understand. And this is still more laughable--that others, on their
behalf, repeat the abjurations and the sacred compacts. But thy
Hierarchical judgment must not be too hard upon those who are led
astray, but, persuasively, and for the purpose of leading them to the
light, reply affectionately to the objections alleged by them, bringing
forward this fact, in accordance with sacred rule, that not all things
Divine are comprehended in our knowledge, but many of the things,
unknown by us, have causes beseeming God, unknown to us indeed, but well
known to the Ranks above us. Many things also escape even the most
exalted Beings, and are known distinctly by the All-Wise and Wise-making
Godhead alone. Further, also, concerning this, we affirm the same things
which our Godlike initiators conveyed to us, after initiations from the
early <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) tradition. For they say,
what is also a fact, that <span id="page_161">p. 161</span> <span
id="iv.iii.vii-Page_161"></span>infants, being brought up according to a
Divine institution, will attain a religious disposition, exempt from
every error, and inexperienced in an unholy-life. When our Divine
leaders came to this conclusion, it was determined to admit infants upon
the following conditions, viz.: that the natural parents of the child
presented, should transfer the child to some one of the initiated,--a
good teacher of children in Divine things,--and that the child should
lead the rest of his life under him, as under a godfather and sponsor,
for his religious safe-keeping. The Hierarch then requires him, when he
has promised to bring up the child according to the religious life, to
pronounce the renunciations and the religious professions, not, as they
would jokingly say, by instructing one instead of another in Divine
things; for he does not say this, "that on behalf of this child I make,
myself, the renunciations and the sacred professions," but, that the
child is set apart and enlisted; i.e. I promise to persuade the child,
when he has come to a religious mind, through my godly instructions, to
bid adieu wholly to things contrary, and to profess and perform the
Divine professions. There is here, then, nothing absurd, in my judgment,
provided the child is brought up as beseems a godlike training, in
having a guide and religious surety, who implants in him a disposition
for Divine things, and keeps him inexperienced in things contrary.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p35"></span>The Hierarch imparts to the child the
sacred, symbols, in order that he may be nourished by <span
id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span id="iv.iii.vii-Page_162"></span>them,
and may not have any other life but that which always contemplates
Divine things; and in religious progress become partaker of them and
have a religious disposition in these matters, and be devoutly brought
up by his Godlike surety. So great, my son, and so beautiful, are the
uniform visions of our Hierarchy, which have been presented to my view;
and from others, perhaps, more contemplative minds, these things have
been viewed, not only more clearly, but also more divinely. And to thee,
as I fancy, more brilliant and more divine beauties will shine forth, by
using the foregoing stepping-stones to a higher ray. Impart then, my
friend, thyself also, to me, more perfect enlightenment, and shew to
mine eyes the more comely and uniform beauties that thou mayst have been
able to see, for I am confident that, by what has been said, I shall
strike the sparks <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) of the Divine
Fire stored up in thee.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p36"></span>Thanks be to God.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p37"></span>JOHN PARKER.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p38"></span>*All Saints’ Day*,  
1898.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_265"></span>[145:266](dio65.htm#fr_265) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>Soul first--body afterwards.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[146:267](dio65.htm#fr_266) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.1"></span>Plato, Phaed. i. 54.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[146:268](dio65.htm#fr_267) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.2"></span>Ibid. i. 62-3.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[146:269](dio65.htm#fr_268) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.3"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p5.4"></span>[Col.
3:3](../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003),
[4](../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p5.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[146:270](dio65.htm#fr_269) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.5"></span>Phaed. i. 64.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[146:271](dio65.htm#fr_270) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.6"></span>Ap. C. v. s. 5-7.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[147:272](dio65.htm#fr_271) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.7"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p5.8"></span>[Matt.
xxii. 28](../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.8"></span>.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[147:273](dio65.htm#fr_272) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.9"></span>Republic, lib. i. p. 9. Cousin, Paris, 1833.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[148:274](dio65.htm#fr_273) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.10"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p5.11"></span>[Ps.
cxii. 10](../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p5.11"></span>.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[149:275](dio65.htm#fr_274) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p9.1"></span>See Burial Office.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[150:276](dio65.htm#fr_275) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p12.1"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p12.2"></span>[Wisdom
iii. 9](../../bib/apo/wis003.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p12.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[150:277](dio65.htm#fr_276) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p12.3"></span><span
id="iv.iii.vii-p12.4"></span>ἀπεκλήρωσαν. See Papias, fragment 5.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[156:278](dio65.htm#fr_277) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p26.1"></span>Ap. C. viii. 43.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[158:279](dio65.htm#fr_278) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p26.2"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p26.3"></span>[Luke x.
16](../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p26.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[160:280](dio65.htm#fr_279) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p34.1"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p34.2"></span>ἄρχαίας.
See <span id="iv.iii.vii-p34.3"></span>[Acts
15:7](../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007), [21](../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#021),
[16](../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#016)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p34.3"></span>;
and Archbishop Trench. Yet even Dupin ignorantly alleged that word as
proof Post-Apostolic. Nov. Bib. p. 100; C. ii. 41.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[162:281](dio65.htm#fr_280) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p35.1"></span>Bacon, Advancement in Learning, p. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: List of Bishops](dio66)
