[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kama202) 
[Next](kama204) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892814411/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UFY4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana*, tr. by Richard Burton, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER III

### ON KISSING

IT is said by some that there is no fixed time or order between the
embrace, the kiss, and the pressing or scratching with the nails or
fingers, but that all these things should be done generally before
sexual union takes place, while striking and making the various sounds
generally takes place at the time of the union. Vatsyayana, however,
thinks that anything may take place at any time, for love does not care
for time or order.

On the occasion of the first congress, kissing and the other things
mentioned above should be done moderately, they should not be continued
for a long time, and should be done alternately. On subsequent
occasions, however, the reverse of all this may take place, and
moderation will not be necessary, they may continue for a long time,
and, for the purpose of kindling love, they may be all done at the same
time.

The following are the places for kissing: the forehead, the eyes, the
cheeks, the throat, the bosom, the breasts, the lips, and the interior
of the mouth. Moreover the people of the Lat country kiss also on the
following places: the joints of the thighs, the arms and the navel. But
Vatsyayana thinks that though kissing is practised by these people in
the above places on account of the intensity of their love, and the
customs of their country, it is not fit to be practised by all.

Now in a case of a young girl there are three sorts of kisses:

The nominal kiss  
The throbbing kiss  
The touching kiss

When a girl only touches the mouth of her lover with her own, but does
not herself do anything, it is called the 'nominal kiss'.

When a girl, setting aside her bashfulness a little, wishes to touch the
lip that is pressed into her mouth, and with that object moves her lower
lip, but not the upper one, it is called the 'throbbing kiss'.

When a girl touches her lover's lip with her tongue, and having shut her
eyes, places her hands on those of her lover, it is called the 'touching
kiss'.

Other authors describe four other kinds of kisses:

The straight kiss  
The bent kiss  
The turned kiss  
The pressed kiss

When the lips of two lovers are brought into direct contact with each
other, it is called a 'straight kiss'.

When the heads of two lovers are bent towards each other, and when so
bent, kissing takes place, it is called a 'bent kiss'.

When one of them turns up the face of the other by holding the head and
chin, and then kissing, it is called a 'turned kiss'.

Lastly when the lower lip is pressed with much force, it is called a
'pressed kiss'.

There is also a fifth kind of kiss called the 'greatly pressed kiss',
which is effected by taking hold of the lower lip between two fingers,
and then, after touching it with the tongue, pressing it with great
force with the lip.

As regards kissing, a wager may be laid as to which will get hold of the
lips of the other first. If the woman loses, she should pretend to cry,
should keep her lover off by shaking her hands, and turn away from him
and dispute with him saying, 'let another wager be laid'. If she loses
this a second time, she should appear doubly distressed, and when her
lover is off his guard or asleep, she should get hold of his lower lip,
and hold it in her teeth, so that it should not slip away, and then she
should laugh, make a loud noise, deride him, dance about, and say
whatever she likes in a joking way, moving her eyebrows and rolling her
eyes. Such are the wagers and quarrels as far as kissing is concerned,
but the same may be applied with regard to the pressing or scratching
with the nails and fingers, biting and striking. All these however are
only peculiar to men and women of intense passion.

When a man kisses the upper lip of a woman, while she in return kisses
his lower lip, it is called the 'kiss of the upper lip'.

When one of them takes both the lips of the other between his or her
own, it is called 'a clasping kiss'. A woman, however, only takes this
kind of kiss from a man who has no moustache. And on the occasion of
this kiss, if one of them touches the teeth, the tongue, and the palate
of the other, with his or her tongue, it is called the 'fighting of the
tongue'. In the same way, the pressing of the teeth of the one against
the mouth of the other is to be practised.

Kissing is of four kinds: moderate, contracted, pressed, and soft,
according to the different parts of the body which are kissed, for
different kinds of kisses are appropriate for different parts of the
body.

When a woman looks at the face of her lover while he is asleep and
kisses it to show her intention or desire, it is called a 'kiss that
kindles love'.

When a woman kisses her lover while he is engaged in business, or while
he is quarrelling with her, or while he is looking at something else, so
that his mind may be turned away, it is called a 'kiss that turns away'.

When a lover coming home late at night kisses his beloved, who is asleep
on her bed, in order to show her his desire, it is called a 'kiss that
awakens'. On such an occasion the woman may pretend to be asleep at the
time of her lover's arrival, so that she may know his intention and
obtain respect from him.

When a person kisses the reflection of the person he loves in a mirror,
in water, or on a wall, it is called a 'kiss showing the intention'.

When a person kisses a child sitting on his lap, or a picture, or an
image, or figure, in the presence of the person beloved by him, it is
called a 'transferred kiss'.

When at night at a theatre, or in an assembly of caste men, a man coming
up to a woman kisses a finger of her hand if she be standing, or a toe
of her foot if she be sitting, or when a woman is shampooing her lover's
body, places her face on his thigh (as if she was sleepy) so as to
inflame his passion, and kisses his thigh or great toe, it is called a
'demonstrative kiss'.

There is also a verse on this subject as follows:

'Whatever things may be done by one of the lovers to the other, the same
should be returned by the other, i.e. if the woman kisses him he should
kiss her in return, if she strikes him he should also strike her in
return.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. On Pressing or Marking with the Nails](kama204)
