[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](coli20)  [Next](coli22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Culture of the Luiseño Indians*, by Philip Stedman Sparkman,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHANGICHNISH, THE RAVEN.

The raven was a bird much feared by the Luiseños. When one of these
birds was heard croaking, or seen hovering about a village, or some of
the old people dreamed of it, steps were immediately taken to propitiate
it. This was done by dancing three nights in succession, and by certain
offerings. Each family brought food, such as chia and other delicacies,
in a flat or winnowing basket, and placed it on the ground. Around these
baskets of food the dance was held. The food was afterwards given to the
old people.

The ceremonies held with the object of propitiating the raven have given
rise to the belief that Changichnish is a deity, whereas it is really
the raven, and instead of being worshiped, the ceremonies are performed
with the object of propitiating it. <span id="fr_7"></span>[5](#fn_6)
Father Geronimo Boscana, of the mission of San Juan Capistrano, appears
to be responsible for this error, as he wrote an account of these
ceremonies which was afterwards published by Alfred Robinson in 1846, in
a book entitled Life in California. Father

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Boscana spelled
the word Chin-ig-chin-ich. His error as to the meaning of the ceremonies
is a perfectly natural one, as it is by no means easy to get to the root
of Indian beliefs and ceremonies.

Changichnish po-hulit, raven his arrow, is the name given to
rock-crystals. These were believed to have been shot by ravens, and were
regarded with superstitious fear by the Luiseños. Internal pains were
often said to be due to a person having been shot by a raven with one of
these "arrows."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[218:5](coli21.htm#fr_7) Mr. Sparkman's statement
on this point conflicts not only with those of Boscana but of Miss
DuBois and other independent investigators. It would seem that his
expression is stronger than he would have allowed it to remain had he
lived to revise the present paper. In his Luiseño dictionary he defines
Changichnish as "the generic name of several things held in
superstitious fear or reverence, among them kawialwut, the raven,
kuihengish, a large black spider, wiyala, rock crystals, also called
Changichnish pohu, and the different species of rattlesnakes." These are
all mentioned by Miss DuBois as associated with Chungichnish in native
belief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Spirits and Monsters](coli22)
