[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](coli16)  [Next](coli18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Culture of the Luiseño Indians*, by Philip Stedman Sparkman,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HOUSES.

The primitive house was of a conical form. A circular pit was dug in the
earth, perhaps two feet deep. Some crotched poles were then set in the
ground with the tops placed together, no king-pole being used. Other
smaller poles were then leaned against these and the whole covered with
brush so as to shed the rain. An opening was left at one side as an
entrance. There

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

was also an opening left at the top for the smoke to escape. When the
weather was fine, cooking was performed out of doors; at other times a
fire was built in the center of the house. During cool nights a fire was
also built in the center, and around this the inmates slept, with their
feet towards it. A house built partly underground in this manner
requires but little fire to warm it. Sometimes the entrance was through
a covered way extending some distance, through which one crawled on
hands and knees to enter. In the mountains the poles of the house were
covered with cedar bark instead of brush, and on the coast large rushes
or sedges were used to cover the pole framework. Often the house was
built without any pit, especially if it was only intended for temporary
or casual use.

Costanso, in his report of the expedition of 1769, speaks of the Indians
of San Diego as living in "shelters of boughs and huts of a pyramidal
shape covered with earth," and of those of the Santa Barbara channel as
having houses "of a spherical form in the fashion of a half orange,
covered with rushes, with the hearth in the middle, and in the top of
the house a vent or chimney to give exit for the smoke." As the former
of these people lived south and the latter north of the Luiseño and
other Shoshonean tribes, much the same style of dwelling seems to have
prevailed all along the coast slope of Southern California.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Marriage](coli18)
