[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](coli23)  [Next](coli25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Culture of the Luiseño Indians*, by Philip Stedman Sparkman,
\[1908\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GIRLS’ PUBERTY CEREMONIES.

On arriving at the age of puberty a girl had formerly to undergo certain
rites. A hole was dug in the ground several feet deep. In this stones
were placed and a fire built to heat them. The stones were afterwards
covered with coarse grass or brush, on top of which the girl was placed
and covered over. She was kept here for three days and nights, only
being taken out a short time each night to be fed, during which interval
the stones were also reheated. During the time she was in the pit,
dancing and singing was kept up around it. Several girls might be placed
in the pit at the same time. It was only necessary that one of them
should be of the correct age, the others might be younger. But it was
imperative that all should belong to the same clan or family. The
feast-chief of the clan to which the girl or girls belonged never
performed the rites himself, but employed another who understood them to
do so. As in the case of the boys’ ceremony this was usually the
feast-chief of another clan, though

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

any one outside of his own clan who understood the rites might be
employed.

At the conclusion of the period during which the girl remained in the
pit, her face was painted, and a similar painting was also made on a
rock. At the end of a month the girl's face was painted in a different
manner, and a similar painting was added to the first painting made on
the rock. This was repeated every month for a year, each month a
different painting being placed on the girl's face, and a similar one
added to the original one on the rock. During this year the girl was
prohibited from eating either meat or salt. At its close other rites
were performed, and a lecture or counsel was given to the girl on much
the same lines as that given to the boys. She was cautioned against
being stingy, against dissembling, and against looking sidewise. She was
also told not to eat jackrabbit or venison. After this lecture the girl
was freed from all restrictions.

The girls’ rites have not been performed in the upper San Luis Rey
valley since 1890, and even then only a part of them were performed. The
boys’ rites have not been performed for about forty years. The
prohibition of eating venison, jackrabbit, and chia was perhaps made
because the old people wished these delicacies to be reserved for
themselves. <span id="fr_13"></span>[11](#fn_11) The opening left on the
north side of the circle of the ground-painting is symbolical of the
direction the soul of a good person is supposed to take as it rises to
the sky.

The following is a translation of the lecture or counsel given to girls
at the puberty ceremonial, yuninish, literally "sprinkling. "

See, these are alive, these will think well of you if you believe; and
if you do not believe, they are going to kill you, if you are heedless,
a dissembler, or stingy. You must not look sideways, must not receive a
person in your house with anger, it is not proper. You will drink hot
water when you menstruate, and when you are pregnant you will drink
bitter medicine.

This will cause you to have your child quickly, as your inside will be
clean. And you will roast yourself at the fire (after childbirth), and
then your son or daughter will grow up quickly, and sickness will not
approach you. But if you are heedless you will not bear your child
quickly, and people will speak of your heedlessness.

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

Your elder relations you must think well of, you will also welcome your
daughters-in-law and your brothers-in-law when they arrive at your
house. Pay heed to this speech, and at some future time you will go to
their house, and they are going to welcome you politely at their house.
Do not rob food of overnight; if you have a child it will make him
costive, it is also going to make your stomach swell, your eyes are also
going to granulate. Pay attention to this speech, do not eat venison or
jackrabbit, or your eyes are going to granulate, and people are going to
know what you have done by your eyes. And as your son or daughter will
grow up, you will bathe in water, and your hair will grow long, and you
will not feel cold, and you will be fat, if you bathe in water. And
after the puberty rite you will not scratch yourself with your hands,
you will scratch yourself with a stick, your body is going to have
pimples if you scratch yourself with your hands. Do not neglect to paint
yourself, and people will see you, and you will grow old, if you pay
attention to this speech, and you will see your sons and daughters.

See these old men and women, these are those who paid attention to this
counsel, which is of the grown-up people, and they have already reached
old age. Do not forget this that I am telling you, pay heed to this
speech, and when you are old like these old people, you will counsel
your sons and daughters in like manner, and you will die old. And your
spirit will rise northwards to the sky, like the stars, moon, and sun.
Perhaps they will speak of you and will blow (three times) and (thereby)
cause to rise your spirit and soul to the sky.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[225:11](coli24.htm#fr_13) This may have been
partly true, but in the main no doubt, if the Luiseños were like other
uncivilized people, genuine religious beliefs were the principal motive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mourning Ceremonies and Mourning](coli25)
