[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr080) 
[Next](tbr082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE INTERVAL BETWEEN THE SECOND AND

### THIRD DOOMS

### THE HALLELUJAH CHORUS.

Rev. 19:1-7.

"And **after these things** I heard a great voice of much people in
Heaven, saying, **Alleluia**; **Salvation**, and **Glory**, and
**Honor**, and **Power**, unto the Lord our God: for true and righteous
are His Judgments; for He hath Judged the '**GREAT WHORE**,' which did
corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blood of
His Servants at her hand. And again they said, **Alleluia**. And her
smoke rose up for ever and ever. And the 'Four and Twenty Elders' and
the 'Four Beasts' fell down and worshipped God that sat on the Throne,
saying, Amen; **Alleluia**. And a voice came out of the Throne, saying,
Praise our God, all ye His Servants, and ye that fear Him, both small
and great. And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as
the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying
**Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth**. Let us be glad and
rejoice and give honor to Him: for the **MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB IS COME,
AND HIS WIFE HATH MADE HERSELF READY**."

After these things. What things? The destruction of "**MYSTICAL
BABYLON**" and the restored **CITY OF BABYLON**. The first
"**Alleluia**" is for the destruction of the "**GREAT
WHORE**"--"**Mystical Babylon**." The second "**Alleluia**" is for the
destruction of the "**CITY OF BABYLON**" whose **smoke** rose up for
ever and ever, which could not be said of "Mystical Babylon" but only of
a **CITY**. In the preceding chapter, verse 20, at the destruction of
the "City of Babylon," we read--"Rejoice over her, thou Heaven, and ye
Holy Apostles and Prophets; for God hath avenged you on her." Here we
hear the rejoicing. What the merchants, and shipmasters, and sailors,
and traders, weep and wail and mourn over, the--"Fall of Babylon,"
Heaven rejoices over. Here we see the difference between Heaven and
Earth's opinion of the these Divine Judgments.

Here we have the first occurrence in the New Testament of the word
"**HALLELUJAH**." It is a compound Hebrew word "**HAL-LELU-JAH**"
("Praise-Ye-Jah"). It occurs **24** times in the Old Testament, and
**4** times in the New Testament. In the Old Testament the word is
always translated--"**Praise ye the Lord**," in the New Testament the
Greek word "**ALLELUIA**" is left untranslated, but in the New Version
the word "**HALLELUJAH**" is substituted for "**Alleluia**." Four times
the word "Hallelujah" is uttered in this chapter, not only by a great
multitude, but by the "Four Beasts," and by the "Four and Twenty
Elders." It is the "**cry of victory**" in which praise is ascribed to
God. They also sang "Hallelujah" because the time had come for the
"**MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB**."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Marriage of the Lamb](tbr082)
