[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr034.md) 
[Next](tbr036.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

### SEVENTH SEAL

### (Silence.)

Rev. 8:1.

"And when He had opened the '**SEVENTH SEAL**,' there was **SILENCE IN
HEAVEN ABOUT THE SPACE OF HALF AN HOUR**."

We must not forget that the "**SEVENTH SEAL**" includes all that happens
during the sounding of the "**Trumpets**," and the pouring out of the
"**Vials**," and so extends down to the ushering in of the Millennium.
To illustrate, a rocket fired into the air may burst into "**seven
stars**," and one of these stars into "**seven other stars**," and one
of the second group of stars into a third group of "**seven stars**." So
the "**Seventh**" Seal includes the "Seven Trumpets," and the
"**Seventh**" Trumpet includes the "Seven Vials."

The "**SILENCE**" that followed the breaking of the "Seventh Seal" was
preparatory to what was to follow during the sounding of the "Trumpets,"
and the pouring out of the "Vials." This "**SILENCE**" was something
remarkable. The Four and Twenty Elders ceased their harp-playing; the
angels hushed their voices, and the Cherubim and Seraphim and all the
host of Heaven were silent, and so great was the **silence** that all
Heaven was awed by it; and to add to the noticeableness of it, John
added that it lasted for "**HALF AN HOUR**." Now a "half an hour" is not
long when engaged in some pleasant employment, but it causes a nerve
breaking tension when we do not know what is going to happen, and when a
life is at stake a minute, or even a few seconds, seem to be hours. The
suspense of the half hour of **SILENCE** in Heaven was intense. But why
that half hour of silence? What did it portend? It was the period of
silent preparation for the awful judgments that were to burst forth in
the earth under the "Trumpets" and "Vials."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Golden Censer](tbr036.md)
