[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr037) 
[Next](tbr039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECOND TRUMPET.

### (The Burning Mountain.)

Rev. 8:8-9.

"And the '**SECOND ANGEL**' sounded, and **as it were** a **'GREAT
MOUNTAIN' burning with fire** was cast into the sea: and the **third
part of the sea BECAME BLOOD**; and the **third part of the creatures
which were in the sea, and had life, DIED**; and the **third part of the
ships were DESTROYED**."

As this "**MOUNTAIN**" is to fall on the **sea**, and the Judgments
poured forth by the "Trumpets" and "Vials" are to fall mainly on that
part of the world bordering on the Mediterranean Sea, it is highly
probable that the "**SEA**" here mentioned is the Mediterranean Sea.

Notice that John does not say that it **was** a "Mountain" that he saw
cast into the sea, but that it **appeared like a mountain**, not a
burning volcano, but an **immense meteoric mass ablaze with fire**. That
was as near as John could describe it. The effect of this "**burning
mass**" on the sea, into which it fell, was to turn a **third part of
the sea** into **BLOOD**. If any are disposed to doubt the possibility
of such a thing let them turn to the "First Egyptian Plague" Ex.
7:19-21, and read the account of the turning of the waters of the River
Nile into **BLOOD**. "And all the waters that were in the river were
turned to **BLOOD**. And the **fish** that was in the river **DIED**;
and the river **STANK**, and the Egyptians could not drink of the water
of the river: and there was **BLOOD** throughout **ALL THE LAND OF
EGYPT**." The only difference between the "First Egyptian Plague," and
the effect on the Mediterranean Sea by the falling of a "Meteor" into it
at the sounding of the Second Trumpet, will be, that only **1/3 of the
sea** shall become **BLOOD**, that where the "Meteor" strikes, and thus
only **1/3 of the living creatures** in the sea shall **DIE**.
**One-third also of the ships** shall be **DESTROYED**, possibly by a
tidal wave, or the "Meteor" may fall on a fleet of naval vessels, like
the storm that destroyed the Spanish Armada.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Third Trumpet. (The Star Wormwood.)](tbr039)
