[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr013) 
[Next](tbr015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III. THE CHURCH AT PERGAMOS.

(**A Licentious Church**.)

Rev. 2:12-17.

1\. **THE SALUTATION**--"And to the Angel of the Church in Pergamos
write: These things saith He which hath the **Sharp Sword with two
edges**.

2\. **THE COMMENDATION**--"I know thy **works**, and **where thou
dwellest**, even where **SATAN'S SEAT IS**: and thou **holdest fast My
Name**, and hast **not denied My Faith**, even in those days wherein
Antipas was My faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where **Satan
dwelleth**.

3\. **THE COMPLAINT**--"But I have a few things against thee, because
thou hast there them that hold the **DOCTRINE** <span id="page_22">p.
22</span> **OF BALAAM**, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block
before the Children of Israel, to **eat things sacrificed unto idols**,
and to **commit fornication**. So hast thou also them that hold the
**DOCTRINE OF THE NICOLAITANES**, which thing I hate.

4\. **THE WARNING**--"**Repent!** or else I will come unto thee quickly,
and will fight against them with the **SWORD OF MY MOUTH**.

5\. **THE PROMISE**--"He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
saith unto the Churches; To him that overcometh will I give to **eat of
the HIDDEN MANNA**, and will give him a **WHITE STONE**, and in the
stone a **NEW NAME written**, which no man knoweth saving he that
receiveth it."

In this Message Pergamos is spoken of as "Satan's Seat." When Attalus
III, the Priest-King of the Chaldean Hierarchy, fled before the
conquering Persians to Pergamos, and settled there, Satan shifted his
capital from Babylon to Pergamos. At first he persecuted the followers
of Christ, and Antipas was one of the martyrs. But soon he changed his
tactics and began to exalt the Church, and through Constantine united
the Church and State, and offered all kinds of inducements for worldly
people to come into the Church. Constantine's motive was more political
than religious. He. wished to weld his Christian and Pagan subjects into
one people, and so consolidate his Empire. The result of this union was
that two false and pernicious doctrines crept into the Church. The first
was the "Doctrine of Balaam," and the second the "Doctrine of the
Nicolaitanes." The latter we have already considered under the Message
to the Church at Ephesus. And the foothold it had secured in the Church
was seen in the First Great Council of the Church held at Nicaea, in A.
D. 325. The Council was composed of about 1500 delegates, the laymen
out-numbering the Bishops 5 to 1. It was a stormy council, full of
intrigue and political methods, and from the supremacy of the "Clergy"
over the "Laity" it was evident that the "Doctrine of the Nicolaitanes"
had secured a strong and permanent foothold.

The "Doctrine of Balaam" is disclosed in the story of Balaam found in
the Book of Numbers, chapters 22 to 25 inclusive. When the Children of
Israel on their way to Canaan had reached the land of Moab, Balak the
king of Moab sent for Balaam the Son of Beor, who lived at Pethor on the
river Euphrates, to come and curse them. When the Lord would not permit
Balaam to curse Israel, he suggested to Balak that he invite them to the
licentious feasts of "Baal-Peor," and thus cause Israel to fall into a
snare that would so anger the Lord that he would Himself destroy them.
This Balak did, and the result was that when the men of Israel went to
those sensual feasts and saw the "daughters of Moab" they committed
whoredoms with them, which so kindled God's anger that He sent a plague
that destroyed 42,000 of them. Now the word "Pergamos" means "Marriage,"
and when the Church entered into a union with the State it was guilty of
"Spiritual Fornication" or "Balaamism."

The "Balaam Method" that Constantine employed was to give to the Bishops
of the Church a number of imposing buildings called Basilicas for
conversion into churches, for whose decoration he was lavish in the gift
of money. He also supplied superb vestments for

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

the clergy, and soon the Bishop found himself clad in costly vestments,
seated on a lofty throne in the apse of the Basilica, with a marble
altar, adorned with gold and gems, on a lower level in front of him. A
sensuous form of worship was introduced, the character of the preaching
was changed, and the great "Pagan Festivals" were adopted, with but
little alteration, to please the Pagan members of the church, and
attract Pagans to the church. For illustration, as the Winter Solstice
falls on the 21st day of December, which is the shortest day in the
year, and it is not until the 25th that the day begins to lengthen,
which day was regarded throughout the Heathen world as the "birthday" of
the "Sun-God," and was a high festival, which was celebrated at Rome by
the "Great Games" of the Circus, it was found advisable to change the
Birthday of the Son of God, from April, at which time He was probably
born, to December 25th, because as He was the "Sun of Righteousness,"
what more appropriate birth-day could He have than the birthday of the
Pagan "Sun-God"?

It was at this time that

"**Post-Millennial Views**"

had their origin. As the Church had become rich and powerful, it was
suggested that by the union of Church and State a condition of affairs
would develop that would usher in the Millennium without the return of
Christ, and since some scriptural support was needed for such a
doctrine, it was claimed that the Jews had been cast off "forever," and
that all the prophecies of Israel's future glory were intended for the
Church. This "Period" extends from the accession of Constantine A. D.
312 to A. D. 606, when Boniface III was crowned "Universal Bishop."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Church At Thyatira](tbr015)
