[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr049) 
[Next](tbr051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. THE MAN-CHILD.

Rev. 12:5-6.

"And she brought forth a '**MAN-CHILD**,' who was to rule all nations
with a '**ROD OF IRON**': and her child was caught up unto God, and to
His Throne."

As the result of her "**travail**" the "**Sun Clothed Woman**" brought
forth a "**MAN-CHILD**" who was to rule the nations with a "**ROD OF
IRON**." There can be no question as to who is meant by the "Man-Child."
He is **CHRIST**. The Second Psalm settles that--"Ask of me, and I shall
give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for Thy possession. Thou shalt break them with a '**ROD OF
IRON**': Thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel." The
"Man-Child" cannot be the Church, as some claim, because the "Man-Child"
is caught up to the **FATHER'S THRONE**, where He is **now seated**,
while the Church, which is **not as yet caught up**, is to be caught up
to **CHRIST IN THE AIR**. 1. Thess. 4:17.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

Those who claim that Christ and the Church **together** constitute the
"Man-Child," because in the Message to the Church at Thyatira, the
promise to the "Overcomers" is, that they shall rule the Nations with a
"**ROD OF IRON**," forget that this promise is not to the Church **as a
whole**, but only to the "Overcomers" of the "Thyatiran Church Period,"
A. D. 606-1520. In other words the "Overcomers" of the "Thyatiran Church
Period" shall hold some prominent "**Ruling Power**" with Christ in the
Millennial Kingdom.

"And the '**WOMAN**' fled into the '**Wilderness**,' where she hath a
place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a **thousand two
hundred and threescore days**."

Here is where many interpreters of this chapter have been led astray.
They have supposed that the "Woman" flees into the Wilderness
**immediately after the birth of her child**, and because the **time**
of her flight is in the "Middle of the Week" (for the 1260 days of her
preservation in the Wilderness corresponds with the "last half" of the
"Week"), they cannot see how her "**Child**" can be Christ, for Christ
was born and "caught up" to His Father's Throne centuries ago, while
this event is still future. But they overlook the fact that between the
5th and 6th verses of this chapter the present **CHURCH PERIOD** comes
in. Between these verses the "**GAP**" between the "Sixty-ninth" and the
"Seventieth" Week of Daniel's "Seventy Weeks" is found. The 5th verse
describes the "**BIRTH**" of Christ, and His "**ASCENSION**," and then
John jumps over the "GAP," and describes in the 6th verse the "Flight"
of the Woman **ISRAEL** into the Wilderness to escape from the
Antichrist. The reason for this is that John is not dealing here with
the Church, and having introduced the "Woman" and her "Child" to account
for the "Dragon's" wrath against her because he did not succeed in
destroying her "Child" (Christ) when He was born, John jumps over the
"**GAP**," that he may again take up God's dealing with **ISRAEL**. The
"Flight" of the "Woman" is mentioned here by anticipation, for she does
not flee until after the "War in Heaven."

Here is evidence that the "Sun Clothed Woman" is not the "Virgin Mary,"
for she does not flee into Egypt, as Joseph and the Virgin did (Matt.
2:12-15), but into the **WILDERNESS**. Neither does she flee "**with her
child**," for it was taken away from her and caught up to the "Throne of
God." Neither does she flee for her **child's protection**, but for her
**own safety**.

From this passage we learn that Christ's Millennial rule will be
**AUTOCRATIC**, for He shall rule over the Nations with a "**ROD OF
IRON**." This does not signify that His rule will be tyrannical. It
simply means that His **WILL** shall be supreme. We cannot imagine
Christ's rule to be other than a rule of love. Politics will have no
place in the government, the masses will not be oppressed by those in
power, equal rights will be accorded to everyone, and every man shall
sit under his **own vine and figtree**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. The Archangel (War In Heaven)](tbr051)
