[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr025.md) 
[Next](tbr027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

# The Seven Seals

### FIRST SEAL.

### (A White Horse.)

Rev. 6:1-2.

<span id="img_05300"></span> ![](img/05300.jpg)

"And I saw when the **LAMB** opened one of the **SEALS**, and I heard,
as it were the noise of thunder, one of the 'Four Beasts' saying, **Come
and see**. And I saw, and behold a **WHITE HORSE**: and he that sat on
him had a **bow**; and a **crown was given unto him**: and he went forth
**conquering**, and **to conquer**."

When the **LAMB** broke the "First Seal," the first, or "Lion-like
Living Creature" cried with a voice of thunder--"**COME**." The words
"and see" are omitted in many manuscripts, and in the Revised Version.
John had no need to "come" for he was already there. The command then of
"Come" was to the "**Rider**" of the White Horse. When he appeared, John
says--"And I saw, and behold a **WHITE HORSE**; and he that sat on him
had a **bow**; and a **crown was given unto him**: and he went forth
**conquering**, and **to conquer**."

Who is the "**Rider**" upon this White Horse? He is not Christ, as some
claim, for Christ, as the **LAMB**, is holding the "Seven Sealed Book"
and breaking its "Seals." Christ does not appear as a White Horse Rider
until chapter 19:11-16, when He comes with the armies of Heaven to
engage in the Battle of Armageddon. Then He is called "Faithful and
True," and on His head there is a many "Diademed Crown," and He is
clothed in a vesture dipped in blood, and His name is called the "**WORD
OF GOD**," and there is no weapon of warfare in His hand, but a **sharp
sword** comes out of His **mouth**, and the effect upon His enemies will
he swift and terrible.

This "Rider" has a "**bow**," no arrow is mentioned, and he is not
crowned at first, but a crown will be given to him later, the
"Stephanos" or "Victor's Crown," as a reward for his victories which are
prolonged and bloodless. This is the picture of a brilliant,
strategical, and irresistible conqueror, whose victories will dazzle the
world, and elevate him to a leadership that will place him at the Head
of the

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Ten Federated Kingdoms of the revived Roman
Empire. As a subaltern, like Napoleon I, he will rise from the ranks
until a crown will be given him. His triumphs will be due to his skilful
diplomacy. Like Antiochus Epiphanes, his prototype, he "will come in
**peaceably**, and obtain the Kingdom by **flatteries**." Dan. 11:21. As
the "Tool of Satan" he will be endowed with wonder working powers, and
when he comes, he will find the world ready to receive him, for God will
send upon its inhabitants a "**strong delusion**" that they will believe
a LIE, or "**THE LIE**," for that is what he will be. 2. Thess. 2:9-11.

In other words this White Horse Rider is the **ANTICHRIST**. He is the
"**PRINCE WHO IS TO COME**" of Daniel's Vision of the "Seventy Weeks,"
and who will confirm the Covenant for "**ONE WEEK**," the last or
"Seventieth Week," with Daniel's people the Jews. Dan. 9:27. This
Covenant will probably be the privilege to return to Palestine and
rebuild the Temple and re-establish their sacrificial form of worship,
and national existence, in exchange for the financial assistance of the
Jewish bankers of the world in his schemes of establishing world wide
commerce, and the formation of a gigantic corporation, with its
commercial centre in the rebuilt city of Babylon, so that no one can buy
or sell unless they have his "**MARK**," (the "Mark of the Beast," Rev.
13:16-17), for we are told in Dan. 8:23-25, that "through his policy
also he shall cause **CRAFT** (manufactories) to prosper in his hand."

The rise of this White Horse Rider necessarily antedates the beginning
of the "Seventieth Week," or the "**SEVEN YEARS**" of his reign, for he
must have reached a position of power to make a Covenant with the Jews
at the beginning of the "**WEEK**," but he does not become "**THE
BEAST**," as described in chapter 13:1-8, until the "**Middle**" of the
**WEEK**, that is, until after Satan is cast out of the Heavenlies and
incarnates himself in him. His rise to power and the rebuilding of
Babylon will take time, so the Rapture of the Church will doubtless
antedate the **beginning** of the **WEEK** by some years.

But while the establishment of the Antichrist's power will be
comparatively peaceful, that peace will be shortlived as is evident from
the breaking of the "Second Seal."

This "White Horse Rider" will be Satan's "**SUPERMAN**." The Scriptures
clearly teach that there is some day to arise a human being who shall be
the embodiment of all Satanic power. He will be known as the "**WILFUL
KING**" because he shall do according to his own will. He will be the
Czar of Czars. He will have no respect for sacred things or places. He
will cause a throne to be erected in the Most Holy Place of a Temple
that the Jews will build at Jerusalem, and, seating himself upon it, he
will proclaim himself **God**, and men will be commanded to worship him;
and Satan will give unto him his **power** and his **seat** (Throne) and
great authority. All this will be fully brought out under the "Sixth
Personage," the "Beast Out of the Sea," Page [103](tbr054.htm#page_103.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Seal (A Red Horse)](tbr027.md)
