[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr003.md) 
[Next](tbr005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# FOREWORD

This work is the result of 25 years' study of the Book of Revelation.
Twice within 6 years the writer gave a 4-months' course of Sunday
morning sermons to his people on the Book. These lectures have also been
given in Bible Institute Courses, illustrated with large, colored, wall
charts.

The Book of Revelation is interpreted from the Futurist Standpoint.
Chapters two and three cover the present Church Dispensation. From
chapter four until the end of the Book all is future. The writer's
purpose is to show that the Book of Revelation is to be taken literally,
and that it is written in chronological order. The text of the Old
Version is used and is printed at the top of each subject. The chapter
and verse divisions are ignored. The text is emphasized by the use of
capitals and black type. This helps to explain it and make it clear to
the general reader. The descriptive matter of the book is emphasized in
the same manner.

The book is also illustrated with over 30 charts, maps, and diagrams.
Numerous cuts of symbols, beasts, etc., spoken of in the Book of
Revelation are distributed through the book at the place where they are
mentioned, and add greatly to its value by elucidating the text and
saving much explanatory matter.

The make-up and printing of the book is unique. The writer has broken
all rules of book-making in his desire to make the average reader see
and grip the truth. This he has been able to do because of his skill as
a draughtsman, and because the Printers of the book, who are lovers of
the truth and like to see it "Rightly Divided," were in sympathy with
the writer's purpose, and have done everything they could to make the
"printer's art" express the writer's thought.

A book gotten up in this way is naturally more expensive to print than
an ordinary book. The writer had to spend weeks and months in study and
designing the charts, maps, diagrams, cuts, etc. These had to be inked
in and lettered by hand. Then plates had to be made of the drawings, and
electros of the plates. The emphasizing of the descriptive matter with
black type costs extra, but all this trouble and

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

expense makes the book doubly valuable. While there are but 210 pages in
the book, the size of the type, and the enlarged page, 6 x 9 inches,
make it equivalent to an ordinary book of 400 pages.

There is nothing fantastical in the book. It contains no speculative
matter, nor opinions of the writer. The book is not a commentary made up
of quotations from other writers. The writer is neither a copyist or
compiler. The only Author the writer has sought to follow is the Author
of the Book the Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore the writer lays no claim to
originality. All he has sought to do is to clearly present the "**MIND
OF CHRIST**" as revealed in the Book, having in mind the "**CURSE**" to
which every expositor of the Book subjects himself. "If any man shall
**ADD** unto these things, God shall **ADD UNTO HIM** the '**PLAGUES**'
that are written in this Book, and if any man shall **TAKE AWAY** from
the words of the 'Book of this Prophecy,' God shall **TAKE AWAY HIS PART
OUT OF THE 'BOOK OF LIFE,' AND OUT OF THE HOLY CITY, AND FROM THE THINGS
WHICH ARE WRITTEN IN THIS BOOK**." Rev. 22:18-19.

The writer's aim has been to prepare a standard work on the Book of
Revelation, from the Futurist Standpoint, that can be used as a
text-book in Theological Seminaries and Bible Schools, and be of
invaluable service to the busy pastor in his exposition of the Word of
God. The book is sent out with the prayer that God will bless its
testimony in these days when the prophetic utterances of the Book of
Revelation are rapidly approaching their fulfilment.

CLARENCE LARKIN.                      

    "Sunnyside"  
Fox Chase, Phila., Pa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plates](tbr005.md)
