[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr015) 
[Next](tbr017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

### V. THE CHURCH AT SARDIS.

(**A Dead Church**.)

Rev. 3:1-6.

1\. **THE SALUTATION**--"And unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis
write: these things saith He that hath the **Seven Spirits of God**, and
the **Seven Stars**.

2\. **THE CONDEMNATION**--I know thy works, that thou hast a **name that
thou livest**, and **ART DEAD**.

3\. **THE COUNSEL**--Be **watchful**, and **strengthen the things which
remain**, that are ready to die: for I have not found thy works perfect
before God. **Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard**, and
**hold fast**, and **repent**.

4\. **THE WARNING**--If therefore thou shalt not watch, I will come on
thee **as a thief**, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon
thee.

5\. **THE PROMISE**--Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not
defiled their garments; and they shall **walk with me in white**: for
they are worthy. He that overcometh, the same shall be **clothed in
WHITE RAIMENT**; and I will not blot out his name out of the Book of
Life, but I will **confess his name before My Father, and before His
angels**. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto
the Churches."

The Church at Sardis was called a "Dead Church" though it had a name to
live. That is, it was a "Formalistic Church," a church given over to
"formal" or "ritualistic" worship. It had the "Form of Godliness without
the power." The meaning of the word "Sardis" is the "escaping one," or
those who "come out" and so it is an excellent type of the Church of the

**Reformation Period**.

By the Reformation we mean that period in the history of the Christian
Church when Martin Luther and a number of other reformers protested
against the false teaching, tyranny and claims of the Papal Church.

This Period began about A. D. 1500. The condition of affairs in the
realm dominated by the Papal Church became intolerable, and came to a
crisis when Martin Luther, on October 31, 1517 A. D., nailed his 95
Theses on the church door at Wittenberg, Germany. From that date the
Reformation set in. But it was more a struggle for political liberty
than a purely Christian or religious movement.

It had the advantage of encouraging and aiding the circulation of the
Holy Scriptures, that had hitherto been a sealed book, the revival of
the Doctrine of "Justification by Faith," and a reversion to more simple
modes of worship, but the multiplication of sects only led to bitter
controversial contentions, that, while they threw much light on the Word
of God, interfered greatly with the spiritual state of the Church, until
it could truthfully be said, "That she had a name to live and was
**dead**."

While the reformers swept away much ritualistic and doctrinal rubbish
they failed to recover the promise of the Second Advent. They turned to
God from idols, but not to "wait for His Son from the Heavens." The
"Sardis Period" extended from A. D. 1520 to about A. D. 1750.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. The Church At Philadelphia](tbr017)
