[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr062.md) 
[Next](tbr064.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE INTERVAL BETWEEN THE "SEVEN PERSONAGES" AND THE "SEVEN VIALS."

1\. THE LAMB ON MOUNT ZION.

Rev. 14:1-5.

"And I looked, and, lo, a **LAMB** stood on **MOUNT ZION**, and with Him
a **Hundred Forty and Four Thousand**, having His Father's name written
in their foreheads. And I heard a voice from Heaven, as the voice of
many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice
of **HARPERS harping with their harps**: and they sung as it were a
**NEW SONG** before the Throne, and before the Four Beasts, and the
Elders: and no man could learn that song but **The Hundred and Forty and
Four Thousand**, which were redeemed **from the earth**. These are they
which were not defiled with women: for they are virgins. These are they
which follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth. These <span
id="page_131">p. 131</span> were redeemed from among men, being the
first fruits unto God and to the Lamb. And in their mouth was found no
guile: for they are without fault before the Throne of God."

The Lamb here is Christ, and the Mount Zion is not Mount Zion of the
earthly Jerusalem but of the Heavenly of which Paul speaks in Heb.
12:22-23. "But ye are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the
living God, '**THE HEAVENLY JERUSALEM**,' and to an innumerable company
of angels, to the General Assembly and Church of the 'First Born' (New
Born), which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to
the spirits of just (justified) men made perfect."

The **144,000** standing with the Lamb on Mount Zion, are the **144,000
"SEALED ONES,"** 12,000 from each Tribe of Israel, of chapter 7:3-8.
There we are told they were sealed, here we are told **why**. In chapter
seven we are told they were sealed in their foreheads, here we are told
that that sealing was the writing on their foreheads of the name of the
Lamb (R. V.) and of the Lamb's Father. As John looked at the Lamb and
the 144,000 "**Sealed Ones**" who stood with Him, he heard a voice from
Heaven, as the "**voice of many waters**," and as the voice of a
"**great thunder**," which identifies the Speaker with the one who spoke
from the midst of the "Lamp-Stands" of chapter 1:10, 15, or the Lamb
Himself.

What the "voice" said is not told us, but it was followed with the voice
or singing of "**Harpers**" accompanied by their harps. These
"**Harpers**" sung a "**NEW SONG**" before the Throne, and the "Four
Living Creatures," and the "Elders." As the "Elders" represent the
Church, these "**Harpers**" are not the Church, for they sing **before
the "Elders."** Who these "**Harpers**" are we are told in chapter
15:2-4. They are those who stand on the "Sea of Glass" before the
Throne. Rev. 4:6. The "New Song" they sing is a "**double song**," the
"**SONG OF MOSES**" and the "**SONG OF THE LAMB**," and we are told that
no man could learn the Song but the **144,000** who were redeemed **from
the earth**. This is further evidence that the **144,000 "Sealed Ones"**
are in Heaven, either having been translated or died a Martyr's death,
and from Rev. 14:4 we learn that they are the "**FIRST-FRUITS**" of the
restored nation of Israel, not the "First-Fruits" of the Church, for
that is represented by the "Elders," and was gathered out long before.

These **144,000 "Sealed Ones"** are called "**VIRGINS**"; and the fact
that they are spoken of as not having been "**defiled with women**,"
shows that they are either all men of the character of the Apostle Paul,
who did not marry, or, as is most likely, and as the word translated
"virgins" means persons of either sex, they are "virgins" in the sense
that they kept themselves clean of the crowning sin of that
day--**FORNICATION**, for the crowning sin of the Tribulation Period
will be **fornication** (Rev. 9:21; 14:8), or looseness and laxity of
the marriage tie, of which "free-love," and the doctrine of
"affinities," and multiplied divorce in these days are but the opening
wedge to the looseness of morals of those Anti-Christian times. The
**144,000 "Sealed Ones"** will be especially delivered from this sin,
and so they, and they only, as a special class, can sing this "New Song"
of redemption,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

not so much by the Blood, as from the sin of fornication. The teaching
of "**seducing spirits**" mentioned in 1. Tim. 4:1-3, as belonging to
those Anti-Christian times, of "**forbidding to marry and commanding to
abstain from meats**," has a deeper significance than that of the
practice of the Church of Rome that requires the celibacy of the
priesthood and clergy, and fasting of the laity. Such teaching comes
from the "Pit," and belongs to Antichrist's religion, and its purpose is
to weaken the body by fasting and make it more susceptible to the
influence of evil angels and demons, and to cause it to gratify the
desires of the flesh in other ways than by lawful means. These "**Sealed
Ones**" are a chosen class who follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth,
and they are without fault **before the Throne of God**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Three Angel Messengers](tbr064.md)
