[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr032) 
[Next](tbr034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

# The Interval Between the Sixth and Seventh Seals

### 1. THE SEALING OF THE 144,000.

Rev. 7:1-8.

"And after these things I saw four angels standing on the four corners
of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should
not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree. And I saw
another angel ascending from the East, having the '**SEAL OF THE LIVING
GOD**': and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it
was given to hurt the earth and the sea, Saying, **Hurt not the earth,
neither the sea, nor the trees**, till we have **SEALED THE SERVANTS OF
OUR GOD IN THEIR FOREHEADS**. And I heard the number of them which were
**SEALED**: and there were **SEALED A HUNDRED AND FORTY AND FOUR
THOUSAND OF ALL THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL**."

Here we have a respite in the breaking of the "Seals" that God's
"**elect of Israel**" may be "**SEALED**." As God reserved 7000 in the
days of Ahab who did not bow the knee to Baal (1. Kings 19:18), so there
will be a "remnant according to the election of grace" (Rom. 11:4-6),
and God will reserve 144,000 of Israel who during the period of the
Tribulation will not bow the knee to **Antichrist**. This **SEALING** is
not the Sealing of the Holy Spirit, by whom the Believer is sealed (Eph.
1:13-14), but it is a "**sealing**" at the hand of **Angels**. Christ
refers to it in Matt. 24:31. What this **SEALING** is we are told in
Rev. 14:1. The "**FATHER'S NAME**" is to be written on their foreheads.
They were "Sealed" on their **FOREHEADS** where others could see it.
Theirs was no **secret discipleship**. In the same public manner the
followers of Antichrist will be "Sealed" in their **Foreheads** or on
their **RIGHT HAND**, with the "**MARK OF THE BEAST**" which is the
**NUMBER OF HIS NAME**, or 666. Rev. 13:16-18.

The 144,000, 12,000 from each Tribe, will be of the earthly Israel, the
literal seed of Abraham, living at that time, and not of a mystical or
spiritual Israel. Though the "Twelve Tribes" were long ago lost among
the nations, their whereabouts is not unknown to God. And though they
may have lost their genealogical books and records, so as not to be able
to trace their Tribal descent, God knows **where** they are, and **who
is who**, and in that day the angels, with **omniscient precision**,
will seal them according to their Tribes, 12,000 from each Tribe. The
Angel who has charge of the **SEALING** comes from the **EAST**. This is
significant. It intimates that the "Sealed Ones" have their gaze
directed toward the "**SUN-RISING**," as if looking for the fulfilment
of the promise in Malachi, "Unto you that **fear My name** shall the
'**SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS**' arise with healing in His wings." Mal. 4:2.
The "**Elect**" then of Israel will be those who "**fear Christ's
name**," and who, like as Simon and Anna watched for His First Coming,
will be looking for the coming of their Messiah.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

There is a remarkable difference in the names of the Tribes as here
recorded and the names of the original Twelve Tribes. Here the names of
Dan and Ephraim are omitted, and the names of Joseph and Levi are
substituted. Why is this? The reason is plain. In Deu. 29:18-21, we read
that the **man**, or **woman**, or **family**, or **TRIBE**, that should
introduce idolatry into Israel, should have their or its name "**blotted
out**" from under heaven, and be **separated** out of the Tribes of
Israel. This is just what the Tribes of Dan and Ephraim were guilty of
when they permitted Jeroboam to set up "**Golden Calves**" to be
worshipped, one at Dan in the "Tribe of Dan," and the other at Bethel in
the "Tribe of Ephraim." 1. Kings 12:25-30. This is the reason why the
Tribes of Dan and Ephraim are omitted from the list in this chapter, and
the names of Joseph and Levi substituted. But as the Tribes of Dan and
Ephraim are in the list of the Twelve Tribes that shall occupy the Holy
Land during the Millennium (Ez. 48:1-7, 23-29), it is evident that the
**SEALING** of the Tribes in this chapter is more for **HEAVENLY
PRESERVATION**, than to keep them for an **earthly inheritance**, and
this view is confirmed by the fact that they are later seen with the
Lamb on the Heavenly Mount Zion. Rev. 14:1-5. The omission of their
names in this list of these "**SEALED ONES**" is to show that the Tribes
of Dan and Ephraim must pass through the Great Tribulation **unprotected
by sealing**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Blood Washed Multitude](tbr034)
