[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr079.md) 
[Next](tbr081.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

### SECOND DOOM

### COMMERCIAL BABYLON.

Rev. 18:1-24.

"And **after these things** (the destruction of "Mystical Babylon") I
saw **ANOTHER ANGEL** come down from Heaven, having great power; and the
earth was lightened with his glory. And he cried mightily with a strong
voice, saying **BABYLON THE GREAT IS FALLEN, IS FALLEN**, and is become
the **habitation of devils**, and the **hold of every foul spirit**, and
a **cage of every unclean and hateful bird**. For all nations have drunk
of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth
have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are
waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies. And I heard another
voice from Heaven, saying, **COME OUT OF HER, MY PEOPLE, THAT YE BE NOT
PARTAKERS OF HER SINS, AND THAT YE RECEIVE NOT OF HER PLAGUES**. For her
sins have reached unto Heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities.
Reward her even as she re-warded you, and double unto her double
according to her works: in the cup which she hath filled fill to her
double. How much she hath glorified herself and lived deliciously. So
much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, I sit a
Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her
Plagues come in one day, **death**, and **mourning**, and **famine**;
and she shall be utterly **BURNED WITH FIRE**: for strong is the Lord
God who judgeth her. And the kings of the earth, who have committed
fornication and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament
for her, when they shall see the **smoke of her burning**. Standing afar
off for the fear of her torment, saying, "**Alas, alas, that Great City
Babylon, that Mighty City! for in ONE HOUR is thy Judgment come**. And
the merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her; for no man
buyeth their merchandise any more: the merchandise of **gold** and
**silver**, and **precious stones**, and of **pearls**, and **fine
linen**, and **purple**, and **silk**, and **scarlet**, and **all-thyme
wood**, and all manner vessels of most **precious wood**, and of
**brass**, and **iron**, and **marble**, and **cinnamon**, and
**odors**, and **ointments**, and **frankincense**, and **wine**, and
**oil**, and **fine flour**, and **wheat**, and **beasts**, and
**sheep**, and **horses**, and **chariots**, and **slaves**, and **SOULS
OF MEN**. And the fruits that thy soul lusted after are departed from
thee, and all things which were dainty and goodly are departed from
thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all. The merchants of these
things, which were made rich by her, shall stand afar off for the fear
of her torment, weeping and wailing, and saying, **Alas, alas, that
GREAT CITY, that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and
decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls! For in ONE HOUR so
great riches is come to nought**. And every **shipmaster**, and all the
**company in ships** (travellers), and **sailors**, and as many as
**trade by sea**, stood afar off, and cried (wept) when they saw the
smoke of her burning, saying What **CITY** is like unto this Great
**CITY**. And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and
wailing, saying, **Alas, alas, that GREAT CITY, wherein were made rich
all that had ships in the sea by reason of her costliness! for in ONE
HOUR is she made desolate**. Rejoice over her, thou Heaven, and ye Holy
Apostles, and Prophets; for God hath avenged you on her. And a Mighty
Angel took up a **STONE like a GREAT MILLSTONE**, and cast it into the
sea, saying, **THUS WITH VIOLENCE SHALL THAT GREAT CITY BABYLON BE
THROWN DOWN, AND SHALL BE FOUND NO MORE AT ALL**. And the voice of
**Harpers**, and <span id="page_155">p. 155</span> **Musicians**, and of
**Pipers** and **Trumpeters**, shall be heard no more at all in thee;
and no **craftsman**, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more
in thee; and the **sound of a millstone** shall be heard no more at all
in thee; and the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee;
and the **voice of the bridegroom** and of the bride shall be heard no
more at all in thee; for thy merchants were the great men of the earth;
for by thy sorceries were all nations deceived. And in her was found the
blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the
earth."

This chapter begins with the words "**after these things**." What
things? The things recorded in the previous chapter, the **destruction
of "Mystical Babylon."**

If "Mystical Babylon" was destroyed in the previous chapter then she
cannot appear in this chapter, and the "City" here described must be a
literal city called Babylon, and as there is no city of that name on the
earth today, nor has been since the ancient city of Babylon was
destroyed, it must refer to some future city of Babylon. That the two
chapters refer to different things is further verified by the fact that
they are announced by different angels. The events of chapter seventeen
are announced by one of the "Vial" Angels, while those of the eighteenth
are announced by "another" angel; probably the "Second Angel Messenger,"
who by way of anticipation, announced in chapter 14:8, the "Fall of
Babylon," that is there called--"**That Great City**."

The ancient city of Babylon from the days of Nimrod (Gen. 10:10), grew
in size and importance century after century until it reached its
greatest glory in the reign of Nebuchadnezzar B. C. 604-562. As
described by Herodotus it was an exact square of 15 miles on a side, or
60 miles around, and was surrounded by a brick wall 87 feet thick, and
350 feet high, though probably that is a mistake, 100 feet being nearer
the height. On the wall were 250 towers, and the top of the wall was
wide enough to allow 6 chariots to drive abreast. Outside this wall was
a vast ditch surrounding the city, kept filled with water from the river
Euphrates; and inside the wall, and not far from it, was another wall,
not much inferior, but narrower, extending around the city.

Twenty-five magnificent avenues, 150 feet wide, ran across the city from
North to South, and the same number crossed them at right angles from
East to West, making 676 great squares, each nearly three-fifths of a
mile on a side, and the city was divided into two equal parts by the
river Euphrates, that flowed diagonally through it, and whose banks,
within the city, were walled up, and pierced with brazen gates, with
steps leading down to the river. At the ends of the main avenues, on
each side of the city, were gates, whose leaves were of brass, and that
shone as they were opened or closed in the rising or setting sun, like
"leaves of flame."

The Euphrates within the city was spanned by a bridge, at each end of
which was a palace, and these palaces were connected by a subterranean
passageway, or tube, underneath the bed of the river, in which at
different points were located sumptuous banqueting rooms constructed
entirely of brass.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

Near one of these palaces stood the

"**Tower of Bel**,"

or Babel, consisting of 8 towers, each 75 feet high, rising one upon the
other, with an outside winding stairway to its summit, which towers,
with the Chapel on the top, made a height of 660 feet. This Chapel
contained the most expensive furniture of any place of worship in the
world. One golden image alone, 45 feet high, was valued at $17,500,000,
and the whole of the sacred utensils were reckoned to be worth
$200,000,000.

Babylon also contained one of the "Seven Wonders" of the world, the
famous Hanging Gardens.

These Gardens were 400 feet square, and were raised in terraces one
above the other to the height of 350 feet, and were reached by stairways
10 feet wide. The top of each terrace was covered with large stones, on
which was laid a bed of rushes, then a thick layer of asphalt, next two
courses of brick, cemented together, and finally plates of lead to
prevent leakage; the whole was then covered with earth and planted with
shrubbery and large trees. The whole had the appearance from a distance
of a forest-covered mountain, which would be a remarkable sight in the
level plain of the Euphrates. These Gardens were built by Nebuchadnezzar
simply to please his wife, who came from the mountainous country of
Media, and who was thus made contented with her surroundings. The rest
of the city was, in its glory and magnificence, in keeping with these
palaces, towers, and "Hanging Gardens." The character of its inhabitants
and of its official life is seen in the description of "Belshazzar's
Feast" in Dan. 5:1-31.

Babylon was probably the most magnificent city the world has ever seen
and its fall reveals what a city may become when it forsakes God and He
sends His judgment upon it. It is so intimately connected with the
history of God's people that the Scriptures have much to say about it. A
large part of the Book of Daniel and of the prophecy of Jeremiah relate
to it, and it is mentioned in 11 other books of the Old Testament, and
in 4 of the New Testament. And that the Book of Revelation is a
continuation of the Book of Daniel is further proven by the fact that
the city of Babylon is again spoken of in it, and its prominence in the
affairs of the world at the "**End Time**" disclosed, and its final
destruction foretold.

### THE CITY OF BABYLON TO BE REBUILT.

That the ancient city of Babylon was destroyed there can be no question,
but when we affirm that it is to be rebuilt and again destroyed we are
met with two objections.

1\. That all the Old Testament prophecies in reference to its
destruction have been literally fulfilled, and that it cannot be
rebuilt.

2\. As there is no city of Babylon now in existence the references in
the Book of Revelation to the destruction of such a city must be
symbolical and not refer to a literal city.

Let us take up the first objection. For a description of Babylon and her
destruction we must turn to Isaiah, chapters 13 and 14.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

and Jeremiah, chapters 50 and 51. In these two prophecies we find much
that has not **as yet** been fulfilled in regard to the city of Babylon.

The city of Babylon was captured in B. C. 541 by Cyrus, who was
mentioned "by name" in prophecy 125 years before he was born. Isa.
44:28; 45:4, B. C. 712. So quietly and quickly was the city taken on the
night of Belshazzar's Feast by draining the river that flowed through
the city, and entering by the river bed, and the gates that surmounted
its banks, that the Babylonian guards had forgotten to lock that night,
that some of the inhabitants did not know until the "third" day that the
king had been slain and the city taken. There was no destruction of the
city at that time.

Some years after it revolted against Darius Hystaspis, and after a
fruitless siege of nearly 20 months was taken by strategy. This was in
B. C. 516. About B. C. 478 Xerxes, on his return from Greece plundered
and injured, if he did not destroy, the great "Temple of Bel."

In B. C. 331 Alexander the Great approached the city which was then so
powerful and flourishing that he made preparation for bringing all his
forces into action in case it should offer resistance, but the citizens
threw open the gates and received him with acclamations. After
sacrificing to "Bel," he gave out that he would rebuild the vast Temple
of that god, and for weeks he kept 10,000 men employed in clearing away
the ruins from the foundations, doubtless intending to revive the glory
of Babylon and make it his capital, when his purpose was defeated by his
sudden death of marsh-fever and intemperance in his thirty-third year.

During the subsequent wars of his generals Babylon suffered much and
finally came under the power of Seleucus, who, prompted by ambition to
build a Capital for himself, founded Seleucia in its neighborhood about
B. C. 293. This rival city gradually drew off the inhabitants of
Babylon, so that Strabo, who died in A. D. 25, speaks of the latter as
being to a great extent deserted. Nevertheless the Jews left from the
Captivity still resided there in large numbers, and in A. D. 60 we find
the Apostle Peter working among them, for it was from Babylon that Peter
wrote his Epistle (1. Pet. 5:13), addressed "to the strangers scattered
throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia."

About the middle of the 5th century Theodoret speaks of Babylon as being
inhabited only by Jews, who had still three Jewish Universities, and in
the last year of the same century the "Babylonian Talmud" was issued,
and recognized as authoritative by the Jews of the whole world.

In A. D. 917 Ibu Hankel mentions Babylon as an insignificant village,
but still in existence. About A. D. 1100 it seems to have again grown
into a town of some importance, for it was then known as the "Two
Mosques." Shortly afterwards it was enlarged and fortified and received
the name of Hillah, or "Rest." In A. D. 1898 Hillah contained about
10,000 inhabitants, and was surrounded by fertile lands, and abundant
date groves stretched along the banks of the Euphrates. Certainly it has
never been true that "neither shall

<span id="page_158 ">p. 158</span>

the **Arabian pitch tent there**, neither shall the **shepherds make
their fold there**." Isa. 13:20. Nor can it be said of Babylon--"Her
cities are a desolation, a dry land, and a wilderness, a land **wherein
no man dwelleth**, neither doth any son of man pass thereby." Jer.
51:43. Nor can it be said--"And they shall not take of thee a **stone
for a corner**, nor a **stone for foundations**, but thou shalt be
desolate forever, saith the Lord" (Jer. 51:26), for many towns and
cities have been built from the ruins of Babylon, among them **Four
Capital Cities**, Seleucia, built by the Greeks; Ctesiphon, by the
Parthians; Al Maiden, by the Persians; and Kufa, by the Caliphs. Hillah
was entirely constructed from the debris, and even in the houses of
Bag-dad, Babylonian stamped bricks may be frequently noticed.

But Isaiah is still more specific for he locates the Time when his
prophecy will be fulfilled. He calls it the "Day of the Lord." Isa.
13:9. That is the Millennium. And he locates it at the beginning of the
Millennium, or during the events that usher in the Millennium, for he
says--

"The **stars of heaven** and the **constellations thereof shall not give
their light**; the **sun shall be darkened** in his going forth, and the
**moon shall not cause her light to shine**." Isa. 13:10 (Luke
21:25-27).

Surely nothing like this happened when Babylon was taken by Cyrus.

In the description of the destruction of the city of Babylon given in
Rev. 18, we read that her judgment will come in **one hour** (vs. 10),
and that in **one hour** she shall be made desolate (vs. 19), and as an
illustration of the **suddenness** and **completeness** of her
destruction, a mighty angel took up a **stone** like a **Great
Millstone**, and cast it into the sea, saying--"Thus with **Violence**
shall that great city Babylon be thrown down and shall **be found no
more at all**." Rev. 18:21.

We are also told in the same chapter that she is to be destroyed by
**FIRE** (Rev. 18:8, 9, 18), and this is in exact harmony with the words
of Isa. 13:19.

"And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees'
excellency, shall be as when God overthrew

**Sodom and Gomorrah**;"

and the Prophet Jeremiah makes the same statement. Jer. 50:40.

The destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah was not protracted through many
centuries, their glory disappeared in a few hours (Gen. 19:24-28), and
as ancient Babylon was not thus destroyed, the prophecies of Isaiah and
Jeremiah cannot be fulfilled unless there is to be a future Babylon that
shall be thus destroyed.

In Rev. 16:17-19, we are told that Babylon shall be destroyed by an
Earthquake, attended with most vivid and incessant lightning and awful
thunder. It would appear then, that as Sodom and Gomorrah were first set
on fire and then swallowed up by an earthquake, that the rebuilt city of
Babylon will be set on fire, and as the site of ancient Babylon is
underlaid with **Bitumen** (Asphalt), that an earthquake will break up
the crust of the earth, and precipitate the burning city into a "**Lake
of Fire**," and the city like a "**Millstone**" (Rev. 18:21) sink below
the surface of the earth as into the sea, and be swallowed up so that it
will be impossible to ever take of her stones for building

<span id="img_15800"></span>

[![Map of the Old Roman Empire with Modern Applications](tn/15800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/15800.jpg.md)  
Map of the Old Roman Empire with Modern Applications  

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

purposes, and the land shall become a **Wilderness** where no man shall
ever dwell.

The fact that in her will be found the blood of the Prophets, and Holy
Apostles and Saints (verses 20, 24), shows that the Papal Church is not
in view in this eighteenth chapter, for there was no Papal Church in Old
Testament times, or in the days of the Apostles. It is the ancient as
well as the revived **City of Babylon** that is meant. For in Old
Testament days the blood of the Prophets was shed by the "Babylonish
System" of false religions as visualized in the City of Babylon. So that
it can truthfully be said that the blood of Prophets and Apostles of all
ages has been shed by her.

### THE EPHAH OF COMMERCE.

There is a remarkable Prophetic Vision recorded by the Prophet
Zechariah, that has mystified the Commentators. "Then the Angel that
talked with me went forth, and said unto me, Lift up now thine eyes, and
see what is this that goeth forth. And I said, What is it? And he said,
This is an **EPHAH** that goeth forth. He said moreover: This is their
resemblance through all the earth. And, behold, there was lifted up a
'**Talent of Lead**': and this is a **WOMAN** that sitteth in the midst
of the **EPHAH**. And he said, This is **WICKEDNESS**. And he cast it
(her down R. V.) into the midst of the **EPHAH**: and he cast the
**weight of lead** upon the mouth thereof. Then lifted I up mine eyes,
and looked, and, behold, there came out **TWO WOMEN**, and the **wind
was in their wings**; for they had wings like the **wings of a Stork**:
and they lifted up the **EPHAH** between the earth, and the heaven. Then
said I to the Angel that talketh with me, Whither do these bear the
**EPHAH**? And he said unto me, To build it (her R. V.) an house in the
**LAND OF SHINAR**: and (when it is prepared, she shall be set there in
her own place R. V.)." Zech. 5:5-11.

The "**EPHAH**" which the Prophet saw go forth, is the largest of Hebrew
dry measures, and is often used as a symbol of **Commerce**, and its
"**resemblance**," or going forth through all the earth, doubtless
refers to **UNIVERSAL COMMERCIALISM**. In this "Ephah" sat a "**WOMAN**"
who was called "**WICKEDNESS**." This "**WOMAN**" attempted to rise but
the Angel thrust her back, and replaced the lid made of a "**Talent of
Lead**." Then "**Two Women**," with the wings of a Stork, came, and
lifted the "Ephah" high in the air and carried it with the swiftness of
the wind to the "**LAND OF SHINAR**" to build it (her R. V.) a
**HOUSE**. Now the "**LAND OF SHINAR**" was the place where they built
the Tower of Babel (Gen. 11:1-9), on whose site ancient **BABYLON** was
located. As this vision of the Prophet occurred many years after the
Fall of ancient Babylon, the **HOUSE** that is to be built for this
"Ephah," or the "**WOMAN**" who was transported in it, must be built in
some **future** City of Babylon.

As we have seen the "Ephah" stands for **COMMERCE**, and as the
**occupant** of the "Ephah" is called "**WICKEDNESS**," it reveals the
fact that the "**Commercialism**" of the time of the Vision's fulfilment
will be characterized by all manner of dishonest schemes and methods.
And the fact that the "**WOMAN**" is thrust back into

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

 

<span id="img_16000"></span>

[![Babylon, the Metropolis of the World](tn/16000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16000.jpg.md)  
Babylon, the Metropolis of the World  

 

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

the "Ephah" and covered with a "**Talent of Lead**," indicates that
those dishonest schemes and methods are to be kept out of sight. The
further fact that the "Ephah" is borne to the "**LAND OF SHINAR**" by
two "**Stork Winged Women**" is not without significance. The Stork,
according to the Mosaic Law, is an **unclean** bird. The name
"**Chasid**" by which it was known, signified the "**PIOUS BIRD**," and
may well stand for the pursuit of wealth under the guise of religion.
That will doubtless be a characteristic of those Babylonian days.

This vision of the "Ephah" by the Prophet Zechariah is still further
confirmatory proof that the ancient City of Babylon is to be rebuilt and
become the **COMMERCIAL CENTRE OF THE WORLD**. Every influence political
and commercial will favor this, and as the "Stork Winged Women" will be
favored by the "**wings of the wind**," the tendency of Commercialism to
that part of the world, when the time comes to carry the "Ephah" to the
"Land of Shinar," we can readily see that it will not take long, with
the wealth of the world at the command of the Capitalists of that day,
to re-build Babylon and make it the great Commercial Centre of the
world. Once however Commerce is firmly established in Babylon, the
occupant of the "Ephah"--"**WICKEDNESS**," will lift the lid and reveal
herself, and no one will be able to buy or sell but he who has the
"**MARK OF THE BEAST**."

As to the probability of the ancient city of Babylon being rebuilt we
have only to consider the events that in recent years have been
happening in that part of the world looking to just such a thing.

In the Department of War of France, at Paris, there is to be seen the
records of valuable surveys and maps made by order of Napoleon I, in
Babylonia, and among them is a plan for a **New City of Babylon**, thus
showing that the vast schemes of Napoleon comprehended the **Rebuilding
of the Ancient City of Babylon**, and the making it his Capital, as his
ambition was to conquer the whole of Europe and Asia, and he recognized
to that end the strategical position of ancient Babylon as a
governmental and commercial centre.

It is a fact that the whole country of Mesopotamia, Assyria and
Babylonia, only needs a system of irrigation to make it again the most
fertile country in the world, and steps have already been taken in that
direction. In 1850 the British Government sent out a military officer
with his command to survey and explore the river Euphrates at a cost of
$150,000, and when the European war broke out, the great English
Engineer who built the Assouam dam in Egypt, was engaged in making
surveys in the Euphratean valley for the purpose of constructing a
series of irrigation canals that would re-store the country and make it
again the great grain producing country it once was. As a result towns
and cities would spring up and railroads would be built. What is needed
in that part of the world is a "**Trans-European-Asiatic-Indian Air
Line**" that will connect Europe with India, and China. Such a line was
the dream of ex-Emperor William of Germany. It was that desire that made
him and Abdul Hamid, of Turkey, the closest of political friends, and he
secured from Abdul Hamid a concession to build a railway from the

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Asiatic side of the Bosphorus, by way of Aleppo,
to the Tigris river, and from there to Bagdad, and from Bagdad via
Babylon (via Babylon, mark that) to Koweit on the Persian Gulf, and most
of the road has been built to Bagdad.

With these facts in mind it can readily be seen that it is the purpose
of European capitalists to revive the country of Babylonia and rebuild
its cities, and when once the time comes the city of Babylon will be
rebuilt almost in a night and on a scale of magnificence such as the
world has never seen.

The rapid growth of modern cities is one of the remarkable phenomena of
the times. Since 1880 more than 500 cities have been built in America.
Less than 100 years ago the site of the City of Chicago was but a swampy
expanse at the mouth of the Chicago river. Now it has been transformed
into a beautiful Metropolis, stretching 25 miles along the shore of Lake
Michigan, with 5000 miles of streets, many of them beautiful boulevards
120 feet wide. In 1840 Chicago had only 4470 inhabitants, today the
population is over 3,000,000. Once the Capitalists of the world are
ready the revived City of Babylon will spring up in a few years.

But I hear a protest. How you say can we be expecting Jesus to come at
"any moment," if the city of Babylon must be rebuilt before He can come?
There is not a word in Scripture that says that Jesus cannot come and
take away His Church until Babylon is rebuilt. The Church may be taken
out of the world 25 or even 50 years before that.

Babylon the Great will be an immense city, the greatest in every respect
the world has ever seen. It will be a typical city, the London, the
Paris, the Berlin, the Petrograd, the New York, the Chicago of its day.
It will be the greatest commercial city of the world. Its merchandise
will be of gold and silver, and precious stones and pearls, of purple,
and silk, and scarlet and costly wools. Its fashionable society will be
clothed in the most costly raiment and decked with the most costly
jewels. Their homes will be filled with the most costly furniture of
precious woods, brass, iron and marble, with the richest of draperies,
mats and rugs. They will use the most costly of perfumes, cinnamon,
fragrant odors, ointments and frankincense. Their banquets will be
supplied with the sweetest of wines, the richest of pastry, and the most
delicious of meats. They will have horses and chariots and the swiftest
of fast moving vehicles on earth and in the air. They will have their
slaves, and they will traffic in the "**souls of men**." That is women
will sell their bodies, and men their souls, to gratify their lusts.

The markets will be crowded with cattle, sheep and horses. The wharves
will be piled with goods from all climes. The manufactories will turn
out the richest of fabrics, and all that genius can invent for the
comfort and convenience of men will be found on the market. It will be a
city given over to pleasure and business. Business men and promoters
will give their days and nights to scheming how to make money fast, and
the pleasure loving will be constantly planning new pleasures. There
will be riotous joy and ceaseless feasting. As it was in the days of
Noah and of Lot,

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

they will be marrying and giving in marriage, buying and selling,
building and planting.

The blood will run hot in their veins. Money will be their god, pleasure
their high-priest, and unbridled passion the ritual of their worship.

It will be a city of music. Amid the noise and bustle of its commercial
life will be heard the music of its pleasure resorts and theatres. There
will be the sound of "harpers and musicians, of pipers and trumpeters"
(vs. 22). The world's best singers and players will be there. Its
theatres and places of music will be going day and night. In fact there
will be no night, for the electric illumination of the city by night
will make the night as bright and shadowless as the day, and its stores
and places of business will never close, night or day, or Sunday, for
the mad whirl of pleasure and the absorbing de-sire for riches will keep
the wheels of business constantly moving. And all this will be easy
because the "God of this World"--**Satan**, will possess the minds and
**bodies** of men, for we read in verse 2, that Babylon at that time
will be "the **Habitation of Devils**, and the **Hold of Every Foul
Spirit**, and the **Cage of Every Unclean and Hateful Bird**." The city
will be the seat of the most imposing "**OCCULTISM**," and mediums, and
those desiring to communicate with the other world, will then go to
Babylon, as men and women now go to Paris for fashions and sensuous
pleasures. In that day demons, disembodied souls, and unclean spirits
will find at Babylon the opportunity of their lives to materialize
themselves in human bodies, and from the atmospheric heavens above, and
from the Abyss below they will come in countless legions until Babylon
shall be full of demon possessed men and women, and at the height of its
glory, and just before its fall, Babylon will be ruled by **SATAN
HIMSELF**, incarnate in the "Beast"--**ANTICHRIST**.

But before its destruction God will mercifully deliver His own people,
for a voice from heaven will cry--

"**Come Out of Her, My People, That Ye be Not Partakers of Her Sins, and
that Ye Receive Not of Her Plagues**."

As Sodom and Gomorrah could not be destroyed until righteous Lot had
escaped, so Babylon cannot be destroyed until all the righteous people
in it have fled.

The destruction of the city will be sudden and without warning. A
fearful storm will sweep over the city. The lightning and thunder will
be incessant. The city will be set on fire and a great Earthquake will
shake it from centre to circumference. The tall office buildings, the
"Hanging Gardens" and the great towers will totter and fall, the crust
of the earth will crack and open, and the whole city with its
inhabitants will sink like a "**Millstone**" (vs. 21), into a lake of
burning bitumen, and the smoke will ascend as of a burning fiery
furnace, and the horror of the scene will be intensified by vast clouds
of steam, generated by the waters of the Euphrates pouring into that
lake of fiery asphalt, and when night comes on those clouds of steam
will reflect the light of the burning city so it can be seen for miles
in all directions in that level country. And the kings of the earth, and
the merchants, and the shipmasters, and sailors, and all

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

who have profited by her merchandise, will stand afar off and cry and
wail because of her destruction, but the heavens will rejoice for God
will have rewarded her Double according to her works, and **BABYLON WILL
BE NO MORE**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Interval Between the Second and Third Dooms: The Hallelujah
Chorus](tbr081.md)
