[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr081) 
[Next](tbr083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

### 2. THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB.

Rev. 19:8-10.

"And to **HER** (The Bride) was granted that she should be arrayed in
fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of
saints. And he said unto me, Write, **BLESSED ARE THEY WHICH ARE CALLED
UNTO THE MARRIAGE SUPPER OF THE LAMB**. And he saith unto me, These are
the true sayings of God."

It is marvellous how the Holy Spirit hath enshrined in the Scriptures
the Bridal relation of the Church and her Lord. It is revealed to the
spiritual mind in the most unexpected places. It is foreshadowed in the
Old Testament in the story of Isaac and Rebekah. Doubtless many readers
of the Bible have wondered why the "**SONG OF SOLOMON**" was ever
included among the books of the Old Testament. Upon the first reading it
appears as only a love song of Solomon for one of the many women that he
loved. But a careful study of the Song reveals the fact that it is an
inspired song of the love of the Church of Christ during His absence in
the Heavenlies. The Song describes a maiden of Shulam, a Galilean town
some 5 miles south of Mt. Tabor, who was taken from her home to one of
Solomon's palaces, probably in the Lebanon district, where Solomon tries
to win her love. She had lived with her mother, but her brothers had
treated her cruelly and made her the keeper of the vineyards until her
skin was so tanned that she spoke of herself as "**BLACK BUT COMELY**,"
and had not kept the vineyard of her own beauty, and her brothers even
went so far as to speak disparagingly of her character. But there was
one, a shepherd, who loved and believed in her, and whose love she
returned with the most intense passion. At times Solomon visited her and
sought to win her away from her beloved, but she would not listen to
him. During the day she would talk to herself of her lover and imagine
she heard his voice calling, and during the night she dreamt of him and
imagined she was walking the streets of the city hunting for him. At
times she bursts out in rapturous praise of her lover's beauty, then she
calls him in loving tones. At last she escapes and finds her lover and
they are seen approaching from the meadows happy in each other's love.

What a beautiful picture we have here of the love of the True Church for
her absent Lord. The Church is held captive in this world and is being
constantly solicited by the offers of wealth and splendor to withdraw
her love from Immanuel, her Shepherd Lover, who is feeding His flock in
Paradise, and give her heart to her Solomonic lovers, and consort with
the kings and governments of the world, as does her sister the Harlot
Church. But she cannot give her Heavenly Lover up. At times she is
sorely tempted, then she sees Him with the eye of faith, and dreams of
Him as spiritually present, and she is ravished by the vision of His
beauty. Then suddenly He vanishes, and she is alone again carrying on
the conflict with the world that tries to cast its spell upon her, and
offers her its glories if she will only forsake her Shepherd Lover. But
while the temptation is great her love never wavers, for she sees

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

the time approaching when she shall be caught away from the earth to
meet her Shepherd Lover on the plains of Paradise.

The "Marriage of the Lamb" was one of the themes that Jesus loved to
dwell on. In the Parable of the "Ten Virgins" He tells how the Virgins
went out to meet the Bridegroom, and the unpreparedness of some of them
to meet Him. And in the Parable of the "Marriage of the King's Son"
(Matt. 22:1-14), He prophetically refers to it, and gives us a foreview
of it, and in the verses now under consideration He describes its
consummation, saying--"Let us be glad and rejoice and give honor to Him,
for the '**MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB**' is come, and His wife hath made
herself ready. And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine
linen, clean and white, for the fine linen is the righteousness of
saints. And he saith unto me, write--"**BLESSED ARE THEY WHICH ARE
CALLED UNTO THE MARRIAGE SUPPER OF THE LAMB**."

Notice that it does not say the "**Marriage of the BRIDE**," but the
"**Marriage of the LAMB**." That grand event will be not so much the
consummation of the hopes of the Bride, as it will be the consummation
of the **PLAN OF GOD FOR HIS SON**, arranged for **before the Foundation
of the World**. Eph. 1:4.

The "Marriage of the Lamb" is the consummation of the joy of Christ **AS
A MAN**. It would not have been possible if Christ had not been born
**IN THE FLESH**. Otherwise it would have been the union of **dissimilar
natures**, for the Bride is of **human origin**. This is why Jesus took
His **HUMAN NATURE** back with Him to glory, and today we have in Heaven
the **MAN** Christ Jesus. 1. Tim. 2:5.

While the Bride was chosen for Him **before** the Foundation of the
World, the "**Espousal**" could not take place until after Christ
assumed humanity, and so it was not until after Christ's incarnation
that Paul could say--"I am jealous over you with godly jealousy: for I
have **ESPOUSED** you to one husband, that I may present you as a
**CHASTE VIRGIN** to Christ. 2. Cor. 11:2. There have been many long
betrothals in which the betrothed have been faithful to their vows until
the long wait has ended in a happy marriage, but the longest this world
has ever heard of is that of Christ waiting for His Bride the Church. He
has been waiting now for nearly 1900 years, but He will not have to wait
much longer. Soon the sleeping Church shall hear the cry--"**BEHOLD THE
BRIDEGROOM COMETH, GO YE OUT TO MEET HIM**," and Heaven will re-sound
with the cry--"Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to Him, for
the **MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB IS COME**." Rev. 19:7. Ordinarily the most
interest in a wedding clusters around the bride, but the intimation in
Scripture is, that the most interest at the "Marriage of the Lamb" will
centre around the **BRIDEGROOM**. If there is joy in Heaven in the
presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth, and that
joy is the joy of the **FATHER**, how much greater will be the joy of
the **FATHER** when He shall behold the consummation of His plan for His
Son in His Marriage to His Bride the Church. There have been many royal
weddings of international interest where the invited guests and
spectators witnessed

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

a spectacle magnificent in its appointments, and rejoiced in a union
that bound together different nations. But the Wedding of the Lamb and
His Bride will surpass them all, for it shall unite Heaven and Earth in
a bond that shall never be broken.

Let us now look at the "Marriage of the Lamb" more in detail. Let us ask
and try to answer some of the questions that relate to it. Most Biblical
Expositors take it for granted that the subject is so familiar to Bible
students that it needs no explanation, and so they do not dwell upon it,
but this is not so. These difficulties will appear as we try to answer
them.

### 1. WHERE AND WHEN SHALL THIS MARRIAGE TAKE PLACE?

The Marriage takes place in Heaven **after** the "Judgment of Reward,"
and before the appearing of Christ with His Saints at the Revelation.

The character of the ceremony or who shall perform it (though doubtless
it will be God the Father Himself), and what vows the Bridegroom and
Bride will take, is not disclosed, but that there will be a ceremony of
some kind that no divorce or separation can break, cannot be questioned,
for there never was a legal marriage without some ceremony. Of one thing
we are certain that there is no one to give away the Bride, for Christ
**presents her to Himself** a "**GLORIOUS CHURCH**, not having **SPOT**,
or **WRINKLE**, or any **SUCH THING**." Eph. 5:25-27.

### 2. WHO IS THE BRIDEGROOM?

To this question there can be but one answer. The "Bridegroom" is the
**King's SON** of the Parable of the "Marriage of the King's Son" (Matt.
22:1-14), or **JESUS**, spoken of here as the **LAMB**. John the Baptist
spoke of Christ as the "**BRIDEGROOM**," and of himself as the
"**Friend**" of the Bridegroom who rejoiced to hear His voice. John
3:29. Jesus also represented **Himself** as the "Bridegroom,"
saying--"Can the 'Children of the Bride-chamber' mourn as long as the
**Bridegroom is with them**." Matt. 9:15. And in the Parable of the "Ten
Virgins" Jesus refers to Himself as the "Bridegroom." Matt. 25:1-10. The
Bridegroom then is Christ.

### 3. WHO IS THE BRIDE?

Here there is a difference of opinion. Some claim that the "Bride,"
because she is called "**WIFE**" in Rev. 19:7, is **ISRAEL**, because in
the Old Testament God calls Himself the **HUSBAND** of Israel. Isa.
54:5. Those who advocate this view claim that "Wife" is the earthly name
of Israel, and "**Bride**" the Heavenly. Some hold that because Isaac's
bride was taken from his own kin, that, therefore, to complete the type,
Jesus' Bride must be Israel, His own kin, and not the Church composed
mainly of Gentiles. But we must not forget that while Abraham was the
first Hebrew his kin were **Gentiles**. Abraham was not, strictly
speaking, a Jew, for the Jews are the descendants of Judah, the fourth
son of Jacob or Israel. So we see that Rebekah was not an Israelite, but
a Gentile, so the type holds good.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

We must not forget that there are "Two Brides" mentioned in the
Scriptures. One in the Old Testament, and the other in the New. The one
in the Old Testament is Israel, the Bride of Jehovah; the one in the New
Testament is the Church, the Bride of Christ. Of Israel it is said--"Thy
Maker is Thine **husband**." Isa. 54:5-8. Because of her Whoredoms,
Israel is a **cast off WIFE**, but God, her **husband**, promises to
take her back when she ceases from her adulteries. Jer. 3:1-18; Ez.
16:1-63; Hosea 2:1-23; 3:1-5. She will not be taken back as a
**Virgin**, but as a **WIFE**. But it is a **VIRGIN** that the Lamb
(Christ) is to marry. So the **Wife** (Israel) of the Old Testament
cannot be the **BRIDE** (Virgin) of the New Testament. Again the
**Wife** (Israel) is to reside in the earthly Jerusalem during the
Millennium, while the **BRIDE** (the Church) will reside in the New
Jerusalem. These distinctions make it clear that Israel cannot be the
"Bride" of Christ. We must remember that John did not call the
bride--**WIFE**, until Rev. 21:9, which was **after the marriage**, when
she was no longer Bride but **WIFE**.

The Bride of the Lamb is from a disowned and outcast race, made so by
the disobedience of the head of that race in the Garden of Eden, but the
Bridegroom saw her and loved her. To redeem her He came from His own
lovely home in Heaven to her sin-cursed home on earth, where He was
rejected by members of her family, and seized and subjected to a mock
trial and nailed to a cross as a malefactor, where He laid down
voluntarily His life for her, thus demonstrating His love, and opening
up the way for her redemption from the Law that held her in bondage. He
then left her to return to His Father's House to prepare a home for her,
and during the period of her betrothal He has left her with her own
family, simply sending the Holy Spirit to teach and protect her, and fit
her for the day of her marriage, when He will descend into **midair** to
meet her on her way to the **BRIDAL HALLS OF HEAVEN**. 1. Thess.
4:16-17.

Many assume that the "Bride" is composed of all the saints from Abel
down to the time of the taking out of the Church, but this can-not be
so, for the Church did not exist until the Day of Pentecost, and only
those who live and die in Christ between Pentecost and the taking out of
the Church belong to the Church.

### 4. WHAT IS MEANT BY HER MAKING HERSELF READY?

We are told in verse 7, that she hath "**made herself ready**," and in
verse 8, that it was permitted her to be "**arrayed in fine linen, clean
and white; which is the righteousness of saints**," and in chapter 21:2,
she is described as--"**prepared as a bride adorned for her husband**."
The fact that the "**fine linen**" in which the Bride is clothed is
called not the "righteousness of Christ," but the "**righteousness-es**
(plural) **of SAINTS**, makes it clear that it is not the "imputed
righteousness" of Christ that is meant, and that the "Wedding Garment"
in the Parable of the "Marriage of the King's Son" stands for, but the
righteous acts and works of the saints themselves.

Where does the Church thus clothe herself and when? It is certain that
she does not thus clothe herself on earth, for we must

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

not forget that the Bride does not put on her wedding robes until
**after** she has been tried at the Judgment Seat of Christ, where all
her "**false works**" will have been consumed by fire (1. Cor. 3:11-15),
and it is this "Fiery Judgment" that Peter refers to as the "**TRIAL OF
FAITH**" which--"being much more precious than of gold that perisheth,
though it be **tried with fire**, might be found unto **praise** and
**honor** and **glory** at the **APPEARING OF JESUS CHRIST**." 1. Pet.
1:7. The "**righteousnesses**" then of the Saints will be their
righteous acts and works that will come out of the "**fiery test**" of
the Judgment of Reward, and be found unto **PRAISE** and **HONOR** and
**GLORY** at the "**APPEARING**" of Jesus Christ; and these shall make
up the beautiful wedding garments in which the Saints shall be clothed.
What a contrast there will be between the purple and scarlet colored
dress, and jewel bedecked person of the "Harlot Wife" of Antichrist, and
the spotless white robe of fine linen of the "Bride" of the Lamb.

### 5. WHAT IS THE MARRIAGE SUPPER?

It is not the wedding itself. The "Marriage Feast" is the supper that
follows **after** the Marriage has been solemnized. There is one thing
about this Feast it will be such an honor to receive an invitation, and
to be present, that the angel said to John, "**WRITE**," put it down in
black and white lest you forget, do not trust to tradition lest the
world never hear about it, but--"**WRITE, BLESSED ARE THEY WHICH ARE
CALLED UNTO THE MARRIAGE SUPPER OF THE LAMB**." What a supper it will
be. As a Feast, the Feasts of Belshazzar and Ahasuerus will be but a
poor meal in comparison. It is called a "**Supper**" in contrast with
the supper mentioned in the seventeenth verse of the same chapter, where
the fowls of the air are invited to gather themselves together unto the
"**SUPPER OF THE GREAT GOD**, that they may eat the **flesh of kings**,
and the **flesh of mighty men**, and the **flesh of horses**, and **of
them that sit upon them**, and the **flesh of all men**, both free and
bond, both small and great." Rev. 19:17-18.

### 6. WHO ARE THE GUESTS?

Here again there is a difference of opinion. It is clear that the Guests
**are not the Bride**, at least this is true as to earthly weddings. The
Bride would not be "**called**" or "**invited**" to the Wedding, she has
a place there of her own right and there could be no wedding without
her. Some hold that the "Virgins" in the Parable of the "Ten Virgins"
are not the "Bride" but simply "**Bridesmaids**"; and that those invited
to the "Marriage Supper" of the King's Son, are simply "Guests" and do
not constitute the "Bride." But as both of these Parables do not mention
the Bride, and are "Kingdom of Heaven" Parables, which describe the
character of this Gospel Dispensation, and have a double significance,
we are led to believe that the "**Wise Virgins**" and the Guests who
possessed a "**Wedding Garment**" are intended to represent the
**BRIDE**, because they represent true believers, and true believers
constitute the Church, and the Church and the Bride are one and the
same.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

But there will be "Guests," for as all the dead in Christ shall rise and
be present at the "Marriage of The Lamb," and as only those who are
saved from Pentecost to the taking out of the Church, belong to the
Church (The Bride), there will be present as "**GUESTS**" the Old
Testament Saints, such as Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Job, Moses,
David, the Prophets, and even John the Baptist who claimed to be only
the "**Friend**" of the Bridegroom. Then there will be the "Blood Washed
Multitude" that come out of the Tribulation **after** the Church has
been caught out. Thus we see that the righteous of all the past Ages and
Dispensations, and all the Saints of God who shall be worthy, and who
are not included in the Bride (The Church), will be "Guests" at the
"Marriage Supper of the Lamb." Angels will be "**spectators**" of the
scene but they cannot be "**Guests**," for that honor is reserved for
only those who have been redeemed by the "Blood of the Lamb."

### 7. WHAT HAPPENS AFTER THE MARRIAGE SUPPER?

What happens at earthly weddings after the supper? The guests make merry
among themselves. Often there is music and dancing, and then the
Bridegroom and the Bride change their wedding garments for a travelling
dress, and steal away on their wedding trip. Generally this is to some
pleasure resort or place that they have never seen. Often it is a trip
across the ocean to some distant land. Sometimes it is a visit to the
old home of the Bridegroom or the Bride. So after the "Marriage of the
Lamb" the Heavenly Bridegroom will take His Bride on a wedding trip, and
to what more suit-able place can they go than back to the old home of
the Bride, this earth. The place where the Bridegroom suffered and died
to purchase her redemption with His own precious blood. The place where
her people rejected Him, and despised His Royal claims. Then He will
show them that He was no imposter, that He was what He claimed to be,
the Son of God. He will then set up His Earthly Kingdom, and the Lord
God shall give unto Him the "**THRONE OF DAVID**," and His Bride (The
Church) shall reign with Him for a **THOUSAND YEARS**. Oh what a sweet
and delightful "**HONEY-MOON**" that will be, when, during that long
"Millennial Reign" the earth shall be blessed with the presence of the
King of Kings and His Consort--**THE CHURCH**. But that long
"Honey-Moon" will end, not for the Bridegroom and the Bride, but for the
Earth, by the return of the Bridegroom and the Bride to the Father's
House. Then after the Earth has had its "Baptism of Fire," they will
return with the descent of the "Holy City" to abide on the "New Earth"
forever. So enraptured was John by the Revelation that he says--"I fell
at his (the angel's) feet to worship him. And he said unto me, See thou
do it not: I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have the
testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the Testimony of Jesus is the
**SPIRIT OF PROPHECY**." That is, all prophecy testifies of Jesus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Battle of Armageddon](tbr083)
