[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr095) 
[Next](tbr097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

### 4. THE NEW NATIONS.

Rev. 21:24-27.

"And the **NATIONS OF THEM WHICH ARE SAVED** (the Saved Nations) shall
walk in the light of it (the City): and the kings of the earth do bring
their glory and honor into it. And the gates of it shall not be shut at
all by day: for there shall be no night there. And they shall bring the
glory and honor of the nations into it. And there shall in no wise enter
into it anything that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination,
or maketh a lie: but they which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life."

This last verse does not imply that there will be sin on the New Earth
to endanger the City, but to show that the City will never be
contaminated by evil of any kind.

Outside the walls of this beautiful City, spread over the surface of the
"New Earth," nations shall dwell, whose kings shall bring their glory
and honor into it, but nothing that will defile or work abomination
shall ever enter in through those "Gates of Pearl," for there will be no
sin on that New Earth. Rev. 21:24-27.

### Who Are to Be the Happy Inhabitants of This New Earth?

Where did the people who inhabited the earth **after the Flood** come
from? They were the lineal descendants of Noah, how did they escape the
Flood? They were saved in an Ark which **God Provided**. Gen. 6:13-16.
Shall not God then during the "Renovation of the Earth by Fire," in some
manner, not as yet revealed, take off righteous representatives of the
Millennial nations that He purposes to save, and when the earth is again
fit to be the abode of men, place them back on the New Earth, that they
may increase and multiply and **replenish** it, as Adam (Gen. 1:27, 28),
and Noah (Gen. 9:1), were told to **multiply and replenish** the present
earth.

If God could take off Elijah for the purpose of sending him back again
to herald the Second Coming of the Lord, surely God can take off
representative men from the nations and put them back again on the New
Earth to **repopulate it**. If this is not God's plan then we have one
type in the Scriptures that has no antitype, for Noah's Ark, which is a
type, has no antitype unless it be this.

It is clear from the Scriptures that God does not purpose to create a
new race for the New Earth. His promise as to Israel is that the
descendants of Abraham shall inherit this earth for a "thousand
generations," or 33,000 years; now this is not possible unless they are
transplanted to the New Earth. And this is just what God has promised.

"For as the New Heavens and the New Earth, which I will make, shall
**remain before Me**, saith the Lord, so shall **Your 'Seed'** and
**Your 'Name' REMAIN**." Isa. 66:22.

It seems clear from the presence of the Tree of Life in the Garden of
Eden, that God intended the human race to populate the Earth, and when
it became too thickly populated, to use the surplus population to
colonize other spheres. Our "Solar System" is only in its infancy. The
Earth is the only one of its planets as yet habitable. Where are the
inhabitants for the other planets to come from? Think you that

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

the planets of our Solar System, and the planets of other solar systems,
of which the stars are the suns, were made simply to adorn the heavens
for our little earth. God does not plan things on a **Small Scale**, and
it magnifies His power and wisdom to believe that He created man in His
own likeness, a created being higher than the angels, and gifted with
the power of **Procreation**, that He might by means of him populate the
Universe. This magnifies the Scheme of Redemption. Think you that God
gave His Son to die on Calvary just to redeem a **few** millions of the
human race? Why He could have blotted them out, as He probably did the
Preadamite race, and created a new race, and Satan would have laughed
because he had the second time blocked God's plan for the peopling of
this earth.

No, God will not permit Satan to block His plan for peopling this earth
with a **Sinless Human Race**. The death of Christ was not merely to
redeem a few millions of the human race, but to redeem the **Earth**,
and the **Race Itself** from the curse of sin, and the dominion of
Satan.

The Apostle James tells us that we are only the "**First Fruits**" of
His "**Creatures**." James 1:18. What then must the **HARVEST BE**?

The Universe is **young yet**. We are only in the **beginning of**
things, for

"Of the increase of His government and peace **THERE SHALL BE NO END**."
Isa. 9:7.

When this Earth shall have gone through its "Baptism of Fire," and shall
be again fit for the occupancy of man, the representatives of the "Saved
Nations" (Rev. 21:24) will be men and women in whom no taint of sin will
remain, and who cannot therefore impart it to their offspring, who will
be like the offspring of Adam and Eve would have been if they had not
sinned. This magnifies the whole scheme of redemption, and justifies God
in the creation of the human race.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. The New River](tbr097)
