[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr048.md) 
[Next](tbr050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. THE DRAGON.

Rev. 12:3-4.

"And there appeared another '**WONDER**' in Heaven; and behold a
'**GREAT RED DRAGON**,' having **SEVEN HEADS** and **TEN HORNS**, and
**SEVEN CROWNS** upon his heads. And his tail drew the **THIRD PART OF
THE STARS OF HEAVEN**, and did cast them to the earth: and the
**DRAGON** stood before the **WOMAN** which was ready to be delivered,
for to devour her **CHILD** as soon as it was born."

The second "**WONDER**" that will appear in Heaven will be a "**GREAT
RED DRAGON**." We are not left in doubt as to who is meant, for in verse
9 he is called that "**OLD SERPENT, THE DEVIL**," and "**SATAN**." His
color is **RED**, the color of blood, for he was a **murderer** from the
beginning. John 8:44.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

He has "**SEVEN HEADS**" and "**TEN HORNS**," and upon his heads are
"**SEVEN CROWNS**." These are the emblems of the universality of his
earthly dominion, and typify the sevenfold perfection of his power: for
he is the

**PRINCE OF THE "POWERS OF THE AIR**."  
And the  
"**PRINCE OF THIS WORLD**."  
(Eph. 6:12. John 12:31, 14:30, 16:11.)

As such Jesus did not dispute his claim when in the Wilderness
Temptation he offered Him the "Kingdoms of this World" and the glory of
them. Luke 4:5-7. His "Seven Heads," "Ten Horns," and "Crowns,"
associate him with the "**BEAST OUT OF THE SEA**" of the first verse of
the next chapter, the only difference being that the Dragon's "Crowns"
are on his "Heads," while those of the Beast are on his "Horns," and
therefore differ in number. These features, common to both, reveal the
fact that there is some relation between the "Dragon" and the "Beast,"
and that the "Beast" is an earthly embodiment or incarnation of the
"**DRAGON**," for the "Beast" does not appear on the earth until
**after** the "Dragon" is cast out of Heaven. Though the "Antichrist"
exists from the beginning of the Week, he does not become "**THE
BEAST**" until in the "Middle of the Week." Satan is cast out of Heaven
and incarnates himself in him. Then the "Antichrist" breaks his
"Covenant" with Israel, desecrates the Temple, and becomes the "Satanic
Person" that rules during the last half of the Week.

The "**STARS OF HEAVEN**" attached to his "**tail**" reveal the fact
that Satan will take with him in his expulsion from Heaven, a third of
the Angels, for the Angels are spoken of as "Stars" in the Old
Testament. Job 38:7. These "Angels" will be cast with him into the
earth. They will not be visible but they will secretly sow the seeds of
rebellion, and ultimately they will be cast with Satan into the "Lake of
Fire" which will be prepared for them. Matt. 25:41. While we are not
told that Satan's "Angels" are cast bound with him into the "Bottomless
Pit," yet the inference is that they are, for during the Millennium they
do not appear to be present on the earth.

John tells us that the "Dragon" stood before the "Sun Clothed Woman"
ready to "devour her child" as soon as it was born. It is intensely
interesting reading to trace in the Scriptures the story of Satan's
efforts to prevent the **birth** of the "Man-Child" **CHRIST**, and then
after His birth to destroy Him before He could reach the Cross and
purchase man's redemption. As soon as Satan had accomplished the Fall of
Adam and Eve, he found himself under the curse of God, and was told that
the "**SEED**" of the Woman should bruise his head. Gen. 3:14-15. This
aroused the enmity of Satan and he determined to prevent the birth of
the promised "Seed," or, if that were not possible, to destroy the
"Seed" after birth. So as soon as Abel was born, from whom the promised
"Seed" was to come, Satan schemed for his destruction, and finally got
his 'brother Cain to kill him. Then the "Sons of God" (Angels) doubtless
at Satan's instigation, married

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

the "Daughters of Men" (Cainites), and their "sin," and the character of
their offspring moved God to destroy mankind from off the earth. This
was what Satan planned for, and would have been a victory for Satan and
a defeat for God, so God decided to spare the race, and begin over again
with a representative man, Noah. But it was not long before Noah planted
a vineyard and drank himself drunk with the wine therefrom, the result
the curse of Canaan the Son of Ham. Gen. 9:18-27. Then the people began
to multiply and Satan filled their heart with pride and presumption and
they rose and built the "Tower of Babel," the result the "Confusion of
Tongues" and the unity of the race broken up. Gen. 11:1-9. Then the Lord
called Abraham and the fight narrowed down to his seed. Abraham was 75
years old, and had no children, and Sarah his wife was 65 years of age
and barren. Gen. 16:1. Doubtless Satan laughed at the situation because
of Sarah's barrenness, in which probably he had a hand, but to show
Satan that He could work a miracle if necessary, to produce the promised
"seed," God waited until Sarah was "past age," until she was 90 years
old (Gen. 17:17), and then He caused her to conceive and bear the
promised "seed." Gen. 18:9-15; 21:1-3. When Isaac was about 12 years of
age Satan moved God to **test** Abraham by commanding him to offer up
Isaac as a sacrifice upon Mount Moriah. It was similar to the test of
Job. Job 1:6-12; 2:3-6. The plan for Isaac's destruction failed, for
when God saw that Abraham was willing and ready to slay his son, He
intervened and spared his life. When Isaac grew up and married Rebekah,
Satan, to prevent her having offspring, caused her to be barren, but
Isaac prayed and God heard his prayer (Gen. 25:20-21), and twins were
born. Then Satan, when they had grown up, stirred up enmity between them
hoping that the tragedy of Cain and Abel would be repeated, and Jacob,
through whom Christ was to come, would be slain. When the time came for
Moses to be born, Satan put it into the heart of Pharaoh to order that
**all** male Hebrew children should be destroyed at birth, his purpose
being to destroy the **male line of descent altogether**. But his plan
was frustrated by a baby's tear. Ex. 2:5-10. And so it went on, until at
the death of King Jehoshaphat his son Jehoram slew all his brethren with
the sword (2. Chron. 21:13), thus reducing the "seed royal" down to
**one life**. But Jehoram had children. Then the Arabians slew all his
children but one, Ahaziah the youngest. 2. Chron. 21:17 (margin). 2.
Chron. 22:1. But Ahaziah had children. These in turn were slain by
Athaliah his mother, doubtless at the instigation of Satan. She thought
she had slain them all, but God interposed and rescued the infant son at
the hands of his aunt, who hid him in the Temple (2. Cor. 22:10-12), and
for 6 years all the hopes of God's people as to the promised "seed"
rested on that infant's life. During the Captivity Satan tried to
destroy the whole Hebrew nation at the hands of Haman, but a very little
thing, a king's sleepless night, frustrated that plan. Esther 3:8-15,
6:1-11. But the story is too long.

At last the promised "**SEED**" was **born**. Then Satan, failing to
prevent His birth, determined to destroy Him before He could reach the
Cross. To that end he prompted Herod, through jealousy and

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

fear, to slay all the male children at Bethlehem under 2 years of age,
but Joseph warned of God in a dream, had fled with the infant Christ to
Egypt. When Christ entered on His ministry Satan met Him in the
Wilderness and suggested that He throw Himself from the Pinnacle of the
Temple. Foiled in that Satan sought Christ's life by getting His own
townspeople to attempt to cast Him over a precipice. Luke 4:29. The two
storms on the Sea of Galilee were but attempts of Satan to destroy
Christ. You cannot rebuke a thing, you can only rebuke a **person**, and
when Christ rebuked the winds and the sea, He rebuked the **person**
(Satan) who had caused their disturbance. Matt. 8:24-27.

Then Satan renewed the fight through Priests and Pharisees until he
succeeded at last in getting one of Christ's own disciples, Judas, to
sell his Master. Then amid the shades of Gethsemane, through physical
exhaustion, he sought to kill Christ. And when he at last succeeded in
having Christ crucified, through the agency of Pilate, he thought he had
conquered, but to be doubly sure he took good care to have the place of
burial sealed and guarded. But when Christ rose from the dead Satan's
rage knew no bounds. In all probability Satan and his angels contested
the Ascension of Christ, for only thus can we account for the necessity
of His going up 10 days before Pentecost, that He might have ample time,
convoyed by "Twelve Legions of Angels," for any "Battle of the Clouds"
that Satan might attempt. The history of the Christian Church is but one
long story of the "Irrepressible Conflict" between Satan and God's
people. Paul writing to the Thessalonians said--"We would have come unto
you, even I Paul, once and again, but **SATAN hindered us**." 1. Thess.
2:18. And now as the time draws nigh for Christ to receive "The
Kingdom," which means that He will come back to the earth, and that
Satan's power and dominion over the earth shall cease, and Satan be
bound for 1000 years, Satan filled with wrath will oppose His return
with his armies and there will be "**WAR IN HEAVEN**."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Man Child](tbr050.md)
