[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr014) 
[Next](tbr016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV. THE CHURCH AT THYATIRA.

(**A Lax Church**.)

Rev. 2:18-29.

1\. **THE SALUTATION**--"And unto the Angel of the Church in Thyatira
write: These things saith the Son of God, who hath His eyes like unto a
**flame of fire**, and His feet are like **fine brass**.

2\. **THE COMMENDATION**--"I know thy **works**, and **charity**, and
**service**, and **faith**, and thy **patience**, and thy **works**; and
the last to be more than the first.

3\. **THE COMPLAINT**--"Notwithstanding I have a few things against
thee, **because thou sufferest that woman JEZEBEL**, which calleth
herself a **Prophetess**, to **teach** and to **seduce** my servants to
**commit fornication**, and to **eat things sacrificed unto idols**. And
I gave her space to repent of her fornication: and she repented not.
Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with
her into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds. And I
will kill her children with death; and all the churches shall know that
I am He which searcheth the reins and hearts: and I will give unto every
one of you according to your works."

4\. **THE PROMISE**--"But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira,
as many as have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths
of Satan, as they speak; I will put upon you none other burden. But that
which ye have already, <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> hold fast till I
come. And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him
will I give **power over the nations**: and he shall rule them with a
rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers:
even as I received of My Father. And I will give him the **MORNING
STAR**. He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the
Churches."

In His commendation of this Church, Christ lays the emphasis on their
"works," as if they depended on them, and claimed they de-served merit
for "works" of "Supererogation." But He had a complaint to make against
them that was terrible in its awfulness. He charges them not merely with
permitting a bad woman, Jezebel, who called herself a "Prophetess," to
remain in the Church, but with permitting her to "teach" her pernicious
doctrines, and to "seduce" the servants to "commit fornication," and to
"eat things sacrificed to idols."

Who this woman was is a question. She was a "pretender," and called
herself a "prophetess." Probably she was of noble lineage. She certainly
was a woman of commanding influence. Whether her real name was Jezebel
or not, she was so like her prototype in the Old Testament, Jezebel the
wife of Ahab, that Christ called her by that name. Jezebel, the wife of
Ahab, was not by birth a daughter of Abraham, but a princess of
idolatrous Tyre, at a time, too, when its royal family was famed for
cruel savagery and intense devotion to Baal and Astarte. Her father,
Eth-baal, a priest of the latter deity, murdered the reigning monarch
Phales, and succeeded him. Ahab, king of Israel, to strengthen his
kingdom, married Jezebel, and she, aided and abetted by Ahab, introduced
the licentious worship of Baal into Israel, and killed all the prophets
of the Lord she could lay her hands on. And this influence she
exercised, not only while her husband was alive, but also during the
reign of her two sons, Ahaziah and Jehoram. Moreover, the marriage of
her daughter Athaliah to Jehoram, son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah,
introduced idolatrous worship into Judah, and it was not long before
there was a house of Baal built in Jerusalem, and so Jezebel caused all
Israel to sin after the sin of Jeroboam the son of Nebat. 1 Kings
16:29-33.

There is no question that, whether Jezebel was a real person or not, she
typified a "System" and that "System" was the "Papal Church." When the
"Papal Church" introduced images and pictures into its churches for the
people to bow down to it became idolatrous. And when it set up its claim
that the teaching of the Church is superior to the Word of God, it
assumed the role of "Prophetess." A careful study of the "Papal System"
from A. D. 606 to the Reformation A. D. 1520, with its institution of
the "Sacrifice of the Mass" and other Pagan rites, reveals in it the
sway of "Jezebelism." It was also a period of "Jezebelistic
Persecution," as seen in the wars of the Crusades, and the rise of the
Inquisition. A careful comparison of this "Message" with the Parable of
"The Leaven" will reveal the wonderful correspondence between the two,
the "Jezebel" of the Church of Thyatira, being the "Woman" of the
Parable, who inserted the "Leaven" of "False Doctrine" into the Meal of
the Gospel. This Period extended from A. D. 606 to the Reformation A. D.
1520.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Church At Sardis](tbr016)
