[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr046.md) 
[Next](tbr048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEVENTH TRUMPET.

### THIRD WOE.

### (Covers The Rest Of The Week.)

Rev. 11:15-19.

"And the '**SEVENTH ANGEL**' sounded: and there were great voices in
Heaven, saying, **THE KINGDOMS OF THIS WORLD ARE BECOME THE KINGDOMS OF
OUR LORD, AND OF HIS CHRIST; AND HE SHALL REIGN FOR EVER AND EVER**. And
the four and Twenty Elders, which sat before God on their seats, fell
upon their faces, and worshiped God, saying, We give Thee thanks, O Lord
God Almighty, which **art**, and **wast**, and **art to come**; because
Thou hast taken to Thee Thy great power, and hast reigned. And the
nations were angry, and Thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead,
that they should be judged, and that Thou shouldest give reward unto Thy
Servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear Thy Name,
small and great; and shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth. And
the **TEMPLE OF GOD** was opened **IN HEAVEN**, and there was seen in
His Temple the '**Ark of His Testament**': and there were
**LIGHTNINGS**, and **VOICES**, and **THUNDERINGS** and an
**EARTHQUAKE**, and **GREAT HAIL**."

The sounding of the "**SEVENTH TRUMPET**" includes all that happens down
to chapter 20:3. When it sounded John heard "**Great Voices**" in Heaven
saying--"**THE KINGDOMS OF THIS WORLD ARE BECOME THE KINGDOMS OF OUR
LORD, AND OF HIS CHRIST; AND HE SHALL REIGN FOR EVER AND EVER**." This
is the announcement that the time had come for Christ to take "**THE
KINGDOM**," though "The Kingdom" does not fully come into His possession
for 3½ years. The whole of this passage is **anticipative**, for the
"sayings" of the Four and Twenty Elders look forward to the
Resurrections and Judgments of chapter 20. The scene is located in
Heaven. For it is there that John hears the Trumpet sound, and sees the
"Temple of God" opened, and hears the "voices" and "thunderings" that
accompany the devastation of the earth by "earthquake" and "hail." This
announcement is preliminary to the great events that are to follow,
which will be the most remarkable and momentous that have ever happened
on this earth.

The "**THIRD WOE**" includes the "**VIALS**," and all other judgments
down to chapter 20:3. The "**Time Limit**" of the "**SEVENTH TRUMPET**"
is given in chapter 10:7, and is spoken of as **"THE 'DAYS'"** of the
"**Voice**" of the "**SEVENTH ANGEL**" when he shall **BEGIN TO SOUND**.
Implying that the blast or blasts, of the "**SEVENTH TRUMPET**" shall be
**long continued**, that is, extend over the whole of the last half of
the "Week."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. The Sun-Clothed Woman](tbr048.md)
