[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr030) 
[Next](tbr032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### SIXTH SEAL.

### (Physical Changes.)

Rev. 6:12-17.

"And I beheld when He had opened the '**SIXTH SEAL**,' and, lo, there
was an **earthquake**: and the sun became **black as sackcloth of
hair**, and the moon **became as blood**: and the stars of heaven **fell
unto the earth**, even as a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she
is shaken of a mighty wind. And the heaven **departed as a scroll when
it is rolled together**; and every mountain and island **were moved out
of their places**. And the **kings of the earth**, and the **great
men**, and the **rich men**, and the **chief captains**, and the
**mighty men**, and every **bond man**, and every **free man**, **hid
themselves** in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains; and said to
the mountains and rocks, **FALL ON US**, and **HIDE US** from the face
of Him that sitteth on the Throne, and from the **WRATH OF THE LAMB**:
for the great day of **HIS WRATH** is come; and who shall be able to
stand?"

When the "**SIXTH SEAL**" was broken John tells us that there was a
"**GREAT EARTHQUAKE**," and the "**SUN BECAME BLACK AS SACKCLOTH OF
HAIR**," and the "**MOON BECAME AS BLOOD**," and the "**STARS OF HEAVEN
FELL TO THE EARTH**," and the "**HEAVEN DEPARTED AS A SCROLL**," and
"**EVERY MOUNTAIN AND ISLAND WERE MOVED OUT OF THEIR PLACE**." It will
not do to say that these things prefigure and symbolize the overthrow of
the Powers of the Earth by great social and political convulsions. These
are nothing more or less than great **physical convulsions** that shall
shake the earth, and that have been foretold by the Prophets and by
Christ Himself. Such physical phenomena and changes have happened
before. We must not forget the "**GREAT DARKNESS**" that for 3 days
overspread Egypt in the days before the Exodus (Ex. 10:21-23), nor the
"**DARKNESS**" that settled over Jerusalem and Calvary on the day of the
Crucifixion of Christ. Matt. 27:45.

The Prophet Zachariah speaks of a day that shall not be "**clear**" or
"**dark**," and he associates it with an **earthquake** at the time of
the return of the Lord. Zech. 14:1-7. On May 19, 1780, there was in New
England what is called in history the "Dark Day." It was not an eclipse
of the sun, and yet it was dark enough to make the stars visible, and
the chickens went to roost. The cause of that darkness has never been
explained. In the prophecy of Joel we read--"I will shew wonders in the
heavens, and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. The
sun shall be **TURNED INTO DARKNESS**, and the moon into **BLOOD**,
before **THE GREAT AND TERRIBLE DAY OF THE LORD COME**." Joel 2:30-31.
In Isa. 13:9-10, we read--"Behold the '**DAY OF THE LORD**' cometh,
cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate, and He
shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it. For the stars of heaven and
the constellations thereof shall **NOT GIVE THEIR LIGHT**, the sun shall
be **DARKENED** in his going forth, and the moon shall not **CAUSE HER
LIGHT TO SHINE**." In Isa. 34:4 we read--"All the host of heaven (the
stars) shall be dissolved and the heavens shall be rolled together as a
scroll: and all their host shall fall down, as the **leaf** 

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

**falleth from the vine**, and as **falling fig from the figtree**."
This corresponds to the "stars of heaven" of this "**SEAL**," and
probably refers not to the constellations and heavenly bodies (stars),
they are too far away to be affected by judgments on the earth, but to
our own atmosphere, and to "**meteors**" and "**shooting stars**,"
similar to the "shooting stars" of November 13th, 1833, when they fell
for 3 hours during the evening, and so terrified the people that they
thought the end of the world had come. These physical convulsions will
be the earth's "**TRAVAIL PAINS**" as she labors to bring forth the
**NEW CREATION** of the Millennial Age. Christ refers to this period in
Matt. 24:29, where He says--"In those days shall the **SUN BE DARKENED**
(that is, its light obscured), and the **MOON SHALL NOT GIVE HER
LIGHT**, and the **STARS SHALL FALL FROM HEAVEN**, and the **POWERS OF
THE HEAVENS** (the Principalities and Powers of the Heavenly Places
(Eph. 6:12), not the Powers and Kingdoms of the Earth), **SHALL BE
SHAKEN**." All these startling **physical changes** and **convulsions**
will cause a great fear to fall upon all classes and conditions of men
(7 classes are named), who will no longer attribute such changes merely
to natural law, but will see the "**HAND OF THE ALMIGHTY**" in it all.
To them the "**DAY OF JUDGMENT**" will become a reality, and in their
fear and terror they will **hide themselves in the dens and in the rocks
of the mountains**, and say to them--"**FALL ON US, AND HIDE US FROM THE
FACE OF HIM THAT SITTETH ON THE THRONE, AND FROM THE 'WRATH OF THE
LAMB,' FOR THE GREAT DAY OF HIS WRATH IS COME, AND WHO SHALL BE ABLE TO
STAND?**" What a prayer? Instead of repenting and crying for Salvation,
they will call on the mountains and rocks to bury them from the sight of
the Almighty.

At this point it will be interesting to compare, as on the next three
pages, Christ's "Olivet Discourse" (Matt. 24:1-30), with the "Six Seals"
of Rev. 6:1-17. The similarity between them is most striking, and proves
that the author of the "Olivet Discourse" foreknew, in the "Days of His
Flesh," in their exact order, the things that shall come to pass in the
"Day of the Lord." This is indisputable evidence of the Deity of Jesus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Comparison of Christ's ''Olivet Discourse'' and ''Revelation
Six''](tbr032)
