[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr016) 
[Next](tbr018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

### VI. THE CHURCH AT PHILADELPHIA.

(**A Favored Church**.)

Rev. 3:7-13.

1\. **THE SALUTATION**--"And to the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia
write: These things saith He that is Holy, He that is **True**, He that
hath the **Key of David**, He that **openeth**; and no man shutteth; and
**shutteth**, and no man openeth.

2\. **COMMENDATION**--I know thy **works**: behold I have set before
thee an **OPEN DOOR**, and no **man** can **shut it**: for thou hast a
**little strength**, and hast kept My word, and hast not denied My name.

3\. **THE PROMISE**--Behold, I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan,
which say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will make
them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved
thee. Because thou hast kept the word of **My Patience**, I also will
keep thee from the **HOUR OF TRIBULATION**, which shall come upon all
the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth. Behold, I come
quickly: hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy **CROWN**.
Him that overcometh will I make a **PILLAR** in the Temple of My God,
and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the **NAME** of
**My God**, and the name of the **CITY** of **My God**, which is **NEW
JERUSALEM**, which cometh down out of Heaven from My God: and I will
write upon him My **NEW NAME**. He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith unto the Churches."

There is no question about the meaning of the word Philadelphia. It
means "Brotherly Love," and well describes the charity and brotherly
fellowship that dissipated the bitter personal animosities that
characterized the theological disputants of the "Sardis Period," and
made possible the evangelistic and missionary labors of the past 150
years. Three things are said of this Church:

1\. It had a "little strength." It was like a person coming back to life
who was still very weak. It was the "dead" Sardis Church "revived," and
Revivals have been characteristic of the Philadelphia Period. These
Revivals began with George Whitefield in A. D. 1739, followed by John
Wesley, Charles G. Finney and D. L. Moody.

2\. It had set before it an "open door," that no "man" could shut. Note
that this promise was made by Him, who "hath the 'Key of David,' He that
'openeth' and no man shutteth; and 'shutteth' and no man openeth." In
1793 William Carey sailed for India, where he found an "open door," and
since then the Lord has opened the door into China, Japan, Korea, India,
Africa and the isles of the sea, until there is not a country in the
world where the missionary cannot go.

3\. It was to be kept from the "**Hour of Temptation**"
(**TRIBULATION**), that shall come upon **ALL THE WORLD**, and as there
has never as yet been a **WORLDWIDE** Tribulation, this "**Hour of
Tribulation**" must still be **future** and refers doubtless to the
"Great Tribulation" that is to come upon the "whole world," just before
the return of the Lord to set up His Millennial Kingdom, and as the
promise is that the "Philadelphia Church" shall **not pass through the
Tribulation**, is not this additional proof that the Church shall be
"caught out" **before the Tribulation**?

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

The Philadelphia Period covers the time between A. D. 1750 and A. D.
1900. We must not forget that the characteristics of all these Periods
continue on in the Church down to the end. This is true of the
Evangelistic and Missionary movements of the "Philadelphia Period," but
they are now more mechanical and based on business methods, and there is
less spiritual power, and this will continue until Christ returns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. The Church At Laodicea](tbr018)
