[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr087.md) 
[Next](tbr089.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. THE MILLENNIUM.

Rev. 20:4.

"And they lived and reigned with Christ a **THOUSAND YEARS**."

That there is to be a period of a 1000 years during which Satan shall be
bound and Christ shall reign on this earth, is plainly stated in the New
Testament. This period is mentioned 6 times in Rev. 20:1-7, and is
generally called

"**The Millennium**,"

from the Latin words "Mille" (1000) and "Annum" (year). It is to be
regretted, however, that the word "Millennium" ever supplanted the
Biblical word "Kingdom," for it is this period that Christ taught His
Disciples to pray for in the petition--"Thy Kingdom Come."

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

 

<span id="img_18100"></span>

[![The Church versus the Kingdom](tn/18100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18100.jpg.md)  
The Church versus the Kingdom  

 

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

Let us drop then for the present the word "Millennium" and look at the
word "Kingdom." In the Book of Daniel we learn that there were to be
"Four World-wide Kingdoms" that were to succeed each other on the earth
and that they were to be destroyed in turn by a Kingdom called the

"S**tone Kingdom**."

As those "Four Kingdoms" were "literal" Kingdoms it follows that the
"Stone Kingdom" must be a "literal" Kingdom, for it takes the place of
those Kingdoms and "fills the whole earth." This "Stone Kingdom" is the
"Millennial Kingdom of Christ."

The time when this "Stone Kingdom;" shall be set up is at the
"Revelation of Christ," when He shall come with the "armies of Heaven"
and destroy Antichrist (Rev. 19:11-21) and judge the Nations.

"When the Son of Man shall come in **His glory**, and all the holy
angels with Him, then shall He sit upon the

"**Throne of His Glory**";

and before Him shall be gathered **all nations**; and He shall separate
them one from another as a shepherd divideth his sheep from the goats,
and He shall set the **Sheep** (Sheep Nations) on His **right hand**,
but the **Goats** (Goat Nations) on the left. Then shall the King say
unto them on His **right hand**, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the **Kingdom Prepared for You From the Foundation of the World**."
Matt. 25:31-34.

This Kingdom is an earthly, visible Kingdom, and is the "Millennial
Kingdom" of the Lord Jesus Christ.

### 1. The Form of Government.

It will be a "Theocracy." God will rule in the person of the Lord Jesus,
Christ.

"And the angel said unto Mary, thou shalt bring forth a son and shalt
call His name Jesus. He shall be great and shall be called the 'Son of
the Highest,' and the Lord God shall give unto Him the **Throne of His
Father David**; and He shall **reign over the House of Jacob FOREVER**,
and of **His Kingdom There Shall Be NO END**." Luke 1:30-33.

There are 7 of God's "**shalls**" in this passage. Four of then have
been fulfilled, for Mary did bring forth a "son," He was called "Jesus,"
He was "great," and was called the "Son of the Highest"; the other three
must and will be fulfilled.

Daniel the Prophet describes the event.

"I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the 'Son of Man' came
with the clouds of heaven, and came to the 'Ancient of Days' (God), and
they brought Him near before Him. And there was given Him **Dominion**,
and **Glory** and a **KINGDOM** that all people, nations, and languages,
should serve Him; His **Dominion** is an **Everlasting Dominion, Which
Shall Not Pass Away**, and His **KINGDOM** that which **Shall Not Be
Destroyed**."

Whether Christ shall sit in person on the Throne at Jerusalem, or
whether He shall rule through another is not so clear. There are several
passages of Scripture that seem to teach that King David will be raised
and placed on the throne again, and that the Children of Israel will
seek him, or it may mean that the new King shall be named David.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

"Afterward shall the Children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their
God, and **David Their King**; and shall fear the Lord and His goodness
in the **Latter Days**." Hosea 3:5.  
"They shall serve the Lord their God, and **David Their King**, whom I
will **Raise Up Unto Them**." Jer. 30:9.  
"And David, my servant, shall be **King Over Them**." Ezek. 37:24.  
"I Jehovah will be their God, and my servant **David a Prince in Their
Midst**." Ezek. 34:24.  
"My servant David shall be their **Prince Forever**." Ezek. 37:25.

As the "Lord of Hosts" shall reign in Mt. Zion, and in Jerusalem, and
before His ancients "gloriously" (Isa. 24:23), the inference is that
King David will reign simply as "Regent," and will be called "King" or
"Prince" as circumstances may require. It is very clear from Ezekiel
that the "Prince," whoever he may be, is not perfect, and has to offer
sacrifices for himself. Ezek. 45:22.

We have a hint of the manner of government in the Parable of the Pounds.
That Parable was spoken to show what Jesus will do to His servants (the
Jews) when He shall have "received the Kingdom and returned." The man
whose Pound shall have gained "Ten Pounds" will be rewarded by being
placed in authority over "ten cities." The man whose Pound shall have
gained "Five Pounds" will have authority over "five cities." The man who
failed to use his Pound is simply deprived of it and loses all
opportunity of authority. Luke 19:11-26.

The promise that Jesus made to His Disciples that

"In the **Regeneration** when the Son of Man shall sit on the **Throne
of His Glory**, ye also shall sit upon **Twelve Thrones, Judging the
Twelve Tribes of Israel**." Matt. 19:28.

in all probability does not refer to the "Millennial Age," but to the
"Perfect Age," the "Age" that is to follow the renovation of the Earth
by fire. The use of the word "regeneration" suggests this, as it refers
to the time when the present earth is to be "re-created" and made "new."
It has occurred to the writer that we have not as yet the proper
perspective as to all the Old Testament prophecies, and that we are
putting in the "Millennial Age" some things that belong to the "Perfect
Age." The one just mentioned for example.

Some object to the "visible reign" of King David, or the Disciples on
the earth during the Millennium because it involves the anomaly of
intercourse between men in the flesh and those who are clad in
resurrected and glorified bodies. But why should this be an objection?
Did not Jesus appear "eleven" times "after His resurrection," during a
period of "forty days," to His disciples? Did He not "eat" and "drink"
with them during that period? Did they not "walk" with Him to the Mount
of Olives and see Him go up in that **Same Resurrection Body**? Did not
angels appear in human form and "eat" and "drink" with men in Old
Testament times? Gen. 18:1-8.

We must not forget that they who shall be accounted worthy to obtain
"**That Age**," and the "**Resurrection From Among the Dead**," shall be
"**Angel like**" (Luke 20:35, 36), and like the angels can mingle with
earth's inhabitants, having visible bodily forms, can eat

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

and drink, and there is probably more truth than poetry in the Prophet's
utterance that in those days,

"They that **wait upon the Lord** (as messengers) shall renew their
strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles (Angels); they shall
run and **not be weary**; and they shall walk and **not faint**." Ira.
40:31.

This can be said of only those who have been "**Raised in Power**." 1.
Cor. 15:42, 43.

### 2. The Seat of Government.

The Seat of Government will be at Jerusalem. Jerusalem is to be trodden
down of the Gentiles, until the "Times of the Gentiles be fulfilled."
Luke 21:24. Then it will be rebuilt. The Prophet Ezekiel gives us a
detailed description of the restored Land and City in Ezek. 48:1-35. See
[Chart of the Millennial Land](#img_18500.md).

The "Royal Grant" of land that God gave to Abraham and his descendants
extended from the "River of Egypt" unto the "Great River," the river
Euphrates. Gen. 15:18. Ezekiel fixes the Northern boundary at Hamath,
about 100 miles north of Damascus (Ezek. 48:1), and the Southern
boundary at Kadesh, about 100 miles south of Jerusalem. Ezek. 48:28.
This "Royal Grant" was not conditional and was never revoked. It is 8
times as large as that formerly occupied by the Twelve Tribes. See [Map
of the ''Royal Grant'' to Abraham](tbr044.htm#img_07800.md).

This "Royal Grant" is to be divided among the restored Twelve Tribes in
parallel horizontal sections, beginning at Hamath on the North with a
section for Dan, next comes Asher, then Naphtali, Manassah, Ephraim,
Reuben, Judah. Then comes the

"**Holy Oblation**,"

a square tract on the west of Jordan, 25,000 reeds, or 50 miles on a
side. A "Reed," according to Ezek. 40:5, is 6 cubits long, the cubit
being an ordinary cubit 18 inches long plus a hand-breadth, 3 inches,
making the "reed cubit" 21 inches. Six of such cubits make the "reed"
10½ feet long. South of the "Holy Oblation" will be the Tribes of
Benjamin, Simeon, Issachar, Zebulon and Gad.

The "Holy Oblation" is divided into three horizontal sections. The
[Northern](errata.htm#4.md) section is 25,000 reeds long, from East to
West, and 10,000 reeds wide. It is called the "Levites' Portion." South
of it is the "Priests' Portions" of equal size. South of the "Priests'
Portion" is the section for the "City" with, its suburbs and farming
sections. This section is 25,000 reeds long, from East to West, and 5000
reeds wide. Ezek. 48:15-19.

In the centre of this section the City (Jerusalem) is located. This
helps us to map out the whole of the "Holy Oblation," as the "New City"
is to be located on the site of the Old. The "New City," however, is to
be much larger than the Old. It is to be 9 miles square, and with its
suburbs, ½ mile on a side, 10 miles square. It will have a wall around
it with 3 gates on each side like the New Jerusalem (Ezek. 48:15-18,
30-35), these gates being named after the 12 sons of Jacob.

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

 

<span id="img_18500"></span>

[![The Millennial Land](tn/18500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18500.jpg.md)  
The Millennial Land  

 

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

The "Temple," or "Sanctuary," will not be rebuilt in the "New City," but
in the "midst" or middle of the "Holy Oblation." Ezek. 48:10, 20, 21.
This will locate it at or near Shiloh, where the Tabernacle rested after
the Children of Israel conquered the Land, and where it remained until
the Temple of Solomon was finished. A "Highway" shall lead from the
"Sanctuary" to the "New City." Isa. 35:8. It will be a magnificent
boulevard, 12 miles long, lined with beautiful shade trees.

The "New Temple" or "Sanctuary" will occupy a space of 500 reeds on a
side, or nearly a mile square. Ezek. 42:15-20. The old Temple was not a
mile in circuit.

The Prophet Zechariah tells us (Zech. 14:8), that in "**That Day**" (the
Millennial Day)

"**Living Waters Shall Go Out From Jerusalem**," half of them toward the
**Former** Sea (Red Sea) and half of them toward the **Hinder** Sea
(Mediterranean); in summer and in winter shall it be."

But those "Living Waters" will not have their "source" in Jerusalem. The
life-giving spring from which they flow will be located under the
"Sanctuary." Ezekiel tells us how he saw in vision the "New Temple" or
"Sanctuary" and how the Lord took him to the eastern door of the "House"
or "Sanctuary," where he saw the waters come forth from under the
Threshold of the door, and flow past the "Altar of Burnt Offering" on
the south side eastward until the stream was deep enough to swim in.

"Then said he unto me, These waters . go down into the desert (by way of
Jerusalem) and go into the sea (Dead Sea), which being brought forth
into the sea, the waters (of the Dead Sea) shall be **healed** (lose
their saltness). . And everything **shall live** whither the river
cometh. And it shall come to pass that the fishers shall stand upon it
(Dead Sea), from Engedi (on the west shore) even unto Eneglaim (on the
east shore); they shall be a place to spread forth nets; their fish
shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the Great Sea
(Mediterranean) exceeding many. . And by the River upon the banks
thereof, on this side and on that side, shall grow **all trees for
meat**, whose **leaf shall not fade**, neither shall the **fruit thereof
be consumed**; it shall bring forth **new fruit according to its
months**, because the waters they issued out of the '**Sanctuary**'; and
the '**Fruit**' thereof shall be for **meat** and the '**Leaf**' thereof
for medicine." Ezek. 47:8-12. Compare Rev. 22:1, 2.

The size of the "New City," the location of the "New Sanctuary" and the
elevation of the Dead Sea, which is now 1200 feet below the level of the
Mediterranean Sea, call for great physical changes in the land surface
of Palestine. How are these changes to come about?

When Christ comes back it will be to the Mount of Olives from whence He
went up. Acts 1:9-12. The Prophet Zechariah describes what will then
happen.

"His (Christ's) feet shall stand in **That Day** (the day of His return)
upon the **Mount of Olives**, which is before Jerusalem on the east and
the **Mount of Olives** shall **Cleave in the midst Thereof Toward the
East and Toward the West, and There Shall Be a Very Great Valley; and
Half of the Mountain Shall Remove Toward the North and Half of It Toward
the South. . . . "All the Land Shall Be Turned as a Plain From Geba to
Rimmon South of Jerusalem**; and it shall be **LIFTED UP AND
INHABITED**." Zech. 14:4, 10, 11.

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

These great changes will probably be brought about by Earthquakes or
volcanic action.

"Behold, the Lord cometh forth out of His place, and will come down, and
tread upon the high places of the earth. And the mountains shall be
**Molten Under Him**, and the **valleys** shall be **Cleft as Wax Before
the Fire, and as the Waters That Are Poured Down a Steep Place**." Micah
1:3, 4.

These great physical changes will level the land surface of Palestine,
and make room for the "New City," and raise the Dead Sea, so its waters
can flow into both the Red and Mediterranean Seas. Ezekiel tells us that
the name of Jerusalem in that day shall be "**Jehovah-Shammah**," the
**Lord Is There**. Ezek. 48:35.

### 3. The Temple and Its Worship.

As we have seen the Temple or Sanctuary will be located in the centre of
the "Holy Oblation." A full description of the Temple and its courts is
given in Ezek. 40:1; 44:31. No such building as Ezekiel so minutely
describes has ever yet been built, and so the prophecy cannot refer to
either Zerubbabel's or Herod's Temple, and as there is to be no Temple
in the New Jerusalem, it must be a description of the Temple that is to
be on the earth during the Millennium. That it does not belong to the
New Earth is also clear, for the land in which it is located is bounded
by the Sea, and the waters that flow from it, flow "into the Sea," but
in the New Earth there is "no more sea." Rev. 21:1. This is still
further confirmed by the Prophet's mention of the "desert," the "River
Jordan," the "Mediterranean Sea," and other localities that will not be
found on the New Earth after its renovation by fire.

The "Aaronic Priesthood" will be re-established, and the sons of Zadok
shall officiate and offer sacrifices. Ezek. 44:15-31. The New Temple,
however, will lack many things that were the features of the old Temple.
There will be no "Ark of the Covenant," no "Pot of Manna," no "Aaron's
Rod" to bud, no "Tables of the Law," no "Cherubim," no "Mercy Seat," no
"Golden Candlestick," no "Shew Bread," no "Altar of Incense," no "Veil,"
no unapproachable "Holy of Holies" where the High Priest alone might
enter, nor is there any "High Priest" to offer atonement for sin, or to
make intercession for the people, unless a rather obscure passage in
Zech. 6:12, 13 means that Christ (The Branch, Jer. 23:5, 6) shall be a
"King-Priest," and perform the duties of High Priest conjointly with His
Kingly office.

While the Levites as a class shall perform Temple service they shall be
barred from Priestly duties for their past sins. Ezek. 44:10-14. There
shall be a daily "morning" sacrifice, but no evening sacrifice. Ezek.
46:13-15. The offerings will be the "Burnt," the "Meat," the "Drink,"
the "Sin," the "Peace" (Ezek. 45:17), and the "Trespass" offering. Ezek.
42:13. Two Feasts are to be observed, "The Passover," but no Passover
Lamb will be offered as Jesus fulfilled that Type (Ezek. 45:21-24), and
the "Feast of Tabernacles," Zech. 14:16-19. This Feast is to be observed
by all the nations under penalty of "Drought" or "Plague."

The "Feast of Pentecost" will be done away with on account of its
fulfillment. The "Day of Pentecost," recorded in Acts 2:1-4, was

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

only a partial fulfillment of the prophecy of Joel 2:28-32. No such
wonders in the heavens and the earth as "blood," and "fire" and "pillars
of smoke," the "Sun turned to darkness," and the "Moon into blood,"
occurred at Pentecost. But all those things will happen before "The
Great and Terrible Day of the Lord."

The conversion of the Jewish Nation will be sealed with a great
outpouring of the Holy Spirit. Whether this shall be universal, or only
upon Israel is not clear. The original prophecy in Joel was given to
Israel, and its partial fulfillment at Pentecost seems to have been
limited to them. The knowledge of the Lord, however, will be world-wide,
and "it shall come to pass that ten men of all languages and nations
shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a **Jew**, saying, **We will
go with you; for we have heard that God is with you**." Zech. 8:22, 23.
There will be one "universal religion" in that day. Malachi 1:11. The
"Shekinah Glory" that departed from the Temple at the time of the
Babylonian Captivity (Ezek. 10:18-20; 11:22, 23), will again take up its
residence in the "New Temple." Ezek. 43:1-5.

### 4. The Character of the Millennium.

(1.) **Satan Bound**. Rev. 20:1-3.

That man may be "without excuse" God is going to subject him to a final
test under the most favorable circumstances. Man has charged his fall
and continuance in sin to Satan. "Take him away," he cries, "paralyze
his power; cripple his malignant activity; bind and imprison him and
deliver us from his dominating influence, and then you will see that man
is radically good and virtuous and is simply the victim of an
unfavorable environment."

God answers it shall be done. Satan shall be bound and imprisoned so
that he can no longer deceive men, and lest man shall say that sinful
habits are too deeply rooted to be soon eradicated the test shall last
for a **Thousand Years**, and man shall have during that period of
probation all the blessed influences of the **Holy Spirit** and the
presence of **Christ Himself**.

Man has never known and therefore cannot conceive what this world would
be like free from Satanic influence. It would certainly be a marvelously
different world. There would be no one to stir up hate and passion, and
engender strife and turmoil. True, man would still have an evil heart of
unbelief to contend against, but it would be like a magazine of
gunpowder without a spark to ignite it. That the evil heart of man has
not been eradicated will be evident when at the close of the Millennium
Satan is loosed and finds no difficulty in deceiving the nations. Rev.
20:8.

During the Millennium the "Prince of the Powers of the Air" will be
"dethroned" and the "Prince of Peace" "enthroned." When the "Great Red
Dragon" (Satan) is cast out of the Heavenlies there will be cast out
with him all the "Principalities and Powers" and "Age Rulers of
Darkness" (Eph. 6:12), and the Heavens which now are "not clean" in His
sight (Job. 15:15), will be "cleansed" of all Evil Powers.

There will be no universal peace until the Lord comes back. Then the
nations will beat their swords into "plow-shares" and their spears

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

into "pruning-hooks" (Mich. 4:3, 4), and shall be no longer impoverished
by the enormous tax on their revenues for the support of armies and
navies and the building of "Dreadnoughts." Then ships of war and
armorclad vessels will rust and rot in the navy yards and guns and
cannon will be recast into implements of agriculture. The great armies
of earth will be disbanded, and in the pursuits of peace and the tilling
of the soil, the depleted treasuries of the world will be replenished.
There will be little if any political graft. Corporations and combines
will not be run in restraint of trade, and there will be no entailed
estates if the law of the "Year of Jubilee" is re-established. Lev.
25:8-17. Num. 36:4.

(2.) **The Revival of the Land of Palestine**.

The Land of Palestine when it was first occupied by the Children of
Israel under Joshua, was a land of "milk" and "honey" and of "all manner
of fruits," and its soil brought forth "abundantly," and this continued
as long as the Children of Israel kept its Sabbaths. But God had warned
them that if they did not obey Him and turned aside to worship other
Gods He would shut up the heavens and the harvests would fail. Deut.
11:13-17. Palestine today has the same fertile soil it had in Joshua's
time, but it lacks rain and irrigation. God has withheld the "early" and
"latter" rain, but they are now becoming more frequent and copious. The
"early" rain falls in October and November, and prepares the land for
ploughing and sowing; the "latter" rain falls in April and May and
insures a good crop.

In the Millennium the Land of Palestine will be restored to its former
fertility. This will be aided not only by the rains, but by numerous
rivers and streams that shall flow from the "New River" that shall have
its source in the Sanctuary.

"It shall come to pass in **That Day** (Millennium) that the **mountains
shall drop new wine**, and the **hills shall flow with milk**, and all
the **Rivers of Judah** (where the New River will be) shall **flow with
waters**, and a **fountain shall come forth of the House of the Lord**,
and shall water the **Valley of Shittim**," the country about the Dead
Sea. Joel 3:18.

The "mountains dropping new wine," and the "hills flowing with milk,"
are figures of speech declaring that the mountain sides will be covered
with vineyards from which an abundance of wine shall be obtained, and
that the pasture lands will be so productive that they will sustain vast
herds of milk cattle.

The harvests will be so great and abundant that the ploughman will
"overtake the reaper," and the treader of grapes him that "soweth seed."
Amos 9:13.

"The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the
desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose." Isa. 35:1.

"Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir-tree, and instead of the
briar shall come up the myrtle tree; and it shall be to the Lord for a
name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off." Isa. 55:13.

"**Then** shall the earth yield her increase." Psa. 67:6.

"And the floors shall be **full of wheat**, and the vats shall
**overflow with wine and oil**. And I will **restore to you the years
that the locust hath eaten**, the **cankerworm** and the
**caterpillar**, and the <span id="page_190">p. 190</span>
**palmerworm**, my great army which I sent among you. And ye shall **eat
in plenty** and be **satisfied**, and praise the name of the Lord your
God that hath dealt wondrously with you; and **My People** (the Jews)
shall never be ashamed."' Joel 2:24-26.

(3.) **There Will Be Changes in the Animal Kingdom**.

"The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down
with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together;
and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed;
their young ones shall lie down together, and the lion shall eat straw
like the ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp and
the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice's den. They shall
not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain (Jerusalem), for the earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea." Isa. 11:6-9.

We cannot spiritualize these words. This was the character of these
animals in Eden before the Fall, and in the Ark. The ferocity of the
brute creation is the outcome of the "Fall of Man." While the context
seems to imply that this change in the brute creation has reference to
the "Millennial Earth," where it may be partially true, yet the fact
that the Edenic condition of the earth is not to be restored until the
appearance of the New Earth may postpone the fulfillment of this
prophecy until then.

The Apostle Paul says--

"We know that the **Whole Creation** groaneth and travaileth in pain
together until now. . . . Waiting for the adoption, to wit, the
**Redemption of Our Body**." Rom. 8:23.

That is, until the human race is redeemed from the results of the "Fall,
and fitted to occupy the New Earth, Creation must wait for its
restoration to 'Edenic conditions'."

(4.) **Human Life Will Be Prolonged**.

"There shall be no more thence an **infant of days**, for the **child**
shall die a **hundred years old**." Isa. 65:20.

That is, a person dying 100 years old shall be considered only a child.
Therefore a man, to be called a man, must live for several hundred
years.

"For as the days of a **Tree** (oak tree) are the days of my people."
Isa. 65:22.

"Thus saith the Lord of Hosts: There shall yet **Old Men** and **Old
Women** dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff
in his hand **For Very Age**." Zech. 8:4.

Patriarchal Years will be restored, and men shall live as long as they
did before the Flood. This may be due to some climatic or atmospheric
change, or to the healing or life-giving qualities of the water of the
"New River" that shall flow from the "Sanctuary," and the leaves of the
trees that line the banks of the River, which shall be for "Medicine."
Ezek. 47:12.

(5.) **There Will Be a Sevenfold Increase of Light**.

"Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of **the sun**,
and the light of the sun shall be **SEVENFOLD** as the light of **seven
days**, in the day that the Lord bindeth up the breach of His people,
and healeth the stroke of their wound." Isa. 30:26.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

The "atmosphere" of the Millennial Earth will be of such a character as
to make **moonlight nights as bright as day**, and the days **seven
times as bright**.

"The sun shall be no more thy light by day: neither for brightness shall
the moon give light unto; but the **Lord Shall Be Unto Thee An
Everlasting Light, and Thy God Thy Glory**." Isa. 60:19-20.

This may refer to that part of the Holy Land that shall be illuminated
by the "Shekinah Glory," where it will make no difference whether the
sun shines or not. It will have its complete fulfillment when the
nations of the New Earth shall walk in the **Light of the New
Jerusalem**. Rev. 21:23-24.

Israel's Mission during the "Millennial Age" will be that of "blessing"
to the Gentile nations. Of the nation of Israel, that has never as yet
been a leading nation. God says--

"I will make thee the **Head**, and not the **Tail**." Deu. 28:13.

The nations today are a "Headless" body. There is no "Chief Nation"
today. In that day Israel shall be the "Chief Nation," and the nation
that will not serve her shall perish. Isa. 60:12.

But those nations will only be kept in subjection by the "Iron Rule" of
Christ. This is brought out in the "Messianic Psalm," Psa. 2:6-9. It is
very clear that during the "Millennial Age" the "will of God" will not
be done on earth as it is done in heaven. The peace among the nations
will be more superficial than real. It will only be feigned obedience,
more the result of fear than of love. As the "afternoon" of that long
"Millennial Day" draws to a close the shadows deepen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Satan Loosed](tbr089.md)
