[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr084.md) 
[Next](tbr086.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FOURTH DOOM.

### THE ANTICHRISTIAN NATIONS.

Rev. 19:21.

And the remnant were slain with the **SWORD** of Him that sat upon the
Horse, which sword proceeded out of His mouth: and all the fowls were
filled with their flesh."

So great will be the destruction of human life in the Battle of
Armageddon, that God will prepare for it in advance less the stench of
the unburied dead should breed pestilence.

"And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice,
saying to all the **fowls that fly in the midst of Heaven** (Buzzards,
Vultures, Eagles, etc.), Come and gather yourselves together unto the

**SUPPER OF THE GREAT GOD**,

that ye may eat the **flesh** of **Kings** . . . **Captains** . .
**Mighty Men**, and the **flesh** of **horses** and of them that **sit
on them** (common soldiers), and the **flesh** of **all men**, both
**free** and **bond**, both small and great." Rev. 19:17, 18.

This "Feast" is described in the Old Testament.

"And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord God, Speak unto every
**feathered fowl**, and to every **beast of the field**, Assemble
yourselves, and come, gather yourselves on every side to **My
Sacrifice**, that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon
the **Mountains of Israel**, that ye may eat **flesh**, and drink
**blood**. Ye shall eat the **flesh** of the **Mighty**, and **drink the
blood of the Princes of the Earth**, of **rams**, of **lambs**, and of
**goats**, of **bullocks**, all of them fatlings of Bashan. And ye shall
eat **fat till ye be full**, and **drink blood till ye be drunken**. . .
. Thus ye shall be filled '**at My Table**,' with **horses** and
**chariots** (their occupants), with **Mighty Men**, and with all **Men
of War**, said the Lord God." Ez. 39:1-22.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

And in the same chapter we are told that the "**House of Israel**," the
occupants of Palestine in that day, shall be **seven months** burying
the bones of the dead, the flesh having been eaten by the birds and
beasts of prey, and the wood from the weapons of warfare, army wagons,
spears, etc., shall last the inhabitants of the land for fuel **seven
years**, so that they will not have to take wood out of the field, nor
cut down any out of the forests.

The words in Rev. 19:21, "and all the **fowls were filled with their
flesh**," declare that those "**Fowl Guests**" will be **GORGED WITH
CARRION**.

Then will be fulfilled the words of Jesus--"For wheresoever the carcase
is, there will the **Eagles** (birds of prey) be gathered together."
Matt. 24:27, 28. The eagle feeds mainly on fresh meat. The Hebrews
classed the eagle among the birds of prey, such as the vulture.

The destruction of this great army will be brought about by supernatural
means, and as there is to be a "**GREAT HAIL**" to fall from heaven upon
the enemies of God when the "Seventh Vial" is poured out, which includes
this period, that may be the means God will use, for it was in that way
that the enemies of Israel were destroyed on the same battlefield in the
"Battle of Beth-Horon" in the days of Joshua. Josh. 10:1-11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. Satan Bound For a Thousand Years](tbr086.md)
