[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr071) 
[Next](tbr073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THIRD VIAL.

### (Blood On the Rivers.)

Rev. 16:4-7.

"And the 'Third Angel' poured out his Vial upon the **rivers and
fountains of waters**; and they **BECAME BLOOD**. And I heard the 'Angel
of the Waters' say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and
shalt be, because Thou hast judged thus. For they have shed the blood of
saints and prophets, and Thou hast given them **BLOOD TO DRINK**; for
they are worthy. And I heard another out of the Altar say, Even so, Lord
God Almighty, true and righteous are Thy Judgments."

This is a repetition of the "First Egyptian Plague." Ex. 7:19-24. When
the waters of Egypt were turned into blood all the fish died, but here
nothing is said about the inhabitants of the rivers and ponds. Then John
heard the "**Angel of the Waters**" say--"Thou art righteous, O Lord,
which art, and wast, and shall be, because Thou hast judged thus. For
they **have shed the blood of saints and prophets**, and Thou hast given
them **BLOOD TO DRINK**; for they are worthy," or deserve it. As a
confirmation of the saying of the "Angel of the Waters," John heard
another voice come from the Altar, saying, "Even so, Lord God Almighty,
true and righteous are Thy Judgments." Those will be awful times when
there will be nothing but **BLOOD** to quench the thirst. The expression
"Angel of the Waters," reveals the fact that even certain divisions of
nature are controlled by angels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fourth Vial (Great Heat)](tbr073)
