<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act026)  [Next](act028.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#001.md)

His innocence fully established and acknowledged by his judges, the
purposes of God must still be accomplished. His appeal to Caesar must
carry him to Rome, that he may bear testimony there also. In his
position here he again resembles Jesus. But at the same time, if we
compare them, the servant, blessed as he is, grows dim, and is eclipsed
before Christ, so that we could no longer think of him. Jesus offered
Himself up in grace; He appealed to God only; He answered but to bear
testimony to the truth that truth was the glory of His Person, His own
rights, humbled as He was. His Person shines out through all the dark
clouds of human violence, which could have had no power over Him had it
not been the moment for thus fulfilling the will of God. For that
purpose He yields to power given them from above. Paul appeals to
Caesar. He is a Roman a human dignity conferred by man, and available
before men; he uses it for himself, God thus accomplishing His purposes.
The one is blessed, and his services; the other is perfect, the perfect
subject of the testimony itself.

Nevertheless, if there is no longer the free service of the Holy Ghost
for Paul, and if he is a prisoner in the hands of the Romans, his soul
at least is filled with the Spirit. Between him and God all is liberty
and joy. All this shall turn to his salvation, that is, to his
definitive victory, in his contest with Satan. How blessed! Through the
communications of the Spirit of Jesus Christ the word of God shall not
be bound. Others shall gain strength and liberty in view of his bonds,
even although, in the low state of the church, some take advantage of
them. But Christ will be preached and magnified, and with that Paul is
content. Oh how true this is, and the perfect joy of the heart, come
what may! We are the subjects of grace (God be praised!), as well as
instruments of grace in service. Christ alone is its object, and God
secures His glory nothing more is needed: this itself is our portion and
our perfect joy.

It will be remarked in this interesting history, that at the moment when
Paul might have been the most troubled, when his course was perhaps the
least evidently according to the power of the Spirit, when he brought
disorder into the council by using arguments which afterwards he
hesitates himself entirely to justify it is then that the Lord, full of
grace, appears to him to encourage and strengthen him. The Lord, who
formerly had told him at Jerusalem to go away because they would not
receive his testimony, who had sent him warnings not to go thither, but
who accomplished His own purposes of grace in the infirmity and through
the human affections of His servant, by their means even, exercising at
the same time His wholesome discipline in His divine wisdom by these
same means Jesus appears to him to tell him that, as he had testified of
Him at Jerusalem, so should he bear witness at Rome also. This is the
way that the Lord interprets in grace the whole history, at the moment
when His servant might have felt all that was painful in his position,
perhaps have been overwhelmed by it, remembering that the Spirit had
forbidden him to go up; for, when in trial, a doubt is torment. The
faithful and gracious Saviour intervenes therefore to encourage Paul,
and to put His own interpretation on the position of His poor servant,
and to mark the character of His love for him. If it was necessary to
exercise discipline for his good on account of his condition and to
perfect him, Jesus was with him in the discipline. Nothing more touching
than the tenderness, the opportuneness, of this grace. Moreover, as we
have said, it all accomplished the purposes of God with regard to the
Jews, to the Gentiles, to the world. For God can unite in one
dispensation the most various ends.

And now, restored, reanimated by grace, Paul shews himself in his
journey to be master of the position. It is he who counsels, according
to the communication he receives from God, he who encourages, he who
acts, in every way, on God's part, in the midst of the scene around him.
The description, full of life and reality, which Luke his companion,
gives of this voyage, needs no comment. It is admirable as a living
picture of the whole scene. Our concern is to see what Paul was amid the
false confidence, or the distress of the whole company.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 28](act028.md)

</div>
