<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act002)  [Next](act004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)

In Chapter 3 the Spirit addresses His testimony to the people by the
mouth of Peter. God still acted in patience towards His foolish people,
and with more than patience. He acts in grace towards them, as His
people, in virtue of the death and intercession of Christ alas! in vain.
Their unbelieving leaders silenced the word. \[See Note \#8\] The
attention of the people is attracted by a miracle that restored strength
to a poor lame man, known to all who frequented the temple; and, the
multitude crowding to behold him, Peter preaches Christ to them. The God
of their fathers, said he, had glorified His servant Jesus, whom they
had denied, when Pilate would have set Him free. They had denied the
Holy One and the Just desired a murderer killed the Prince of Life; but
God had raised Him from the dead. And His name, through faith, had
healed the impotent man. Grace could esteem their act done as through
ignorance, and that as to their rulers also. We here see the Holy Ghost
responding to the intercession of Christ: "Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do!" Guilty of the ten thousand talents, the
great King remits it them, sending the message of mercy which calls them
to repentance. To this Peter invites them: "Repent ye, and be converted;
so \[See Note \#9\] that the time of refreshing may come from the
presence of the Lord, and that he may send Jesus, whom the heaven must
receive," he tells them, until the time ordained of God for the
restoration which should accomplish all that the prophets had foretold.
That is to say, he preaches repentance to the Jews as a nation,
declaring that, on their repentance, Jesus, who had ascended up to
heaven, would return; and the fulfilment of all the blessings spoken of
by the prophets should take place on their behalf. The return of Jesus
with this object depended (and still depends) on the repentance of the
Jews. Meanwhile He remains in heaven.

Moreover Jesus was the prophet announced by Moses: and whosoever would
not hear Him should be cut off from the people. His voice still sounded
in especial grace by the mouth of His disciples. All the prophets had
spoken of these days. They were the children of the prophets, the
natural heirs of the blessings which they had announced for Israel, as
well as of the promises made to Abraham of a seed in whom all nations
should be blessed. To them also in consequence, God, having raised up
His servant Jesus, \[See Note \#10\] had sent Him to bless them, in
turning away every one of them from his iniquities.

Note \#8

It is striking to see the counsels of God and their accomplishment in
grace, as far as they were now being fulfilled, so clearly distinguished
from the responsibility of those with whom God was dealing. In Chapter 2
Peter says, "Save yourselves from this untoward generation." God was
gathering, according to His own knowledge of what was coming. In Chapter
3 he says, "God hath sent him to bless you in turning every one of you
away from his iniquities." So He had, and patience still waited, though
God acted in present grace according to the result known to Himself: in
Jeremiah often. Had they repented, God would surely have turned from
judgment, as stated also in Jeremiah.

Note \#9

Not "when." There is no pretence for so translating it.

Note \#10

This refers to the time of His life on the earth, though on His
intercession there was a renewal of the mercy in testimony to a
glorified Christ, who would return on their repentance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 4](act004)

</div>
