<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act022)  [Next](act024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001)

Paul addresses the council with the gravity and dignity of an upright
man accustomed to walk with God. It is not a testimony borne to them for
their good; but the appeal of a good conscience to their consciences, if
they had any. The immediate answer is an outrage on the part of the
judge or chief of the council. Paul, roused by this procedure, denounces
judgment on him from God; but, warned that he was the high priest (who
was not so clothed as to be recognised), he excuses himself by his
ignorance of the fact, quoting the formal prohibition of the law to
speak evil of the ruler of the people. All this was right and in place
with regard to men; but the Holy Ghost could not say, "I wist not." It
is not the activity of the Spirit performing the work of grace and of
testimony. But it is the means of the final judgment of God upon the
people. It is in this character, as regards the Jews, that Paul appears
here. Paul makes a much better appearance than his judges, who
thoroughly disgrace themselves and manifest their dreadful condition;
but he does not appear for God before them. Afterwards he avails himself
of the different parties of which the council were composed to throw
complete disorder into it, by declaring himself to be a Pharisee, the
son of a Pharisee, and called in question for a dogma of that sect. This
was true; but it was below the height of his own word, "that which was
gain I counted loss for Christ's sake." The Jews however fully manifest
themselves. That which Paul said raises a tumult, and the chief captain
takes him from among them. God has all things at His disposal. A nephew
of Paul's, never mentioned elsewhere, hears of an ambush laid for him
and warns him of it. Paul sends him to the chief captain, who expedites
the departure of Paul under a guard to Caesarea. God watched over him,
but all is on the level of human and providential ways. There is not the
angel as in Peter's case, nor the earthquake as at Philippi. We are
sensibly on different ground.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 24](act024)

</div>
