<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act000)  [Next](act002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

[Acts 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 1:1</span></span>

Let us now examine the Chapters in their course. Chapter 1 supplies us
with the narrative of that which relates to Jesus risen, and the actions
of the apostles before the descent of the Holy Ghost. The Lord's
communications present several very interesting points. Jesus, the risen
man, acts and speaks by the Holy Ghost after His resurrection as before
it. Precious token of our own position, as reminding us that we shall
have the Holy Ghost after our resurrection, and that, being no longer
engaged in restraining and mortifying the flesh, His divine energy in us
will be entirely consecrated to eternal joy and worship, and to the
service committed to us by God. The risen Lord then gives His disciples
commandments in connection with the new position He assumes. Their life
and their service are to be formed and guided in view of His
resurrection a truth of which they had irrefragable proofs. They were
still on earth, but they were pilgrims there, having Him in view who had
gone before them raised from among the dead. Their relations with Him
are still connected with their position on earth. He speaks to them of
the kingdom, and of that which concerned the kingdom. Jerusalem was the
starting-point of their ministry, even more than of His own. For He had
gathered together the poor of the flock wherever He had found them,
especially in Galilee; \[See Note \#2\] but now, resurrection having
made Him in power the vessel of the sure mercies of David, He calls
Israel afresh to own as Prince and Saviour the One whom they had
rejected as the living Messiah on earth. The Epistles of Peter are
connected with the gospel in this point of view.

Nevertheless, to exercise this ministry, they were to wait for the
accomplishment of the Father's promise, the Holy Ghost, with whom they
were to be baptised, according to John's testimony, which the Lord
assured them should soon take place. The mission of the Holy Ghost led
them, at the same time, out of the Jewish field of purely temporal
promises. The Father's promise of the Holy Ghost was a very different
thing from that of the restoration of the kingdom of Israel by the power
of Jehovah, the God of judgment. It was not for them to know the time
and season of this restoration, the knowledge of which the Father kept
in His own possession; but they should themselves receive the power of
the Holy Ghost, who would come down upon them; and they should be
witnesses unto Jesus (as they had known Him, and according to the
manifestation of Himself after His resurrection), both in Jerusalem and
in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth
thus making Jerusalem the starting-point and first object, according to
the mission, [Luk 24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047). Nevertheless,
their testimony was founded on their beholding their Master and their
Lord caught up from their midst, and received into the clouds of heaven,
which hid Him from their sight. While looking steadfastly upwards, as
this took place, two messengers from heaven come and announce to them
that He will return in like manner. His manifestation in this lower
world, beneath the heavens, is therefore here intended. He will return
to earth to be seen of the world. We have not the rapture of the
assembly, nor the assembly's association with Him while absent. With the
knowledge of Jesus taken up out of the world, and to come again into the
world, as the termini and elements of all their teaching, they return to
Jerusalem, there to wait for the Holy Ghost who was promised unto them.
It is not into Galilee that they go. They are to be witnesses in
Jerusalem of the heavenly rights of that Christ who had been rejected on
earth by Jerusalem and the Jews. \[See Note \#3\] All this clearly shews
the position in which they were placed, and the mission committed to
them. But before they receive the Holy Ghost for its fulfilment, some
other characteristic circumstances find their place in this Chapter.
They act, under the guidance of Peter, according to intelligence in the
word, before they are endowed with power from on high. These two things
are therefore distinct from each other.

It appears that, although Peter was not directly led of the Holy Ghost,
the Spirit put His seal on that which was done in accordance with the
word in the Old Testament understood by the apostle. We have before seen
that Christ, after His resurrection, opened the understanding of His
disciples that they might understand the scriptures. They now act, not
having received the Holy Ghost, according to a Jewish principle. They
present the lot to the Lord, that He may decide. Nevertheless the lot
was not all, nor was it drawn without making a distinction. Apostolic
authority flowed from the nomination of Christ Himself. Intelligence of
the scriptures makes them understand that which ought to be. The object
which the Lord had assigned to their service narrowed the choice to the
little circle of those who could fulfil that object. Their history made
them capable, as Jesus had said, of being His witnesses, because they
had been with Him from the beginning, and could now testify that this
same Jesus, whom the Jews had rejected and crucified, was indeed risen
from among the dead.

Apostolic authority is exercised in Jerusalem on the Jewish principle,
before the gift of the Holy Ghost. In this there was neither research
nor the exercise of the human mind. "His bishopric let another take"
guided their conduct; the capacity to testify of Jesus in His life on
earth, and now of His resurrection and ascension, decided on the needed
qualifications; the lot of Jehovah determined the individual who was to
take Judas' place. Two are chosen, according to these needful
qualifications, and the lot falls upon Matthias, who is numbered with
the eleven apostles. But they were still without the promised power.

Note \#2

The mission given in Luke 24 is the one fulfilled both in Peter's and
Paul's discourses in the Acts, but especially in Chapters 2 and 13, not
that of Matthew 28 which, indeed, was only to Gentiles. Luke's was on
His ascension from Bethany, Matthew's in resurrection from Galilee,
where He had sought the poor of the flock (compare [Mat
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#015)).

Note \#3

In this sense it is not a continuation of Christ's mission on the earth,
continued in the Matthew mission from Galilee.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 2](act002)

</div>
