<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act018)  [Next](act020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#001.md)

From Verse 24 of Chapter 18 to Verse 7 of Chapter 19 we have a kind of
summary of the progress made by the doctrine of Christ, and of the power
that accompanied it. Apollos knew only of the teaching of John; but,
upright in heart, he publicly confessed and preached that which he knew.
It was the faith of a regenerate soul. Aquila and Priscilla enlighten
him fully with regard to the facts of the gospel, and the doctrine of a
dead and glorified Christ. At Corinth he becomes a powerful teacher of
the gospel, of the Lord among the Jews, thus confirming the faith of the
disciples. The energy of the Holy Ghost manifests itself in him without
any intervention of the apostle or of the twelve. He acts independently;
that is, the Spirit acts independently in him. People could say, "I am
of Apollos." It is interesting to see these different manifestations of
the power and liberty of the Spirit, and to remember that the Lord is
above all, and that, if He acts greatly by a Paul, He acts also in whom
He will.

In that which follows we find, on another side, the progress of the
divine revelation in union with Paul's apostolic power made very
prominent by the capability of communicating the Holy Ghost. Twelve
persons had believed, but with no other instruction than that of John:
their baptism had been in reference to it. It was a Christ to come, and
a Holy Ghost whom He would communicate, that they looked for. Now John's
baptism required repentance, but in no way came out of the Jewish pale;
although it opened a perspective of something different, according to
the sovereignty of God, and as the effect of Christ's coming. But it was
a baptism unto repentance for man on the earth, and not Christ's death
and resurrection. Grace acted in a remnant, but of whom Jesus was a
companion on earth. Now Christianity (for man's sin has been fully
manifested) is founded on death and resurrection; first, that of Christ,
thus accomplishing redemption, and then on our death and resurrection
with Him so as to place us in Him and as Him before God in sinless life,
life of His life, and washed in His blood from all our sins. But John's
baptism, in fact, only taught repentance here below in order to receive
Christ; Christianity taught the efficacy of the death and resurrection
of a rejected Christ, in virtue of which the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete
come down from heaven, should be received.

These twelve men (although John had announced that the baptism of the
Holy Ghost should be the result of Christ's intervention) did not know
whether there was yet any Holy Ghost \[See Note \#25\] a plain proof
that they had not come into the house of God in which He dwelt. Paul
explains this to them, and they are baptised in the name of Jesus. Paul,
in his apostolic capacity, lays his hands on them; and they receive the
Holy Ghost. They speak with tongues, and they prophesy.

This power, and he who was its instrument, were now to be brought out
into distinct relief. The capital city of Asia (that is, of the Roman
province so named) is the theatre in which this was to be effected. We
shall see a power displayed in this locality, which acts independently
of all traditional forms, and which governs all that surrounds it,
whether man, conscience, or the enemy an organising power, which forms
of itself and for itself the institutions and the body that suit it, and
which governs the whole position. The power of active grace has been
displayed in the work of Paul, beginning with Antioch; and had shewn
itself in different ways. Here we have some details of its formal
establishment in a great centre.

During three months of patience he preaches Christ in the synagogue, and
reasons with the Jews, conscious of divine strength and of the truth. He
grants precedence, as the sphere of testimony, to that which had been
the instrument and the people of God: "To the Jews first." It is no
longer said, "Salvation is of the Jews," but it is preached to them
first.

But this work having had its development, and many taking the place of
adversaries, Paul acts as the founder of that which was according to God
and on the part of God. He separates the disciples, and discourses upon
Christianity in the hall of a Greek who had a public class. This went on
for two years: so that the doctrine was spread through all the country
among both the Jews and the Greeks. God did not fail to bear testimony
to the word of His grace, and His power was displayed in a remarkable
manner in connection with the person of the apostle who bore the
testimony. The manifestations of the enemy's power disappear before the
action of this liberative power of the Lord, and the name of Jesus was
glorified. Now the reality of this action was demonstrated in a striking
way, that is, its source in the personal, positive, and real action of
the Lord on the one side, and on the other, the mission of Paul, and
faith as the instrument by which this supernatural power wrought.
Certain Jews desired to avail themselves of it for their own
self-interest; and devoid of faith, they use the name of "Jesus whom
Paul preached" as though it had been a kind of charm. But the evil
spirit, whose power was as true and real in its way as that of the Lord
which he was forced to acknowledge when it was in exercise, knew very
well that here it was not so, that there was neither faith nor power.
"Jesus I know," said he, "and who Paul is I know; but who are ye?" And
the man who was possessed attacked and wounded them. Striking testimony
to the action of the enemy, but at the same time to that superior force.
to the reality of that intervention of God. which was carried into
effect by means of Paul. Now, when God shews Himself, conscience always
shews itself; and the power of the enemy over it is manifested and
ceases. The Jews and Greeks are filled with fear, and many who became
Christians brought the proofs of their sorceries.

The mighty action of the Spirit shewed itself by the decision it
produced, by the immediate and unhesitating acting out of the thoughts
and resolutions produced in the heart. There were no long inward
arguments; the presence and the power of God produced their natural
effects.

The enemy's resources were, however, not exhausted. The work of God was
done, in the sense of the establishment of the testimony through
apostolic labour; and God was sending His servant elsewhere. The enemy,
as usual, excites a tumult, stirring up the passions of men against the
instruments of the testimony of God. Paul had already intended to go
away, but a little later; he had therefore sent Timothy and Erastus
before him into Macedonia, purposing to visit Macedonia, Achaia, and
Jerusalem, and afterwards to go to Rome; and he still remains some time
in Asia. But after the departure of these two brethren, Demetrius
excites the people against the Christians. Inveterate against the
gospel, which shook the whole system in connection wi th which he made
his fortune, and which was linked with all that gave him importance,
this agent of the enemy knew how to act on the passions of the workmen
who had the same occupation as himself; for he made little portable
shrines to Diana, in silver. His employment was connected with that
which all the world admired, with that which had possession of men's
minds a great comfort to man who feels the need of something sure with
that which had long given its hue to their religious habits. A great
part of the influence exercised was, not "Great is Diana!" but "Great is
Diana of the Ephesians!" It was, in short, the power of the enemy among
the Gentiles. The Jews apparently sought to avail themselves of this by
putting one Alexander forward the same possibly who had withstood Paul,
and who they supposed would therefore be listened to by the people. But
it was the evil spirit of idolatry that agitated them; and the Jews were
foiled in their hope. Paul was prevented, both by the brethren and by
some of the Asiarchs, \[See Note \#26\] from shewing himself in the
theatre. The assembly was dissolved by the town authorities; and Paul,
when he had seen the disciples, went away in peace. \[See Note \#27\]
His work there was finished, and the gospel planted in the capital of
the province of Asia, and even in the whole province: Greece and
Macedonia had already received it.

There was yet Rome. In what manner should he go thither? This is now the
remaining question. His free and active life ended with the events which
now occupy us, as far as it is given us by the Holy Ghost. A life
blessed with an almost unequalled faith, with an energy that surpassed
anything that has been seen in men, and which, through the divine power
that wrought in it, produced its effects in spite of obstacles
apparently insurmountable, in spite of every kind of opposition, in
contempt and destitution, and which stamped its character on the
assembly by giving it, instrumentally, its existence; and that, not only
in spite of two hostile religions which divided the civilised world
between them, but in spite of a religious system which possessed the
truth, but which ever sought to confine it within the boundary of
traditions that granted some place to the flesh a system that had the
plea of priority, and was sanctioned by the habits of those apostles who
were nominated by the Lord Himself.

The assembly indeed, as Paul foresaw, soon returned to its Judaic ways,
when the energy of the apostle was absent. It requires the power of the
Holy Ghost to rise above the religiousness of the flesh. Piety does not
necessarily do this; and power is never a tradition it is itself, and
thereby independent of men and of their traditions, even when bearing
with them in love. The flesh therefore always returns to the path of
traditions and forms; because it is never power in the things of God,
although it can recognise duty. It does not therefore rise to heaven; it
does not understand grace; it can see what man ought to be for God
(without however perceiving the consequences of this, if God is
revealed), but it cannot see what God in His sovereign grace is for man.
It will perhaps retain it as orthodoxy, where the Spirit has wrought;
but it will never bring the soul into it. This it was, more than the
violence of the pagans or the hatred of the Jews, which wrung the heart
and caused the anguish of the faithful and blessed apostle, who by grace
had a character, or rather a position, more like that of Christ than any
other on earth.

These conflicts will be unfolded to us in the Epistles, as well as that
ardent heart which while embracing in its thoughts all the revealed
counsels of God, and putting each part in its place, and embracing in
its affections the whole of the work and of the assembly of God could
equally concentrate its whole energy of thought on a single important
point, and of affection on a poor slave whom grace had given to him in
his chains. The vessel of the Spirit, Paul shines with a heavenly light
throughout the whole work of the gospel. He condescends at Jerusalem,
thunders in Galatia when souls were being perverted, leads the apostles
to decide for the liberty of the Gentiles, and uses all liberty himself
to be as a Jew to the Jews, and as without law to those that had no law,
as not under law, but always subject to Christ. Yet how difficult to
maintain the height of life and of spiritual revelation, in the midst of
so many opposing tendencies! He was also "void of offence." Nothing
within hindered his communion with God, whence he drew his strength to
be faithful among men. He could say, and none but he, "Be ye imitators
of me, as I am of Christ." Thus also he could say, "I endure all things
for the elect's sake, that they may obtain the salvation which is in
Christ Jesus with eternal glory," words which would not be improper in
the Lord's mouth in a more exalted sense doubtless, because He endured
for Paul himself the wrath that would have been his eternal condemnation
yet words which bring out the remarkable position of this man of God, as
the vessel of the Holy Ghost by whom he was used. "I fill up," said he,
"that which is lacking \[See Note \#28\] of the sufferings of Christ for
his body's sake, which is the assembly; whereof I am made a minister to
complete the word of God.

John (through his intimate knowledge of the Person of Christ, born on
earth and Son of God) was able to maintain this essential and
individually vital truth, in the same field in which Paul laboured; but
it was Paul's part to be the active instrument for propagating the truth
which saves the soul, and brings ruined man into connection with God by
faith, by communicating all His counsels of grace.

Still Paul was a man, although a man wonderfully blest. The intrinsic
power of Judaism in connection with its relationship to the flesh is
marvellous. As to the result indeed, if man takes his place below grace,
that is, below God, it is better in a certain sense that he should be
man under law than man without law. He will be the one or the other; but
in taking up the exclusive idea of duty he forgets God as He is for He
is love; and too often forgets also man as he is for he is sin. If he
unites the idea of duty and of sin, it is continual bondage, and this is
what Christianity in general is reduced to; with the addition of
ordinances to ease the burdened conscience, of forms to create piety
where communion is absent; clothing it all with the name of Christ, and
with the authority of the church, so named, the very existence of which
in its reality is identified with the principle of sovereign grace, and
characterised by subjection. \[See Note \#29\]

Note \#25

Literally whether the Holy Ghost was. The expression, which is the same
as in John 7, is a very striking testimony to the distinctness and
importance of the Holy Ghost's presence down here on earth. It is called
"the Holy Ghost," though we all know He had ever been. But what is
called the Holy Ghost, that is, His presence down here this had never
been.

Note \#26

Honorary magistrates from among the notables, who presided over the
celebration of religious festivals.

Note \#27

It may perhaps interest the reader and help him to understand this part
of the New Testament history, if I point out the time at which Paul
wrote some of his epistles. He wrote the First to the Corinthians from
Ephesus, and sent it by Titus. Timothy he sent by way of Macedonia. The
latter might perhaps go into Greece; "If he come," the apostle says to
the Corinthians. Then came the tumult, and just at this moment, or about
the same time, his life was endangered; he did not even suppose that he
should save it. He had purposed going by Greece into Macedonia, and then
returning to Greece; but the state Corinth was in prevented it, and he
went first into Macedonia. On his way he goes to Troas, but does not
stay there; in Macedonia he is much exercised in mind, and has no rest,
because Titus had not brought him tidings of the Corinthians. There,
however, Titus found him, and the apostle was comforted in his trouble
by the good news of the return of the Corinthians to a right mind. Upon
this he writes the second letter to them, and, after having visited the
assemblies, he pursues his journey to Corinth, whence he wrote his
epistle to the Romans. I only speak here of that which relates to thus
part of the apostle's history, and throws light upon his labours.

Note \#28

The reader must distinguish between the Lord's sufferings for sin from
God in righteousness, and those which He endured from sinful men for
righteousness' sake. We partake in the latter, while Christ has saved us
from the former, in which there is no question at all of participation,
but of His substitution for us when we have deserved the condemnation
due to sin.

Note \#29

See [Eph 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#024.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 20](act020.md)

</div>
