<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act010)  [Next](act012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001.md)

[Act 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019.md) begins the narration of the
new order of things by which the ministry of Paul is distinguished.
Among those who were scattered abroad on the occasion of Stephen's
death, and who went as far even as Antioch preaching the Lord Jesus,
there were some who, being men of Cyprus and Cyrene, were more
habitually connected with Greeks. They addressed the Greeks therefore in
this ancient capital of the Seleucidae, and many received their word and
turned to the Lord. The assembly at Jerusalem, already prepared through
the conversion of Cornelius, by which God had shewn them the entering in
of the Gentiles, accept this event also and send Barnabas himself a man
of Cyprus to Antioch. A good man and filled with the Holy Ghost, his
heart is full of joy on seeing this work of the grace of God; and much
people is added unto the Lord.

As yet all is linked with the work at Jerusalem, although extending now
to the Gentiles. Barnabas, apparently no longer sufficient for the work
and at all events led of God, departs in search of Saul, who had gone to
Tarsus, when they sought to kill him at Jerusalem. And these two meet
with the assembly at Antioch, teaching much people. Still everything
takes place in connection with Jerusalem, whence some prophets come down
and announce a famine. The links between the flock and Jerusalem as a
centre are shewn and strengthened, by the sending of relief to that
religious metropolis of Judaism, and of Christianity looked at as having
its commencement in the Jewish remnant who believed in Jesus as the
Christ.

Barnabas and Saul are themselves charged with this service, and go up to
Jerusalem to accomplish it. This circumstance carries us back to
Jerusalem, where the Spirit has still something to shew us of the ways
of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 12](act012.md)

</div>
