<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Amos Index](amo.md)  
  [Previous](amo002)  [Next](amo004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001.md)

After having specified each one of the nations that were found on the
territory promised to Abraham, God addresses Judah and Israel
together-the whole family whom He had brought up from Egypt. These only
had Jehovah known of all the families of the earth; therefore would He
punish them for their iniquities: a solemn but very simple principle. If
we are in the place of testimony-of testimony to God-it is needful that
this testimony should be in accordance with the heart and the principles
of God-that it should not falsify His character-that our walk should
agree with our position. And the more immediate this testimony is, the
more jealous will God be with respect to His glory and our faithfulness.
Judgment begins at His house. If there was evil in the city, it was that
Jehovah had interfered in judgment.\* Two cannot walk together except
they are agreed. Two important declarations are attached to this
principle. On the one hand, if God intervene and make His great and
terrible voice to be heard, there is a cause: on the other hand, God
would not act without warning His people. He would do nothing without
revealing it to His servants the prophets. But the lion had roared:
should they not tremble? Jehovah had spoken; the prophet could not be
silent. This was the condition of Israel. It is this latter kingdom
that, for the moment, the Spirit of God particularly addresses. There
should be left but a few little fragments of them, even like the morsels
of a lamb that might be taken out of the lion's mouth after he had
devoured it. Finally, in speaking here of Israel, Jehovah specifies
their idolatrous altars, and declares that all the glory of the people
shall perish. We may again remark, here, the way in which the kingdom of
Israel is taken for the whole people, although Judah is spoken of and
judged in its turn (see [Amo 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009.md); [Amo
3:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012).md). \[See Note \#1\] With the
exception of the first two chapters, which go together, each chapter in
Amos is a distinct prophecy.

Note \#1

Though some take it as moral evil which would lead Jehovah to
interfere-then shall Jehovah do nothing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 4](amo004.md)

</div>
