<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Amos Index](amo.md)  
  [Previous](amo000)  [Next](amo002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001.md)

[Amos 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 1:1</span></span>

The following commentary covers Chapters 1 and 2.

In the outset Jehovah, proclaiming His own rights from the place of His
own throne, roars from Zion and utters His voice from Jerusalem.
Afterwards, quite at the end, the restoration of the house of David and
of Israel likewise is announced. We may remark that, before the judgment
of Israel and Judah is declared, that also of the surrounding nations is
pronounced; and this, on account of their hostile and cruel behaviour to
the people of Israel, and on account of that also which was essentially
cruel in them, and opposed even to the sentiments of humanity; for God
takes cognizance of all these things. Syria is to be carried away
captive into Assyria. The means employed for the judgment of the others
is not mentioned. Gaza and the Philistines, Tyre, Edom, Ammon, Moab,
pass successively in review; and, finally, Judah and Israel. God enters
into much more detail with respect to the sins of His people. He had
indeed specified that which characterised each nation judged; but with
Israel He goes into detail. We may here again remark-that which we have
seen elsewhere-that these judgments of Jehovah fall upon the nations
that are established on the territory promised to Abraham, and
belonging, according to this gift of God, to the people of Israel. God
purges His land of that which defiles it, and consequently alas! of
Judah and Israel likewise; but at the same time asserting and retaining
His own rights, which He will exercise in grace on Israel's behalf in
the last days. We see here the folly of the hope entertained by the
enemies of the people, in seeking their ruin with the idea of finding
their own advantage in it. Doubtless God can chastise His people, for He
must make His own character manifest; but the malice of their enemies
brings His judgment upon them also.

With respect to Judah, Jehovah especially points out their contempt of
the law and disobedience of His commandments. In Israel the sin
specified has a character more independent of the law (the reason of
which is easily understood, if we consider the condition of that
people), and connected with that departure from the fear of God, which
allows man to give way to the selfishness of his own heart, and to
oppress those whom God regards. They sell the righteous for silver, and
the poor for a pair of shoes. They care not for the sufferings of the
poor; but even at the altar-supposed, at least, to be that of
Jehovah-they lie down upon garments pledged through poverty, and make
merry with the fines inflicted for transgressions. Nevertheless God had
brought them up out of Egypt, had destroyed their enemies to put them in
possession of their lands, and had given them the tokens of an especial
relationship with Himself, whether by persons set apart for Himself, or
by those whom He had sent as messengers to them; but they had caused the
former to defile themselves, and had commanded the latter not to
prophesy in the name of Jehovah. The heart of God was crushed, as it
were, by their sins; and His judgment should overtake them. The charge
of despising the poor is often repeated in this prophecy ([Amo
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#007.md); [Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001.md); [Amo
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#011.md); [Amo
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#006).md); and this in special connection
with Israel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 2](amo002.md)

</div>
