<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo004)  [Next](amo006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#001)

After having deplored the ruin of Israel, He contrasts the places of
their false worship with Jehovah, the Creator, and exhorts them to come
unto Him and live. But Israel put off the thought of the evil day. Evil
had the upper hand. The wise man kept silence, for it was an evil day.
Nevertheless the Spirit calls to repentance. It might be that Jehovah
would have compassion on the affliction of Joseph. Yet there were those
in the midst of all this iniquity who professed to desire the day of
Jehovah. The prophet tells them that it should be a day of terror and of
judgment, of darkness and not of light. They should fall from one
disaster into another. Jehovah took no pleasure in their offerings and
sacrifices; He could not bear with their solemn feasts; He desired
judgment and righteousness. But the people had been the same from the
beginning: it was not Himself that they worshipped in the wilderness,
but their Moloch and their Remphan, which they had made to themselves;
and they should be carried away captive, beyond even the land that was
now the object of their dread. This last appeal of the prophet involves
deeply important instruction. The evil principle which was their ruin
had been amongst them from the beginning: the interposition of God's
power had checked it, and had turned aside its effect; but there it was,
and with the decline of faith and godliness, when human interests no
longer restrained it, the same evil had reappeared. The calves of Dan
and Bethel were but a renewal of the calf they made in the wilderness.
The people of Israel shewed themselves in their true character,
notwithstanding all the longsuffering of God; and the judgment dates
from the first act that displayed what they had in their heart. Here
again we see all Israel looked at morally as one, when the ten tribes
are spoken of. But this is made evident in a clear and striking manner
by the whole prophecy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 6](amo006)

</div>
