<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1028)  [Next](ch2000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#001)

God would also associate the people with David in this willing service
of the day of His power; and, even as they had been associated with him
in his wars and conflicts, there are those who shall be so likewise in
the liberality which he manifests towards the house of his God. They are
at a great distance from him, it is true: it is, so to say, a
superfluous thing. They have nothing to do with the wisdom that arranges
and prepares, but they are allowed to share in the work. This favour is
granted them, and their goodwill is acceptable to God, and it is also
the fruit of His grace.

David here ([Ch1 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#018)) again
acknowledges God according to the promises made unto the fathers, and
according to the memorial of God for ever; "God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Israel, our fathers"; he seeks that which will be accomplished under the
new covenant, and directs the thanksgivings of the whole assembly.
Sacrifices of righteousness are offered, and they eat before Jehovah
with great gladness.

Solomon is made king the second time (see [Ch1
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#001)). The first time was when grace
was fully established in the altar built on the threshing-floor of
Ornan, where the son of David, as the prince of peace, was to build the
temple. Solomon is introduced as the head of all that was being
established, and as holding the first and supreme place in the mind of
God-the one on whom all the rest depended, which could not even exist
now without him. The house, the whole order of the house, and its
government, all referred to Solomon; and thus his identification with
David, in that both were on the throne at the same time, makes it much
easier to understand the type of Christ in this. It is one person, whom
His sufferings and victories place on the throne of glory and of peace.
For at this moment, although the result of the glory was not yet
manifested, God had given rest unto His people, that they might dwell at
Jerusalem ([Ch1 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#025)).

David now disappears, although it is he who puts Solomon in this
position. That which we see, as filling the whole scene of royal glory,
is Solomon himself reigning in peace over a willing people, who can
offer these sacrifices of righteousness. The son of David is seen in his
own true character, and in this character alone, namely, that of
Jehovah's anointed, the governor of the people; and Zadok, the faithful
priest (not Abiathar), walks before the anointed one (all the counsel of
God, according to Hannah's song, and the words of the man of God in 1
Samuel 2 being thus fulfilled). "And Solomon sat on the throne of
Jehovah"-a remarkable expression: everything is subject to him.

The attentive reader cannot fail to observe the prominent place given to
the counsels of God respecting Christ the Lord, and the contrast there
is between this and the history of Adonijah in Kings-a history which, by
the contrast it presents with the narrative in Chronicles, so fully
proves that the thought and intention of the Spirit of God in this Book
was to give us in type the expression of God's purposes with regard to
the true Son of David, and the position He is to occupy, and to shew
what will be the character in those days of the throne at Jerusalem,
when Christ shall be seated upon it. It will be the throne of Jehovah,
and the royal majesty in Israel shall be such as has never yet been
known. With reference to this the Book of Chronicles is full of
instruction.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Introduction](ch2000)

</div>
