<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2026)  [Next](ch2028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 27 through 31.

Jotham, the son of Uzziah, walks uprightly; and he avoids his father's
fault; but the people are still corrupt. Nevertheless the faithfulness
of Jotham procures him blessing and prosperity. For it is always the
state of the king which is the object of God's judgment. As we have
seen, the people as such had failed long before.

The reign of Ahaz forms an epoch. Entirely forsaking Jehovah, he gives
himself up wholly to idolatry; and, the more he is smitten of God, the
more he sins against Him. He is delivered into the hands of the Syrians,
and into the hand of Pekah, the king of Israel. In the latter case,
however, God interposes for the rescue at least of the captives. The
Edomites, and afterwards the Philistines, invade Judah. All this
distress induces Ahaz to seek help from the king of Assyria, who only
brought him into still greater trouble (compare [Isa
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#017); see also [Hos
5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013)).

If piety is not transmitted from father to son, grace can work in the
heart and direct the steps of one who had the most wicked father. This
was the case with the son of Ahaz. The way in which Hezekiah sought the
glory of his God shows remarkable faith and energy. In the better days
of the kingdom, true piety and the work of righteousness were manifested
in Jehoshaphat; great energy of faith is now displayed in Hezekiah; and
we shall find in Josiah profound reverence for the scriptures, for the
book of the law.

I recall here the great principle, the effects of which the reader has
to remark in the book which occupies us, namely, the government of God,
which visited every act with its immediate consequences, a government
which always had reference to the king's conduct. But, in spite of some
awakenings and some restorations wrought by grace, the people having
entirely corrupted themselves, the kingly power which alone recalled
them to their duties came short of the glory of God; and at length, the
oath made in Jehovah's name being broken, the measure of sin was filled
up, and the judgment of Israel, and the times of the Gentiles commenced.

Hezekiah acknowledges the sinful state of Israel, and he invites the
people to cleanse themselves. A true worship, affecting in its
character, is re-established ([Ch2
29:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#025)), and the service of
Jehovah's house is set in order.

But Hezekiah's zeal embraces all Israel, and he sends letters which,
although the greater part laughed them to scorn, brought up many serious
souls to the worship of Jehovah in Jerusalem. If everything is not
re-established as a whole, yet, wherever faith is in action and a
sincere heart seeks to glorify God, there is always cause for the
faithful to rejoice in the dealings of God. God pardoned their failure
in the purification necessary for participation in the service of the
sanctuary; the prayer for blessing came up to His holy dwelling-place
and was granted.

Strengthened by this communion with Jehovah, all Israel that had been
present went out and destroyed the groves and the images, not only in
Judah, but also in Ephraim and Manasseh. The state of disorder in Israel
gave an opportunity on God's part for the exercise of faithfulness and
the manifestation of devotedness in His people. Abundance and blessing
are found in Judah, and Jehovah's house is filled with proofs of His
goodness brought in by grateful hearts according to the ordinances of
the law; and even in the cities of the priests all is set in order
according to the law, and everything prospers. \[See Note \#1\]

Note \#1

Observe here that, when God blesses and there is faithfulness, the
instruments whom He employs in His service partake of the glory that is
connected with the blessing. Their names are inscribed in the record of
God's dealings.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 28](ch2028)

</div>
