<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2.md)  
  [Previous](ch2021)  [Next](ch2023.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 21 through 26.

Finally, the king perishes, according to Elijah's prediction. Disaster
upon disaster falls upon Judah in consequence of this connection with
the house of Ahab. To connect oneself with that which claims to be of
God, according to His religion, but which is not so, is intolerable to
God. The only son that remained to Jehoram is slain by Jehu, as
participating in the iniquity of Ahab's family; and Athaliah, who
belonged to this family, takes possession of the throne, destroying all
the seed royal, except one child that God in His grace took care of, who
would not have the lamp of David put out at Jerusalem, although He
chastened his family. The sister of Ahaziah, wife to the high priest,
preserves the child, who is concealed in the house of God for six years.

Everything was in a very low state; and, to outward appearance, all was
over with the house of David; but the faithfulness of God did not fail.
And, although the power of the throne is absolutely destroyed, and the
family of David set aside, God raises up a man of faith, in the person
of the high priest, to restore the whole. The chastisement of God was
complete. The entire order of the throne was subverted by His judgment.
Nothing was left but the faithfulness of God. Man was judged. He had no
longer any means of recovery. But all things are at God's disposal, the
heart of Jehoshaphat and the faith of Jehoiada. The latter takes the
needful steps, and the king is set upon his throne; and, after all, the
same thing which we have seen before again takes place: the king
appoints everything concerning the re-establishment of the order in the
house of God.

How often the energy of faith may, so to say, establish a kingdom, yet
fail at the same time in maintaining the ordinary duty of those who have
to do with the service of God! Faithful at the commencement of his
reign, Joash walks nevertheless more by Jehoiada's faith than by his
own; and, after the death of the high priest, he leans on the princes of
Judah, and serves idols, and even puts to death the son of Jehoiada, by
whom the Holy Ghost had testified against him. Joash, forsaken of God,
is defeated by the Syrians. He falls into many diseases, and is at
length slain by his own servants.

In this whole history we must observe that the immediate government of a
God of judgment is in exercise, because those whom He judges were in
close connection with Himself.

Amaziah, up to a certain point, walks with God, but in weakness and with
an unsteady step. He leans upon an arm of flesh: but he hearkens to the
prophet, and this saves him from being defeated. The cities of Judah,
however, suffer the consequences of his false step, and are plundered by
the army of Israel, which Amaziah had sent back. Lifted up by the
victory that he had obtained over Edom, he takes the gods of Seir which
could not deliver their own people, and bows himself down before them.
He then turns a deaf ear to the prophet who rebukes him. But pride goes
before confusion, and a haughty spirit before a fall. Amaziah, making
war against Israel, is ignominiously defeated and made prisoner, and
Jerusalem itself is laid waste.

We should remark in this part of the history the goodness of the Lord,
who continually interposes by means of prophets.

Uzziah, the son of Amaziah, walks for a long time with Jehovah and
prospers. The strength of Judah is increased, and all the king's
undertakings are successful. "But when he was strong, his heart was
lifted up"; he takes upon himself the priestly function, and is smitten
with leprosy by the hand of God.

We enter now on a period in which Isaiah throws much light on the state
of the people. This state was partly exhibited before, in the reign of
Joash, who, as soon as he hearkens to the princes, falls into idolatry.
But in reading the first two chapters of Isaiah, or the prophecy of
Hosea, we shall see the terrible condition of the people, the greatness
of God's patience, and the manner in which iniquity and idolatry
multiplied on every side, when the king was not faithful and energetic.
\[See Note \#1\]

Note \#1

We find consequently, that Isaiah, after exposing the evil and the
consequent judgment, immediately introduces the promises of latter-day
blessing and of the Messiah. In the first chapters he sets forth the
state of the people, as well as the blessing of the last days. The house
of David is not judged till chapter 7, and it is there that the Messiah,
the Son of the virgin, is brought in as the resource, and the means of
deliverance and grace according to the counsels of God. The rest of this
prophet's writings gives us the whole history of the people, according
to the thoughts of God, and that of the nations, in connection with
Israel, until the accomplishment, at the end of the age, of full
blessing in Christ, with the judgment of Israel's sin in respect of
Jehovah (Isaiah 40-48), and in respect of Christ (Isaiah 49-57).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 23](ch2023.md)

</div>
