<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](co1003)  [Next](co1005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001.md)

As for the apostle and the labourers, they were to consider them as
stewards employed by the Lord. And it was to Him that Paul committed the
judgment of his conduct. He cared little for the judgment man might form
respecting him. He was not conscious of anything wrong, but that did not
justify him. He who judged (examined) him was the Lord. And, after all,
who was it that gave to the one or to the other that which he could use
in service?

Paul had thought well, in treating this subject, to use names that they
were using in their carnal divisions, and those, especially himself and
Apollos, which could not be used to pretend he was getting rid of others
to set up himself; but what was the real state of the case? They had
despised the apostle. Yes, he says, we have been put to shame, despised,
persecuted, in distress; you have been at ease, like kings a reproach in
accordance with their own pretensions, their own reproaches a reproach
that touched them to the quick, if they had any feeling left. Paul and
his companions had been as the offscouring of the earth for Christ's
sake, while the Corinthians were reposing in the lap of luxury and ease.
Even while writing to them, this was still his position. "Would to God,"
he says, "ye did reign" (that the day of Christ were come) "in order
that we might reign with you." He felt his sufferings, although he bore
them joyfully. They, the apostles, were set forth on God's part as
though to be the last great spectacle in those marvellous games of which
this world was the amphitheatre; and as His witnesses they were exposed
to the fury of a brutal world. Patience and meekness were their only
weapons.

Nevertheless he did not say these things to put them to shame, he warned
them as his beloved sons; for his sons they were. Though they might have
ten thousand teachers, he had begotten them all by the gospel. Let them
then follow him. In all this there is the deep working of the affection
of a noble heart, wounded to the utmost, but wounded in order to bring
out an affection that rose above his grief. It is this which so
strikingly distinguishes the work of the Spirit in the New Testament, as
in Christ Himself. The Spirit has come into the bosom of the assembly,
takes part in her afflictions her difficulties. He fills the soul of one
who cares for the assembly, \[See Note \#6\] making him feel that which
is going on feel it according to God, but with a really human heart. Who
could cause all this to be felt for strangers, except the Spirit of God?
Who would enter into these things with all the perfection of the wisdom
of God, in order to act upon the heart, to deliver the conscience, to
form the understanding, and to set it free, except the Spirit of God?
Still the apostolic individual bond was to be formed, to be
strengthened. It was the essence of the work of the Holy Ghost in the
assembly to bind all together in this way. We see the man: otherwise it
would not have been Paul and his dear brethren. We see the Holy Ghost,
whom the latter had grieved, no doubt, and who acts in the former with
divine wisdom, to guide them in the right way with all the affection of
their father in Christ. Timothy, his son in the faith and in heart,
might meet the case. Paul had sent him; Paul himself would soon be
there. Some said, No, he would not, and took occasion to magnify
themselves in the absence of the apostle; but he would come himself and
put everything to the test; for the kingdom of God was not in word, but
in power. Did they wish him to come with a rod, or in love?

Here this part of the epistle ends. Admirable specimen of tenderness and
of authority! of authority sure enough of itself on the part of God, to
be able to act with perfect tenderness towards those who were thoroughly
dear to him, in the hope of not being forced to exercise itself in
another way. The most powerful truths are unfolded in so doing.

Note \#6

sunantilambanei tais astheneiais hemon ("The Spirit joins also its help
to our weakness," [Rom 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)..md)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 5](co1005.md)

</div>
