<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](co1011)  [Next](co1013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001.md)

The other branch of the truth, in reference to the assembly of God in
general and to the assemblies, is the presence and the gifts of the Holy
Ghost. These, as well as the Lord's supper, are in connection with unity
\[See Note \#15\] ; the individual being responsible in each. It is the
subject of spiritual manifestations which the apostle takes up in
Chapter 12. The first point was to establish the distinctive marks of
the Spirit of God. There were evil spirits, who sought to creep in among
the Christians, and to speak or act pretending to be the Spirit of God,
and thus to confound everything. Christians of the present day hardly
believe in such efforts of the enemy as these. Spiritual manifestations
are, no doubt, less striking now than at the time of which the apostle
speaks; but the enemy adapts his means of deception to the circumstances
in which man and the work of God are found. As Peter says in a similar
case, "As there were false prophets among the people, so shall there be
false teachers among you." The enemy does not cease to act. "Forbidding
to marry," etc., was the doctrine of devils. In the last days his power
will be manifested still more. God can restrain him by the energy of His
Spirit, and by the power of the truth; but if he is not bridled, he
still acts, deceiving men, and that by such things as one would suppose
it impossible (if not deceived oneself) that a man of sober sense could
believe. But it is surprising what a man can believe when he is left to
himself, without being kept by God, when the power of the enemy is
there. We talk of common sense, of reason (very precious they are); but
history tells us that God alone gives them or preserves them to us.

Here the Spirit of God manifested Himself by the effects of His power,
which broke forth in the midst of the assembly, attracting the attention
even of the world. The enemy imitated them. The greater part of the
Christians at Corinth having been poor Gentiles, without discernment,
and stupidly led by the delusions of the enemy, they were the more in
danger of being again deceived by this means. When a man is not filled
with the Spirit of God, who gives force to the truth in his heart, and
clearness to his moral vision, the seductive power of the enemy dazzles
his imagination. He loves the marvellous, unbelieving as he may be with
regard to the truth. He lacks holy discernment, because he is ignorant
of the holiness and character of God, and has not the stability of a
soul that possesses the knowledge of God (God Himself, we may say) as
his treasure of a soul which knows that it has all in Him, so that it
needs no other marvels. If a man is not thus established by the
knowledge of God, the power of the enemy strikes him pre-occupies him;
he cannot shake it off, he cannot account for it. He is a victim to the
influence which this power exercises over his mind; the flesh is pleased
with it, for in one shape or another the result is always liberty to the
flesh.

Long led blindly by the power of evil spirits, the converted Gentiles
were hardly in a state to discern and judge them. Strange to say, this
demoniac power exercised such an influence that they forgot the
importance even of the name of Jesus, or at least forgot that His name
was not acknowledged by it The enemy transforms himself into an angel of
light, but he never really owns Jesus Christ as Lord. He will speak of
Paul and Silvanus, and would have his part with Christians, but Christ
is not acknowledged; and at last it is the breaking up and ruin of those
who follow him. An unclean spirit would not say Lord Jesus, and the
Spirit of God could not say Anathema to Jesus. But it is a question here
of spirits, and not of conversion, nor of the necessity of grace working
in the heart for the true confession of the name of Jesus a very true
thing, as we know, but not the subject here.

We come now to positive instructions. Nothing more important, more
distinctive, more marvellous, than the presence of the Holy Ghost here
below in the midst of Christians; the fruit to us, of the perfect work
of Christ, but in itself the manifestation of the presence of God among
men on the earth. The providence of God manifests His power in the works
of creation, and His government which directs all things; but the Holy
Ghost is His presence in this world, the testimony that He bears of
Himself, of His character. \[See Note \#16\] He is among men to display
Himself, not yet in glory, but in power and in testimony of what He is.
Christ having accomplished redemption, and having presented the efficacy
of His work to God, Sovereign and Judge, the assembly, being ransomed
and cleansed by His blood, and united to Him as His body, became also
the vessel of this power which acts in His members. Thus she ought to
display this power in holiness she is responsible to do so. But in this
way, as to its exercise, man becomes in fact individually the vessel of
this spiritual energy. It is a treasure committed to him. Now the Spirit
is, in the first place, the link between the assembly and Christ, as
well as between the Christian and Christ. It is by the Spirit that
communion is realised and maintained, it is the primary function of the
Spirit; and man must be in communion in order to realise the character
and discern the will of God, and that, according to the testimony
intended to be borne by the Spirit come down to earth.

But if the assembly does not maintain this communion, she loses her
strength as the responsible witness of God on earth, and in fact her joy
and her spiritual intelligence also. God is ever sovereign to act as He
chooses, and Christ cannot fail in His faithfulness to His body; but the
testimony committed to the assembly is no longer so rendered as to make
it felt that God is present on the earth. The assembly is not, perhaps,
aware of the estrangement, because she retains for a time much of that
which God has given, which is far beyond all that was according to
nature; and in losing strength she has also lost the discernment of what
she ought to be. But God is never mistaken as to the assembly's
condition "Thou hast left thy first love." "Except thou repent," says
He, "and do the first works, I will take away thy candlestick" a solemn
consideration for the assembly, as to her responsibility, when we
reflect on the grace that has been shewn her, on the fruits that have
been and those that ought to have been manifested, and on the power
given her to produce them.

The purposes of God for the assembly have their end and aim in heaven.
They will be accomplished without the possibility of the least thing
failing. All that is needful to bring her members there according to His
counsels, Christ will do. They are redeemed by His blood to be His.

The ways of God are accomplished and unfolded on the earth for our
instruction, both in the assembly and in individuals.

It is not only in His gifts that the presence of the Spirit of God is
manifested. There are prophecies and miracles, men moved by the Holy
Ghost, before the day of Pentecost. That which is attributed to faith in
Hebrews 11 is often ascribed to the Spirit in the Old Testament. But the
Spirit was promised in a special way in the Old Testament. He was never
at that period the presence of God in the midst of the people, as He
dwelt in the assembly. The glory came to take possession of the
tabernacle or temple. His Spirit acted in sovereignty outside the order
of His house, and could be with them when that glory was gone. But the
Holy Ghost sent down from heaven to dwell in the disciples and in the
assembly on earth, was the manifestation of the presence of God in His
house, of God who was there by the Spirit. And this presence of the
Spirit is so distinct, and so plainly noted as a thing known and
realised by the first Christians, which demonstrated instead of being
demonstrated, that it is spoken of in the word as being the Holy Ghost
Himself. In John 7 it is said, "The Holy Ghost was not yet." In Acts 19
the twelve men say to Paul, "We have not so much as heard whether the
Holy Ghost is." It was not a question whether there was a Holy Ghost
(every orthodox Jew believed it), but whether this presence of the Holy
Ghost Himself dwelling here below, the new Comforter and Guide of the
disciples, of which John the Baptist had spoken, had yet taken place.
When come down, it was the presence of God in His spiritual temple on
earth. The place in which the disciples were gathered together was
shaken to shew that God was there. Ananias and Sapphira fell down dead
before the apostles for having lied to God. Philip is caught away by His
power from the presence of the man who had received the knowledge of
Jesus by his means.

Such was the presence of the Holy Ghost. In our Chapter, the apostle
speaks of the manifestations of His presence in the gifts which were
exercised by the instrumentality of members of the body, whether for the
calling out and edification of the assembly, or in testimony to those
outside. Before entering on this subject, he gives the Corinthians whom
the enemy would have deeply deceived that which would enable them to
distinguish between the manifestation of the Holy Ghost and the actings
of an evil spirit. He then speaks of gifts.

Now there were not divers spirits, as in the case of demons; there was
only one and the same Spirit, but diversity of gifts. This gives
occasion to bring in the different relationship (for he speaks of the
order of the relations of man with God the practical energy of which is
in the Holy Ghost) in which men, moved by the Holy Ghost, are placed
with regard to God and to Christ. The Spirit, one and the same Spirit,
acts in them by various manifestations. But in the exercise of these
different gifts they were administrators, and there was one Lord, that
is, Christ. It was not therefore in them an independent and voluntary
power: whatever might be the energy of the Spirit in them, they did not
cease to be servants and stewards of Christ, and they were to act in
this character, acknowledging in their service the Lordship of Christ.
Nevertheless, although it was power in a man, and that it was man who
acted, so that he was a servant (and a Man who was Head and who was
served, although He was Son of God and Lord of all), yet it was God who
wrought, one and the same God who wrought all in all. It is not the
Trinity, properly speaking, that is presented here in its own character,
but one only Spirit acting in Christians, Jesus Lord, and God acting in
the gifts.

The gifts are manifestations of the energy of the Spirit thus committed
to men, under Christ who is Head and Lord; men were to use them as
serving the Lord. Now Christ thought of what was profitable to His
people, to those that were His; and the manifestation of the Spirit was
given for the profit of souls, of the assembly in general. The apostle
notices several of these gifts; but he reminds us again that it is the
same Spirit who works in each case, distributing to every one according
to His own will. Let the reader remark this passage. The apostle had
said that God wrought all these things, and had spoken of the gifts as
being manifestations of the Spirit. It might have been supposed that the
Spirit was some vague influence, and that one must attribute everything
to God without recognising a personal Spirit. But these operations,
which were attributed to God in Verse 6 ([Co1
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006).md), are here attributed to the
Spirit; and it is added, that He, the Spirit, distributes to each as He
will. It is not therefore an inferior Spirit. Where He works, it is God
who works; but these operations in men are gifts distributed according
to the will of the Spirit, the Spirit being thus presented as acting
personally in this distribution and according to His will.

Some of the gifts may require a short observation. Wisdom is the
application of divine light to right and wrong, and to all the
circumstances through which we pass an expression which has a wide
extent, because it applies to everything with regard to which we have to
form a judgment. The Holy Ghost furnishes some in a peculiar way with
this wisdom, with a wisdom according to God a perception of the true
nature of things, and of their relationship to each other, and of
conduct with regard to both, which, coming from God, guides us through
the difficulties of the way, and enables us to avoid that which would
place us in a false position towards God and man.

Knowledge is intelligence in the mind of God as it is revealed to us.
Faith is not here simple faith in the gospel; that is not a distinctive
gift which one believer may possess and another not. This is evident. It
is the faith, the energy, given by God, which overcomes difficulties,
which rises above dangers, which confronts them without being alarmed by
them. The discerning of spirits is not that of a man's condition of soul
it has nothing to do with it. It is the knowing how to discern, by the
mighty energy of the Spirit of God, the actings of evil spirits, and to
bring them to light if necessary, in contrast with the action of the
Spirit of God.

The other gifts require no comment. We must now return to the unity of
the Spirit, with which is connected that which the apostle says after
having spoken of the gifts. The Spirit was one, he had said, working
diVersely in the members according to His will. The importance of His
personality, and the immense import of His divinity (if we reflect that
it is He who works in and by man) is very evident when we observe that
He is the centre and the living power of the unity of the whole body, so
that the individuals, in the exercise of their gifts, are but the
members of the one and the same body divinely formed by the power and
the presence of the Spirit. This point the apostle develops largely, in
connection with the oneness of the body, the mutual dependence of the
members, and the relationship of each one to the body as a whole.

The practical instructions are easily understood, but there are some
important points in the general principles. The oneness of the body is
produced by the baptism of the Holy Ghost, and the connection of the
members depends upon it. By one Spirit we have all been baptised to be
one body. The Lord's supper is the expression of this oneness; the
Spirit is He who produces it, and who is its strength. The distinctive
character of Jew and Gentile and all other distinctions was lost in the
power of one Spirit common to all, who united them all as redeemed ones
in one only body. The apostle in this Verse ([Co1
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013).md) speaks of the baptism of the
Holy Ghost; but the word suggests to him the supper, the second
ordinance of the Lord, and he speaks of drinking into one spirit,
alluding, I doubt not, to the Lord's supper. He does not speak of the
Holy Ghost: one spirit was the state of the believers, the word being
used in contrast with one body, associated in one heart and mind by the
Spirit participating in Christ.

It is not faith which is union, nor even life, though both are the
portion of those united, but the Holy Ghost. The baptism of the Holy
Ghost, then, is that which forms Christians into one only body, and they
are all made partakers of, are animated individually by, one and the
same Spirit. Thus there are many members, but one only body, and a body
composed of these members, which are dependent the one on the other, and
have need of each other. And even those gifts which were the most
shining were comparatively of the least value, even as a man clothes and
ornaments the least honourable parts of his body, and leaves the more
beautiful parts uncovered.

Another point which the apostle marks, is the common interest that
exists among them in that they are members of the one and the same body.
If one suffers, all suffer, since there is but one body animated by one
Spirit. If one is honoured, all rejoice. This also depends on the one
self-same Spirit who unites and animates them. Moreover this body is the
body of Christ. "Ye are," says the apostle, "the body of Christ, and
members in particular."

Observe, also, here that, although that assembly at Corinth was only a
part of the body of Christ, the apostle speaks of the whole body; for
the assembly there was, according to the principle of its gathering, the
body of Christ as assembled at Corinth. It is true that at the beginning
he speaks of all those who call on the name of the Lord Jesus; but in
fact he addresses the Corinthian assembly. And the general expression
shews that, in the walk of the assembly, and in its general interests, a
local assembly cannot be separated from the whole body of Christians on
earth; and the language employed here shews that, as to their position
before God, the Christians of one town were considered as representing
the whole assembly, as far as regarded that locality; not as independent
of the rest, but, on the contrary, as inseparably united to the others,
living and acting, with respect to that locality as members of the body
of Christ, and looked upon as such in it, because every Christian formed
a part of that body, and they formed a part of it likewise. From the
Verses that follow we see that the apostle, while looking upon the
Christians there as the body of Christ, the members of which they were,
has in his mind the whole assembly as the assembly of God. In the New
Testament there is no other membership than that of Christ, except that
they are members of each other,. as forming the entire body, but never
members of a church; the idea is different. The word speaks of the
members of a body, like that of man as a figure, never of the members of
an assembly in the modern sense of the word. We are members of Christ,
and consequently of the body of Christ; so were the Corinthians, as far
as that body was manifested at Corinth.

Moreover the body of Christ, the assembly, is looked at here as a whole
upon the earth. God has set in the assembly, apostles, prophets, etc.;
miracles, healings, tongues. It is very plain that this is on the earth,
as were the Corinthians, and that it is the assembly as a whole.
Healings and tongues were not in heaven, and the apostles were not those
of an individual assembly. In a word it was the Holy Ghost, come down
from heaven, who had formed the unity of the body on earth, and who
acted in it by the especial gifts which distinguished the members.

The apostle then points out these gifts, not to give a formal and
complete list of them, but to mark the order and importance of those he
mentions. Tongues, of which the Corinthians were so proud, are the last
gifts named in the list. Some gifts then, were more excellent than
others; they were to be estimated according to the measure in which they
served for the edification of the assembly. Those which served this end
were to be desired.

It is interesting to remark here the difference of this Chapter and
Ephesians 4. Here it is simply power, and men are told in certain cases
to be silent, when the power was there; it was the Holy Ghost working as
power. In Ephesians 4 it is Christ's care as Head of the body. No gifts
which are signs of power to others are mentioned; only what founds the
assembly, edifies the saints, and builds the assembly up; and then there
is promise of continuance till we all come. For Christ cannot cease to
care for His body; but sign gifts may disappear, and they have. Apostles
and prophets were the foundation, and in that sense they were, when the
foundation was laid, no longer in exercise.

Note \#15

We have seen this with regard to the supper, in [Co1
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#017.md). Here, [Co1
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013.md), we see it with regard to the
Holy Ghost.

Note \#16

It is a very striking truth that God's dwelling with men is the fruit of
redemption. He did not dwell with Adam innocent; He could walk in the
garden, but did not dwell there. He did not dwell with Abraham.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 13](co1013.md)

</div>
