<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1005)  [Next](co1007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001)

[Co1 6:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001) treats the subject of
wrongs. It was shameful that those who were to judge the world and the
angels should be incapable of judging the paltry affairs of this world.
Let the least esteemed in the assembly be employed in this service.
Rather should they bear the wrong, whereas they did wrong themselves.
But the wicked and the unrighteous would assuredly not inherit the
kingdom. What a wonderful mixture we have here of astonishing
revelations, of a morality that is unchangeable whatever may be the
divine supremacy of grace, and of ecclesiastical order and discipline!
The assembly is united to Christ. When He shall judge the world and
pronounce the doom of the angels, she will be associated with Him and
take part in His judgment, for she has His Spirit and His mind. Nothing
however that is unrighteous shall enter into that kingdom, for in effect
how could evil be judged by any that took pleasure in it? Christians
should not go to a worldly tribunal for justice, but have recourse to
the arbitration of the brethren a service which, as entering so little
into christian spirituality, was suited to the weakest among them.
Moreover the proper thing was rather to suffer the wrong. Be it as it
might, the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom.

Judaism, which took pleasure in a carnal sanctity of outward
regulations, and the spirit of the world with conformity to its ways,
were the two dangers that threatened the assembly at Corinth dangers,
indeed, which exist for the heart of man at all times and in all places.
With regard to meats the rule is simple: perfect liberty, since all is
allowed true liberty, in that we are in bondage to none of these things.
Meats and the belly, as in relationship to each other, should both
perish; the body has a higher destiny it is for the Lord, and the Lord
for it. God has raised up Christ from the dead, and He will raise us up
again by His power. The body belongs to this and not to meats.

But the doctrine that the body is for Christ decided another question,
to which the depraved habits of the Corinthians gave rise. All
fornication is forbidden. To us, with our present Christian habits of
mind, it is a thing of course to Pagans, new; but the doctrine exalts
every subject. Our bodies are the members of Christ. Another truth
connected with this is of great importance: if (by union according to
the flesh) two were one body, he who is united to the Lord is one
spirit. The Spirit whose fulness is in Christ is the same Spirit who
dwells in me and unites me to Him. Our bodies are His temples. What a
mighty truth when we think of it!

Moreover we are not our own, but were bought with a price the blood of
Christ offered for us. Therefore we ought to glorify God in our bodies,
which are His powerful and universal motive, governing the whole conduct
without exception. Our true liberty is to belong to God. All that is for
oneself is stolen from the rights of Him who has bought us for His own.
All that a slave was, or gained, was the property of his master; he was
not the owner of himself. Thus it was with the Christian. Outside that,
he is the wretched slave of sin and of Satan selfishness his rule, and
eternal banishment from the source of love his end. Horrible thought! In
Christ we are the special objects and the vessels of that love. We have
here two mighty motives for holiness: the value of Christ's blood, at
which we are purchased; also the fact that we are the temples of the
Holy Ghost.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 7](co1007)

</div>
