<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1012)  [Next](co1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)

Nevertheless there was something more excellent than all gifts. They
were the manifestations of the power of God and of the mysteries of His
wisdom; love, that of His nature itself.

They might speak with all tongues; they might have prophecy, the
knowledge of mysteries, the faith which can remove mountains; they might
give all their possessions to feed the poor, and their bodies to be
tortured: if they had not love, it was nothing. Love was conformity to
the nature of God, the living expression of what He was, the
manifestation of having been made partakers of His nature: it was the
acting and feeling according to His likeness. This love is developed in
reference to others; but others are not the motive, although they are
the object. It has its source within; its strength is independent of the
objects with which it is occupied. Thus it can act where circumstances
might produce irritation or jealousy in the human heart. It acts
according to its own nature in the circumstances; and by judging them
according to that nature, they do not act upon the man who is full of
love, except so far as they supply occasion for its activity, and direct
its form. Love is its own motive. In us participation in the divine
nature is its only source. Communion with God Himself alone sustains it
through all the difficulties it has to surmount in its path. This love
is the opposite of selfishness and of self-seeking, and shuts it out,
seeking the good of others, even (as to its principle) as God has sought
us in grace (see [Eph 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032); [Eph
5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#001)). What a power to avoid evil in
oneself, to forget all in order to do good!

It is worthy of note that the qualities of divine love are almost
entirely of a passive character.

The first eight qualities pointed out by the Spirit are the expression
of this renunciation of self. The three that follow, mark that joy in
good which sets the heart free also from that readiness to suppose evil,
which is so natural to human nature, on account of its own depth of
evil, and that which it also experiences in the world. The last four
shew its positive energy, which the source of every kind thought by the
powerful spring of its divine nature, presumes good when it does not see
it, and bears with evil when it sees it, covering it by longsuffering
and patience; not bringing it to light, but burying it in its own depth
a depth which is unfathomable, because love never changes. One finds
nothing but love where it is real; for circumstances are but an occasion
for it to act and shew itself. Love is always itself, and it is love
which is exercised and displayed. It is that which fills the mind:
everything else is but a means of awakening the soul that dwells in love
to its exercise. This is the divine character. No doubt the time of
judgment will come; but our relationships with God are in grace. Love is
His nature. It is now the time of its exercise. We represent Him on
earth in testimony.

In that which is said of love in this Chapter we find the reproduction
of the divine nature, except that what is said is but the negative of
the selfishness of the flesh in us. Now the divine nature changes not
and never ceases; love therefore abides ever. Communications from God;
the means by which they are made; knowledge, as attained here below,
according to which we apprehend the truth in part only, although the
whole truth is revealed to us (for we apprehend it in detail, so that we
have never the whole at once, the character of our knowledge being to
lay hold of different truths singly); all that is characterised by being
in part passes away. Love will not pass away. A child learns; he
rejoices too in things that amuse him; when he becomes a man, he
requires things in accordance with his intelligence as a man. It was
thus with tongues and the edification of the assembly. The time however
was coming when they should know even as they were known, not by
communications of truths to a capacity that apprehended the truth in its
different parts, but they should understand it as a whole in its unity.

Now love subsists already; there are faith and hope also. Not only shall
these pass away, but even now, here below, that which is of the nature
of God is more excellent than that which is connected with the capacity
of human nature, even though enlightened by God, and having for its
object the revealed glory of God.

Believers therefore were to follow after and seek for love, while
desiring gifts, especially that they might prophesy, because thus they
would edify the assembly, and that was the thing to aim at; it was that
which love desired and sought, it was that which intelligence required,
the two marks of a man in Christ, of one to whom Christ is all.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 14](co1014)

</div>
