<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2001)  [Next](co2003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001.md)

But had there been any lightness in his decisions, since, as he now
informed them, he had intended to visit them on his way to Macedonia
(where he was at the moment of writing this letter), and then a second
time on his return from that country? In no wise; they were not
intentions lightly formed, according to the flesh, and then abandoned.
It was his affection, it was to spare them. He could not bear the idea
of going with a rod to those whom he loved. Observe in what manner,
although shewing his affection and tenderness, he maintains his
authority; and they needed the exercise of this authority. And while
reminding them of his authority, he displays all his tenderness. They
were not Cretans, perhaps, whom it was necessary to rebuke sharply; but
there was a laxity of. morals which required delicacy and care lest they
should become restive, but also authority and a bridle, lest, in giving
them liberty, they should fall into all sorts of bad ways. But he turns
immediately to the certainty which was in Christ, the basis of all his
own. He would not press too much upon the chord he had touched at the
beginning. He lets his authority be known as that which might have been
exercised, and he does not employ it. The groundwork of Christianity was
needed, in order to put their souls into a condition to judge themselves
healthily. They were quite disposed, through the intrigues of false
teachers and their habit of schools of philosophy, to separate from the
apostle, and, in spirit, from Christ. He brings them back to the
foundation, to the sure doctrine that was common to all those that had
laboured among them at the beginning. He would give Satan no occasion to
detach them from him (see [Co2 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011).md).
He establishes therefore the great principles of christian joy and
assurance. I do not speak of the blood, the only source of peace of
conscience before God as a judge, but of the manner in which we are
placed by the power of God in His presence, in the position and state
into which that power introduces us according to the counsels of His
grace. Simple certainty was in Christ, according to that which had been
said. It was not first Yea, and then Nay: the yea remained always yea a
principle of immense importance, but for the establishment of which
there was needed the power and the firmness and even perfection, and the
wisdom, of God; for to assure and make stedfast that which was not wise
and perfect would certainly not have been worthy of Him. It will be seen
that the question was, whether Paul had lightly changed his purpose. He
says that he had not; but he leaves the thought of that which concerned
him personally to speak of that which pre-occupied his thoughts of
Christ; and to him, in fact, to live was Christ. But there was a
difficulty to solve, when the immutability of God's promises was the
question. It is that we are not in a state to profit by that which was
immutable on account of our weakness and inconstancy. He solves this
difficulty by setting forth the mighty operations of God in grace. There
are two points therefore: the establishment of all the promises in
Christ, and the enjoyment, by us, of the effect of these promises. The
thing is, as we have seen, not merely to say, to promise, something; but
not to change one's intentions, not to depart from what was said, but to
keep one's word. Now there had been promises. God had made promises,
whether to Abraham unconditionally, or to Israel at Sinai under the
condition of obedience. But in Christ there was, not promises, but the
Amen to God's promises, the verity and realisation of them. Whatever
promises there had been on God's part, the Yea was in Him, and the Amen
in Him. God has established deposited, so to speak the fulfilment of all
His promises in the Person of Christ. Life, glory, righteousness,
pardon, the gift of the Spirit, all is in Him; it is in Him that all is
we Yea and Amen. We cannot have the effect of any promise whatsoever out
of Him. But this is not all: we, believers, are the objects of these
counsels of God. They are to the glory of God by us. But, in the first
place, the glory of God is that of Him whoever glorifies Himself in His
ways of sovereign grace towards us; for it is in these ways that He
unfolds and displays what He is. The Yea and Amen therefore of the
promises of God, the accomplishment and the realisation of the promises
of God, for His glory by us, are in Christ. But how can we participate
in it, if all is Christ and in Christ? It is here that the Holy Ghost
presents the second part of the ways of grace. We are in Christ, and we
are in Him not according to the instability of the will of man, and the
weakness that characterises him in his transitory and changeable works.
He who was firmly established us in Christ is God Himself. The
accomplishment of all the promises is in Him. Under the law, and under
conditions the fulfilment of which depended on the stability of man, the
effect of the promise was never attained; the thing promised eluded the
pursuit of man, because man needed to be in a state capable of attaining
it by righteousness, and he was not in that state; the accomplishment of
the promise therefore was always suspended; it would have its effect if
but the "if" was not accomplished, and the Yea and Amen did not come.
But all that God has promised is in Christ. The second part is the "by
us," and how far we enjoy it. We are firmly established by God in
Christ, in whom all the promises subsist, so that we securely possess in
Him all that is promised us. But we do not enjoy it as that which
subsists in our own hands. But, further, God Himself has anointed us. We
have by Jesus received the Holy Ghost. God has taken care that we should
understand by the Spirit that which is freely given us in Christ. But
the Spirit is given to us, according to the counsels of God, for other
things than understanding merely His gifts in Christ. He who has
received Him is sealed. God has marked him with His seal, even as He
marked Christ with His seal when He anointed Him after His baptism by
John. Moreover the Spirit becomes the earnest, in our own hearts, of
that which we shall fully possess hereafter in Christ. We understand the
things that are given us in the glory; we are marked by the seal of God
to enjoy them; we have the earnest of them in our hearts our affections
are engaged by them. Established in Christ, we have the Holy Ghost, who
seals us when we believe, to bring us into the enjoyment, even while
here below, of that which is in Christ. Having again spoken of the care
which manifested his affection for them, he expresses his conviction
that that which had pained him had pained them also; and this was
demonstrated by the way in which they had treated the transgressor. He
exhorts them to receive again and comfort the poor guilty one, who was
in danger of being entirely overwhelmed by the discipline that had been
exercised towards him by the mass of the Christians; adding, that if the
Christians forgave him his fault, he forgave it likewise. He would not
that Satan should get any advantage through this case to bring in
dissension between himself and the Corinthians; for Paul well knew what
the enemy aimed at, the object with which he made use of this affair.
This gives him occasion to shew how much he had them always in his
heart. Coming to Troas for the gospel, and a wide door being opened to
him, nevertheless he could not remain there, because he had not found
Titus; and he left Troas and continued his journey into Macedonia. It
will be remembered that, instead of passing by the western shores of the
Archipelago, in order to visit Macedonia, taking Corinth on his way, and
then returning by the same route, the apostle had sent Titus with his
first letter, and had gone by way of Asia Minor, or the eastern coast of
the sea, which led him to Troas, where Titus was to meet him. But not
finding him at Troas, and being uneasy with regard to the Corinthians,
he could not be satisfied with there being a work to be done at Troas,
but journeyed on to meet Titus and repaired to Macedonia. There he found
him, as we shall see presently. But this thought of having left Troas
affected him, for in fact it is a serious thing, and painful to the
heart, to miss an opportunity of preaching Christ, and the more so when
people are disposed to receive Him, or at least to hear of Him. To have
left Troas was indeed a proof of his affection for the Corinthians; and
the apostle recalls the circumstance as a strong demonstration of that
affection. He comforts himself for having missed this work of
evangelisation by the thought that after all God led him as in triumph
(not "caused him to triumph"). The gospel which he carried with him, the
testimony of Christ, was like the perfume caused by burning aromatic
drugs in triumphal processions a token of death to some of the captives,
of life to others. And this perfume of the gospel was pure in his hands.
The apostle was not like some who adulterated the wine they furnished;
he laboured in christian integrity before God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 3](co2003.md)

</div>
