<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2009)  [Next](co2011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#001)

The apostle returns to the subject which pre-occupied him his
connections with the Corinthians, and the truth of his apostleship,
which was questioned by those who seduced them, throwing contempt on his
person. He was weak, they said, when present, and his speech
contemptible, though bold when absent (his letters being boastful, but
his bodily presence contemptible). "I beseech you," says the apostle,
"by the meekness and gentleness of Christ \[shewing thus the true
character of his own meekness and humility when among them\] , not to
compel me to be bold among you, as I think of being with regard to some
who pretend that I walk after the flesh." The strength of the war that
he waged against evil was founded on spiritual weapons, with which he
brought down all that exalted itself against the knowledge of God. This
is the principle on which he acted, to seek to bring to obedience all
who hearkened to God, and then severity to all disobedience, when once
obedience should be fully established, and those who would hearken were
restored to order. Precious principle! the power and the guidance of the
Spirit acting in full, and with all patience, to restore to order, and
to a walk worthy of God; carrying the remonstrances of grace to the
utmost, until all those who would hearken to them and willingly obey God
were restored; and then to assert divine authority in judgment and
discipline, with the weight which was added to the apostolic action by
the conscience and common action of all those who had been brought back
to obedience. Observe, that the apostle refers to his personal authority
as an apostle; but that he uses it in patience (for he possessed it for
the purpose of edification and not for destruction) in order to bring
back to obedience and uprightness all those who would hearken; and thus,
preserving christian unity in holiness, he clothes the apostolic
authority with the power of the universal conscience of the assembly,
guided by the Spirit, so far as there was a conscience at work. He then
declares that such as he is in his letters, such shall they find him
when he is present; and he contrasts the conduct of those who took
advantage of his labours, beguiling a people who had already become
Christians, in order to stir them up against him, with his own conduct
in going where Christ had not yet been known, seeking to bring souls to
the knowledge of a Saviour of whom they were ignorant. Also he hoped
that, when he visited the Corinthians, his ministry would be enlarged
among them by their increase of faith, in order that he might go on
beyond them to evangelise regions that still lay in darkness. But he who
gloried, let him glory in the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 11](co2011)

</div>
