<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2010)  [Next](co2012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001)

In Chapter 11, jealous with regard to his beloved Corinthians with a
godly jealousy, he carries yet further his arguments relating to false
teachers. He asks the faithful in Corinth to bear with him a little,
while he acts like a fool in speaking of himself. He had espoused them
as a chaste virgin to Christ, and he feared lest any should corrupt
their minds, leading them away from the simplicity that is in Him. If
the Corinthians had received another Christ from the teachers lately
come among them, or another Spirit, or another gospel, they might well
bear with what these teachers did. But certainly the apostle had not
been a whit behind in his instructions, even if they compared him with
the most renowned of the apostles. Had he wronged them by receiving
nothing at their hands (as these new teachers boasted of doing), and in
taking money from other assemblies, and never being a burden to them? a
subject for boasting, of which no one should deprive him in the regions
of Achaia. Had he refused to take anything from them because he loved
them not? God knew No; it was to deprive the false teachers of a means
of commending themselves to them by labouring gratuitously among them,
while the apostle received money. He would deprive them of this boast,
for they were false apostles. As Satan transformed himself into an angel
of light, so his instruments made themselves ministers of righteousness.
But again let them bear with him while he spoke as a fool in speaking of
himself. If these ministers of Satan accredited themselves as Jews, as
of the ancient religion of God, consecrated by its antiquity and its
traditions, he could do as much, a Hebrew of the Hebrews, and possessing
all the titles to glory of which they boasted. And if it was a question
of christian service to speak as a fool certainly the comparison would
not fail to shew where the devotedness had been. Here in fact God has
allowed this invasion of the apostle's work by these wretched judaising
men (calling themselves Christians) to be the means of acquainting us
with something of the indefatigable labours of the apostle, carried on
in a thousand circumstances of which we have no account. In the Acts God
has given us the history of the establishment of the assembly in the
great principles on which it was founded, and the phases through which
it passed on coming out of Judaism. The apostle will have his own reward
in the kingdom of glory, not by speaking of it among men. Nevertheless
it is profitable for our faith to have some knowledge of christian
devotedness, as it was manifested in the life of the apostle. The folly
of the Corinthians has been the means of furnishing us with a little
glimpse of it. Troubles and dangers without, incessant anxieties within,
a courage that quailed before no peril, a love for poor sinners and for
the assembly that nothing chilled these few lines sketch the picture of
a life of such absolute devotedness that it touches the coldest heart;
it makes us fee\] all our selfishness, and bend the knee before Him who
was the living source of the blessed apostle's devotedness, before Him
whose glory inspired it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 12](co2012)

</div>
