<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Colossians Index](col)  
  [Previous](col003)  [Next](th1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#001)

It will be observed how the apostle consequently introduces Christ into
them, and especially in regard to those who are subject in them, wives
and children; in order to sanctify, by so exalted a motive, the
obediencesuited to their position. He does this still more where the tie
is not of nature but one which has its origin in a sinful world and from
sin itself-that between slaves and their masters. Grace does not set
itself to change the state of the world and of society, but to lead
souls to heaven by renewing them after the image of God. I doubt not
that it has very much altered for the better the social condition of
man; because, through bringing the conscience immediately before the
only true God whom it has revealed in His own perfections, and
establishing by its authority that of the natural relationships in the
human family, grace has had its effect upon that conscience even where
the heart was not converted, and has furnished it with a rule in that
which regards morality. But Christianity, as to its own doctrine, treats
the world as alienated from God, and lying in evil man as the child of
wrath, and lost.

Christ, the Son of God (who if He had been received could have put all
things right, and who will hereafter by His kingdom establish
righteousness and peace), was rejected by the world, and the friendship
of the world is enmity against God. The state of man is treated in the
gospel in a deeper way than in regard to his social condition. It is
viewed with reference to the soul's connection with God, and
consequently with that which is eternal. God imparts a new life unto us,
in order that we may enjoy those new relationships with Himself which
redemption has gained for us. Now as Christ, while living, was the
expression of the love and the omnipotent goodness of God in the midst
of a fallen creation, so, being now rejected by the world (which thus
condemned itself), Christ, who dwells by His grace in the heart of one
who has received life, becomes to that heart a source of happiness in
communion with the love of God, which lifts it up and sets it above
circumstances, be they what they may. The slave, in possessing Christ,
is free in heart; he is the freed man of God Himself. The master knows
that he himself has a Master, and the relationship in which he finds
himself takes the form of the grace and love that reigns in the heart of
him who in it exercises his authority.

But, as I have said, to the poor slave Christ is especially presented as
a resource. He may serve his master, whether a good or bad one, with
faithfulness, meekness, and devotedness; because in so doing he serves
the Lord Himself, and is conscious that he does so. He will have his
reward there where nothing is forgotten that is done to glorify Christ,
and where masters and slaves are all before Him who has no respect of
persons.

Two principles act in the heart of the Christian slave: his conscience
in all his conduct is before God; the fear of God governs him, and not
his master's eye. And he is conscious of his relationship to Christ, of
the presence of Christ, which sustains and lifts him above everything.
It is a secret which nothing can take from him, and which has power over
everything because it is within and on high Christ in him, the hope of
glory. Yes, how admirably does the know ledge of Christ exalt everything
that it pervades; and with what consoling power does it descend into all
that is desolate and cast down, all that groans, all that is humbled in
this world of sin!

Three times in these two Verses, while holding their conscience in the
presence of God the apostle brings in the Lord, the Lord Christ, to fill
the hearts of these poor slaves, and make them feel who it was to whom
they rendered service. Such is Christianity.

The apostle ends his epistle with some important general exhortations.

He desires that the saints should continue through prayer in communion
with God, and in the sense of their dependence on Him, conscious of His
nearness to them, and of His readiness to hear them. For that which
speaks to the heart for our walk is not enough; the soul must know it's
own relations with God exercising itself in those relations; and it must
receive directly from Him that which assures it of His love. There must
be perseverance in this. We are in conflict with evil, which has a hold
upon our own hearts if we are without the strength of God. We must
therefore commune with God. We must watch therein with settled purpose
of heart, not merely as an occasional thing: any one can cry out when he
is in need. But the heart separated from the world and all that is of it
occupies itself with God, with all that regards the glory of His name,
according to the measure in which we are concerned in it. The conflict
is carried on with a tender and freed spirit, having only His glory as
the object, both in the assembly and in the individual walk. But thus
one understands that God works and that He does not forsake us, and
thanksgiving is always mingled with the prayers we address to Him.

Paul felt his dependence on this blessing, and he asked for a share also
in their prayers, that God might open his mouth, and that he might
proclaim the gospel as he ought to do.

Now we are in a hostile world, in which hostility is easily awakened
where it does not already exist openly, and in which offence is quickly
taken at things wherein perhaps we neither saw nor intended evil. We
must take away the occasion even from those that seek it, and walk in
wisdom with respect to them that are without.

How clearly the within and the without are here distinguished! Those
within, whom God acknowledges, His family, His assembly they are His
own. Those without, they are the world, those who are not joined to the
Lord. The distinction is plainly marked, but love is active towards them
that are without, and, being itself in the enjoyment of communion with
God, it is careful to do nothing that might prevent others from enjoying
it.

But there was something more: they were to redeem the time. The natural
man, taken up with his own affairs, and disinclined to serious things,
gave Christian love little opportunity to set grace and truth before him
and make him care for his own soul, thus serving the Lord and using time
in His name. The heart of man cannot always escape the influence of
surrounding circumstances, which bear witness to his heart and
conscience that he is under the dominion of sin, and already eating its
bitter fruits here below circumstances which bring to his conscience the
remembrance of a too-much forgotten God, which speak with the mighty
voice of sorrow to a broken heart, glad at least to have a resource in
God when his hand is pierced by the broken reed on which he leaned. God
Himself acts upon man by these circumstances, and by every circumstance
of life. One who is walking with the Lord knows how to avail himself of
them. Satan may indeed deceive a man, but he cannot prevent God at all
times from speaking to the heart. It is a happy thing so to walk with
God that He can use us as His voice, when He would thus speak to poor
sinners. Our speech ought always to be the expression of the separation
from evil, this power of the presence of God which keeps us inwardly
apart from it, so as to make that power felt by others; and that, in all
the questionings which arise in the heart of man, wandering out of the
way in confusion and darkness, and even leading others astray thereby,
we may know how to give an answer which comes from the light and conveys
light.

Tychicus was to carry the testimony of the interest which the apostle
took in the welfare of the Colossians, and of his confidence in their
interest in him, Paul bears witness to the love of others, and to their
concern also in the progress of the gospel and the prosperity of the
faithful.

Marcus, who had formerly drawn back from the toils of the work, receives
a testimony here on the apostle's part and a still better one later
([Ti2 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011)), forhe had made himself
useful to the apostles himself. Such is grace, The secret of the
interest Barnabas took in him comes out here: he was nearly related to
him, This dear servant of God was from Cyprus too. He went there and
took Mark with him, The flesh and Judaism find their way everywhere. The
poser of the Spirit of God is requisite to raise us above, and set us
beyond, their influence.

Demas receives no especial testimony. The apostle conveys his greetings,
but is silent as to himself. Only in the Epistle to Philemon is he named
as a fellow-laborer of the apostle. Afterwards he forsook Paul. He was a
brother: the apostles admits his claim but says nothing; had had nothing
to say. "And Demas," for Paul's style is terribly cold.

We may observe that the Epistle to the Ephesians was written at the same
time, and sent by this same Tychicus. The one "from Laodecia" is, I
doubt not, one that they were to receive from that assembly, written by
Paul, and by which the saints at Colosse were to profit; possibly the
Epistle to the Ephesians, which he may have had communicated to the
Laodiceans. Be this as it may, all that is said is that it was one of
which the assembly at Laodicea were in possession and by no means that
it was directly addressed to them; rather the contrary. It is very
possible that a letter, or a hundred letters, may have been written by
Paul to others, which it was not in the purposes of God to preserve for
the universal assembly: but here there is no proof that a letter had
been written to the Laodecians. Tychicus was the bearer of two; he may
have been the bearer of three, one of which differed only in some
details of application which might serve to confirm the Colossians
without being in the main another Divine communication for other days;
but, I repeat, it does not appear to be so from that which is said here.
It might be said, a letter "from Laodicea," because it was there instead
of a letter to Laodicea; but it is not the usual mode of expression. We
have seen that the letter to the Ephesians is another communication of
the Spirit of God. It has been preserved for us. We do not know whether
that from Laodicea was the same communicated by them to the Christians
of that city; or another, which they were to send to the Colossians (an
assembly in their vicinity), and which adding nothing to the divine
relations has not been preserved for us.

It appears that Christians were not very numerous at Laodicea. The
apostle salutes the brethren there. There were some who assembled in the
house of one Nymphas; they were not in a case to have a letter addressed
to them in particular: still the apostle does not forget them. But that
which he says here is an almost certain proof that the apostle had not
addressed any epistle to them. He would not have sent greetings through
the Colossians to the brethren in Laodicea, if at the same time he had
written a special epistle to the latter. The case is plain enough: there
were brethren at Laodicea, but not in great numbers and not in that
distinct position which gave rise to an epistle. But this little
assembly in the house of Nymphas was not to be forgotten; it should
profit by the epistles addressed to other assemblies more considerable
than itself, and whose condition required an epistle, or gave occasion
to write one, which epistles were transmitted to Laodicea, according to
the apostle's order.

With regard to the Epistle to the Colossians, it is not a supposition.
The apostle commands them expressly to have it read in the assembly at
Laodicea. The latter had also received another epistle from some other
assembly, and the Colossians were to profit by it in the same manner.
The two assemblies, which were near each other, were mutually to enjoy
the spiritual favors that were granted them.

The apostle does not forget individuals even. Archippus receives a
solemn exhortation to take heed to the ministry which the Lord had
committed to him, and to fulfill his service. The apostle had not seen
these assemblies. ([Col 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001))

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Introduction](th1000)

</div>
