<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Daniel Index](dan.md)  
  [Previous](dan004)  [Next](dan006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001.md)

In chapter 5 the iniquity of the head of the Gentiles with respect to
the God of Israel reaches the highest point, and assumes that character
of insolence and contempt which is but the effort of weakness to conceal
itself. In the midst of the orgies of a great feast to his lords and
courtiers Belshazzar causes the vessels of the temple of God, which
Nebuchadnezzar had taken away from Jerusalem, to be brought, that he and
his guests might drink therein; and he praises the gods of gold and of
silver and of stone. The madness of the king puts the question between
the false gods and Jehovah the God of Israel. Jehovah decides the
question that very night by the destruction of the king and of all his
glory. The warning which God gives him is interpreted by Daniel. But,
although subject to the king, Daniel does not treat him with the same
respect that he had for Nebuchadnezzar. Belshazzar had taken the place
of an insolent enemy to Jehovah, and Daniel answers him according to
God's revelations of his doom, and to the ostentatious manifestation
which the king made of his iniquity, magnifying his own gods and
insulting Jehovah. Accordingly the warning was no longer remedial and
left no room for repentance. It announced judgment; and the very
annunciation sufficed to destroy all the insolence of the impious king.
For he had neglected the warning given him by the history of
Nebuchadnezzar. This narrative gives us the last character of the
iniquity of the sovereign power of the Gentiles, in opposition to the
God of Israel, and the judgment which falls in consequence upon the
monarchy of which Babylon was the head, and to which Babylon had given
its own character. For, whatever may have been the longsuffering of God,
and His dealings in other respects towards the monarchy of the Gentiles,
as the power to which He committed authority in the world, all was
already lost for these empires, even in the days of Babylon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 6](dan006.md)

</div>
