<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan009)  [Next](dan011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 10 and 11.

In chapter 10 we return to the East \[See Note \#1\]. Chapters 10, 11
and 12 form but one prophecy; only chapter 11 closes the history of the
Gentiles, and chapter 12, as we remarked at the beginning, is occupied
with the condition of the remnant during the last period of the Gentile
power, and with their deliverance (concluding thus the revelation of
God's mind with respect to the remnant who are preserved in the midst of
the Gentiles). Daniel, ever intent on the welfare of his people, made
supplication ([Dan 10:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002); [Dan
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012)) to God, with a renewed and a
persevering desire to understand His dealings. After three weeks of
fasting and prayer an angel is sent to him, revealing the opposition of
the enemies of God's glory to the accomplishment of His purposes of
favour to His people, and to the communication of these purposes for
their encouragement. But if faith is exercised, God is faithful; and the
perseverance of Daniel puts him morally in a condition to appreciate the
communications of God, being a proof of his fitness to receive them. The
angel informs him that the vision has reference to the Jews, and that it
belongs to the latter days ([Dan
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014)). The strength which is given
him enables him to receive the communication. The kings of Persia, under
whose reign he received the vision, are enumerated; and the attack on
Greece by one amongst them is announced. This gives rise to an attack on
Persia by Greece; and the Greek empire is established; but it is
afterwards divided into four parts. Two of these four monarchies shall
be more powerful than the others. They are also territorially in
relation with the Jews. It is on the territory of the latter that their
wars are carried on. The history of the kings of these two monarchies,
thus in conflict on the territory of Israel, is given with considerable
detail under the names of king of the north and king of the south. I do
not enter into these details.

The history is carried on until the intervention of the Romans, the
ships from the coast of Chittim \[See Note \#2\], and the attack upon
the Jews, and the temple, and the holy covenant. The king of the north
allies himself with the apostate Jews; he pollutes the sanctuary, and
sets up an idol; he takes away the daily sacrifice; he leads the wicked
into apostasy (this is the force of the expression in [Dan
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#032)). But they who know God shall be
strong, and shall act with energy. They who understand, being taught of
God, shall instruct the many. Thus far is the succession of the first
kings, and the history of the Maccabees, and of Antiochus Epiphanes. The
result, on to the end, is then given in general terms-the last part of
the preceding history being a type of what shall happen in the last
days. The people again fall for a time under the hands of their enemies.
They shall be helped a little: some shall cleave to them with
flatteries. A few even of those who understand, who might have been
expected to be preserved providentially by God, will also fall by
violence, to try the faith of all, and purge them, until the time of the
end. For this state of things is to continue until the period appointed
by God. It is the condition of the Jews, especially in those days, that
is, of the Seleucidae and Lagida, kings of north and south, and in
general, until the last days.

Some observations on the details may here be of use to the reader. In
[Dan 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027); [Dan
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#033); [Dan
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003), the word translated "many" has
the article in Hebrew, and signifies the mass of the people, which makes
the force of these Verses much more simple. The reader will also remark,
in contrast with the masses ([Dan
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#033)), "the Maschilim," a word found
in the titles of many of the Psalms. They that understand, they that are
taught of God, shall instruct the many: there will be the activity of
love for the truth in these times of trial. In [Dan
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003), we have again those that
understand associated with those that instruct the many in
righteousness. Compare [Dan 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#033).
They become victims, in [Dan 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#035), to
violence. This last Verse reaches, as we have seen, to the end of this
people's history, while under the dominion of the Gentiles. But more
positive details are given with respect to the end. The king \[See Note
\#3\] is introduced-the wicked one who will exercise power in Judea at
the end of the age; and will prosper until the indignation comes to an
end-a period of which we have already spoken. It is a king who acts in
the land of Judea; one of an impious character, and who follows his own
unbridled will, exalting himself above all, forsaking the religion of
his fathers, regarding neither Christ nor any God, blaspheming the God
of heaven, and establishing idolatry; but in a way of his own; "he shall
cause them to rule over the many, and shall divide the land for a
reward." It is rather difficult to say who these are that he will cause
to rule-I apprehend his followers; but the general character of this
self-willed, impious, and idolatrous king who magnifies himself above
all, is sufficiently plain. We find, as the chapter goes on, that the
king of the south pushes at him, and the king of the north comes against
him like a whirlwind, overflows and passes over and enters into the land
of delight, Judea. But Edom, Moab, and Ammon escape his power, being
reserved ([Isa 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014)) to be subdued by
Israel itself. But he stretches out his hand over the countries and
pillages them. Egypt does not escape, and they who dwell in Africa are
at his feet. But, disturbed by tidings from the east and north, he sets
up his tabernacles between Jerusalem \[See Note \#4\] and the sea, and
comes to his end, with none to help him. The end of the king is not
given here. It is the end of the king of the north, the subject here
being the nations and the land of Israel, and that which shall happen to
the people of Daniel in the last days. In the land there will be the
wicked and impious king, who shall be attacked by the king of the south.
The king of the north then pillages all the countries round, with the
exception of three, and he perishes in the land of Israel.

Note \#1

It may be remarked that in both cases the revelation given to Daniel, as
to his people, is in reply to his exercises of heart in intercession or
fasting; the revelations in chapters 7, 8 as to the western or eastern
destroying powers are not. They are given when God pleases. These were
in the time of Belshazzar; the two former, after Babylon was taken The
Jews were then really in a new position till Christ was rejected, and
then the great forsaking came, when time does not count till they are in
their own land, and God begins to deal with them again. Then, after the
display of their unbelief in receiving the power of evil and in idolatry
the last grand tribulation comes, and then judgment in the Person of the
Lord from heaven.

Note \#2

The intervention of these in favour of the young king of Egypt, whom
Antiochus Epiphanes had conquered, led to his going back and raging
against the Jews, profaning the temple, and forbidding Jewish worship.

Note \#3

Compare [Isa 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033) (reading "for the
king also") and [Isa 57:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#009). He has the
tide of "the king" in the eyes of the Jews-a title which of right
belongs only to Jesus, the true Messiah and King of Israel.

Note \#4

This is the regular meaning of the Hebrew.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 11](dan011)

</div>
