<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu029)  [Next](deu031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)

We must now dwell a little on this last point. Chapter 30 furnishes us
with an important principle. It supposes that the people have already
incurred the consequences of disobedience, and they are seen as driven
out of the land, and strangers among distant nations. The law could not
be followed out in such a case; and, indeed, the violation of the law
had even then produced its fruits. But then quite a new principle is
introduced: the return of the hearts of the people to Jehovah, and
obedience, one must add, in spirit. Thereupon Jehovah brings them back
into their land, and blesses them in it. The curse is put on their
enemies; and they are to observe in the land the ordinances of Jehovah,
enjoying anew His full blessing; for the commandment was neither in
heaven, nor beyond the seas, but in the mouth and in the heart. This was
not the new covenant, but faith laying hold of the spirit of the law in
principle, and turning the heart towards Jehovah, when the law was
externally impracticable.

The establishment of the new covenant, based on this return of the
heart, at a time appointed of God, will be something well defined. Here
we have the principle of their return when under the curse of the law
they had broken. Hence, the apostle quotes this passage for the basis of
the principle, as a testimony given to what righteousness by faith was,
applying it to Christ Himself-the return of the heart to the object and
end of the law, when judgment was on them for its violation, and hope of
righteousness by its accomplishment impossible-how Christ was the end of
the law for righteousness. The principle is found here. The apostle
brings in Christ as the true accomplishment of it. At the end of the
chapter, Moses declares that he has now set before them the good and the
evil, and that they would have to bear the consequence of their choice.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 31](deu031)

</div>
