<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu001)  [Next](deu003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 1, 2, 3, and 4.

Let us examine a little more closely these chapters, which shew the
pains the Spirit took, to set before the eyes of the people all the
motives which could induce them to walk faithfully in the career which
now lay before them.

He begins with the narrative of what had occurred since the sojourn of
the children of Israel at Sinai; and Moses reminds them of the
commandment to leave that place and to go to the mount of the Amorites,
\[See Note \#1\] to go up and possess the land. They get there, and,
discouraged by the spies, they will not go up; then, trying to do so
without God, they are smitten before their enemies. Passing by the
borders of Esau and Moab, God gives them the land of Sihon and of Og. We
learn too here that, though sanctioned by God, the sending the spies was
the effect of unbelief among the people-an instructive lesson. God may
allow, and so far sanction a course, wise humanly, in His ways-His
government, which yet bears the fruit of the unbelief which is at the
root of it. In a word, Moses recalls to them, in general, what had taken
place in the journey which led to their entrance into the land of which
they are to take possession-the patience and the goodness of God.

In reminding them of Horeb, he insists on the privilege they had enjoyed
in nearness to God, who Himself had spoken to them out of the midst of
the fire, when they saw no similitude; on the authority of the word-its
majesty-excluding thus all thought of idolatry. He shews them that all
that were of full age had perished, as a consequence of their unbelief;
that he himself could not enter into that good land; that God is a
jealous God, a consuming fire; and that, if they made any graven image,
they would utterly perish from off the land they were about to enter,
and would be scattered amongst the nations and-left to serve the gods
they had loved; that, nevertheless, they should find God if they sought
Him with all their heart, for He is a merciful God, who would not
forsake them; that if Sinai had been the brightness of His majesty, it
was also true that such a God of majesty had never vouchsafed to come so
near to a people, elect and chosen for their fathers' sakes. Such is the
basis of the government of this people.

Moses sets apart three cities of refuge, as a token of possession, on
the part of God, of what was on this side Jordan. These four chapters
are introductory.

Note \#1

It is interesting to put together the second and third verses. For an
eleven days' journey Israel took forty years. Alas! how often is it thus
with us, owing to our unfaithfulness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 3](deu003)

</div>
