<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu026)  [Next](deu028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)

Now comes the sanction-that is to say, that which gives vigour to His
law-in the consequences (blessings and curses) which were to correspond
with obedience or disobedience. This is brought out in chapter 27 and
two following chapters. Chapter 27 is by itself, however, and is of
rather wide scope in the understanding of the word of God. If individual
piety expressed itself in the manner we have seen in the preceding
chapter, the public relations of the people with God were based on the
threats of the law. When the people should have gone over Jordan to take
possession of the land of promise (an idea which constantly presents
itself), having set up great stones and plastered them with plaster,
they were to write the law upon them. This law contained the conditions
on which the land was to be enjoyed.

The people were to divide themselves into two companies of tribes, part
being placed upon Mount Gerizim to bless, the other upon Ebal to curse.
Upon the latter was an altar to be erected to Jehovah, not for
sin-offerings, but for burnt-offerings and peace-offerings: a worship
pre-supposing a righteous people in communion with Jehovah, but placed
under the curse if they should break the law. The announcement of the
curses follows, ending with that curse which would rest on every one,
not continuing in all the things which were written in the book of the
law to do them. But the blessings of Gerizim are entirely omitted. It is
needless to insist upon the importance of this blank. The apostle seizes
on it as the place of all under the law. "As many as are of the works of
the law \[See Note \#1\] are under the curse," says the apostle: "for it
is written, Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which
are written in the book of the law." There is no possibility of escape.
No one, except the Lord Jesus, has accomplished it; and He, if one may
so speak, did not raise an altar for burnt-offering, an altar of worship
for a righteous man who had fulfilled the law-for Himself alone; but He
offered Himself for us on that mountain of cursing as an offering for
sin, and has thus silenced for ever all those threats and curses. The
blessing of Gerizim, consequently, is not sufficient either. Heaven,
and, moreover, for Him, the Father's throne, are the only worthy answer
and reward for what He has accomplished by suffering for our sins. But
this is the righteousness of God, giving to Christ, and so consequently
to us, what He was fully entitled to in having glorified God, and to us
what He has obtained for us.

The connection between the principles of chapter 26 and those of chapter
27 is deeply interesting: the fulfilment of the promise in the enjoyment
of the land, the basis of thanksgivings and of the worship which has its
source in redemption; afterwards the altar, the service to be rendered
to God, a service linked to His law, the violation of which, in a single
point, brought the curse. This was the condition of their enjoyment of
it. It is in that point of view, the only one which went to the root of
the question, that the apostle looks at it. It is on the ground of this
covenant of Deuteronomy that the people became the people of Jehovah on
their entering the land (compare [Deu
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#002); [Deu
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#010); and [Deu
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)).

Note \#1

This expression does not contemplate the conduct, but the principle on
which we stand before God. Those who are of faith are linked with
faithful Abraham; those that are of the works of the law are under the
curse, for the law saith, "Cursed," etc.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 28](deu028)

</div>
