<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu031)  [Next](deu033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)

We have the prophetic song, which is based on the foreknown fall of the
people. First, it declares the perfectness of Jehovah, whatever may take
place; it is Israel who have corrupted themselves (compare [Psa
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#003). Christ can say, "Why?") At the
same time ([Deu 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008)) we have an
all-important declaration; namely, that God, in His government of the
world, had made Israel the centre, and had arranged the nations of the
earth, in their various localities, as having respect to the bounds of
Israel as being the first object of those ways. For His earthly people
are Jehovah's portion, His inheritance upon earth. But Jeshurun (Israel)
waxed fat, and kicked, and forsook the Rock of his strength.
Consequently God moves them to jealousy with those that are not a
people. It is the call of the Gentiles, according to [Rom
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019).

The judgment, nevertheless, falls upon Israel, so that God would have
destroyed them, had not the glory of His name hindered Him, for the
Gentiles proved themselves perfectly wicked. Then, the people being
distressed, without strength and without hope, He remembers them, and
finally takes vengeance on their enemies, those idolatrous Gentiles.
But, though avenging Himself, it is then that, having restored His
people Israel, He will cause the Gentiles to rejoice in Him.

This principle is true already; but the testimony it furnishes will be
fully accomplished when Israel is again restored to the enjoyment of the
promises; when God will manifest His mercy towards His land, as well as
towards His people. The whole course of His dealings, in respect of the
people who form the centre of His ways upon earth, is thus fully brought
out. Afterwards, Moses puts obedience (the great end of this book,
Israel being placed under the condition of obedience for continuance in
the enjoyment of the promises) before them again, and reminds them that
thereby they would prolong their days in the land which they were going
up to possess.

At last poor Moses has to go up Mount Nebo, to see the land into which
he cannot enter, not having answered the requirement of the glory of God
in the wilderness, nor sanctified His name by faith. It is the
unavoidable consequence of the just government of God towards a
servant-I mean under the law. He does not get into the enjoyment of the
promise. A single fault deprives him of it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 33](deu033)

</div>
