<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](eph001)  [Next](eph003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001)

In Chapter 2 \[See Note \#4\] the operation of the power of God on
earth, for the purpose of bringing souls into the enjoyment of their
heavenly privileges, and thus of forming the assembly here below, is
presented, rather than the unfolding of the privileges themselves, and
consequently that of the counsels of God. It is not even these counsels;
it is the grace and the power which work for their fulfilment, by
leading souls to the result which this power will produce according to
those counsels. Christ is first seen, not as God come down here and
presented to sinners, but as dead, that is, where we were by sin, but
raised from it by power. He for sin had died; God had raised Him from
the dead, and set Him at His own right hand. We were dead in our
trespasses and sins: He has quickened us together with Him. But as it is
the earth that is in question, and the operation of power and grace on
the earth, the Spirit naturally speaks of the condition of those in whom
this grace works, in fact of the condition of all. At the same time, in
the earthly forms of religion, in the system that existed on earth,
there were those who were nigh and those who were far off. Now we have
seen that in the full blessing of which the apostle speaks the nature of
God Himself is concerned; in view of which, and to glorify which, all
His counsels were settled. Therefore outward forms, although some of
them had been established provisionally on the earth by God's own
authority, could now have no value. They had served for the
manifestation of the ways of God as shadows of things to come, and had
been connected with the display of God's authority on earth among men,
maintaining some knowledge of God important things in their place; but
these figures could do nothing as to bringing souls into relationship
with God, in order to enjoy the eternal manifestation of His nature, in
hearts made capable of it by grace, through their participation in that
nature and reflecting it. For this, these figures were utterly
worthless; they were not the manifestation of these eternal principles.
But the two classes of man, Jews and Gentles, were there; and the
apostle speaks of them both. Grace takes up persons from both to form
one body, one new man, by a new creation in Christ.

In the first two Verses of this Chapter ([Eph
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001)) he speaks of those who were
brought out from among the nations that knew not God Gentiles, as they
are usually called. In Verse 3 ([Eph
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003)) he speaks of the Jews "We all
also," he says. He does not enter here into the dreadful details
contained in Romans 3, \[See Note \#5\] because his object is not to
convince the individual, in order to shew him the means of
justification, but to set forth the counsels of God in grace. Here then
he speaks of the distance from God in which man is found under the power
of darkness. With regard to the nations, he speaks of the universal
condition of the world. The whole course of the world, the entire
system, was according to the prince of the power of the air; the world
itself was under the government of him who worked in the hearts of the
children of disobedience, who in self-will evaded the government of God,
although they could not evade His judgment.

If the Jews had external privileges; if they were not in a direct way
under the government of the prince of this world (as was the case with
the nations that were plunged in idolatry, and sunk in all the
degradation of that system in which man wallowed, in the licentiousness
into which demons delighted to plunge him in derision of his wisdom); if
the Jews were not, like the Gentiles, under the government of demons,
nevertheless in their nature they were led by the same desires as those
by which demons influenced the poor heathen. The Jews led the same life
as to the desires of the flesh; they were children of wrath, even as
others, for that is the condition of men; they are in their nature the
children of wrath. In their outward privileges the Israelites were the
people of God; by nature they were men as others. And remark here these
words, "by nature." The Spirit is not speaking here of a judgment
pronounced on the part of God, nor of sins committed, nor of Israel
having failed in their relationship to God through falling into idolatry
and rebellion, nor even of their having rejected the Messiah and so
deprived themselves of all resource all of which Israel had done.
Neither does He speak of a positive judgment from God pronounced on the
manifestation of sin. They were, even as all men, in their nature the
children of wrath. This wrath was the natural consequence of the state
in which they were \[See Note \#6\] Man as he was, Jew or Gentile, and
wrath, naturally went together, even as there is a natural link between
good and righteousness. Now God, though in judgment taking cognisance of
all that is contrary to His will and glory, in His own nature is above
all that. To those who are worthy of wrath He can be rich in mercy, for
He is so in Himself. The apostle therefore presents Him here as acting
according to His own nature towards the objects of His grace. We were
dead, says the apostle dead in our trespasses and sins. God comes, in
His love, to deliver us by His power "God, who is rich in mercy,
according to his great love wherewith he loved us." There was no good
working in us: we were dead in our trespasses and sins. The movement
came from Him, praised be His name! He has quickened us; not only that
He has quickened us together with Christ. He had not said in a direct
way, that Christ had been quickened, although it may be said, where the
power of the Spirit in Himself is spoken of. He was however raised from
the dead; and, when we are in question, we are told that all the energy
by which He came forth from death is employed also for our quickening;
and not only that; even in being quickened we are associated with Him.
He comes forth from death we come forth with Him. God has imparted this
life to us. It is His pure grace, and a grace that has saved us, that
found us dead in sins, and brought us out of death even as Christ came
out of it, and by the same power, and brought us out with Him by the
power of life in resurrection with Christ, \[See Note \#7\] to set us in
the light and in the favour of God, as a new creation, even as Christ
Himself is there. Jews and Gentiles are found together in the same new
position in Christ. Resurrection has put an end to all those
distinctions; they have no place in a risen Christ. God has quickened
the one and the other with Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 3](eph003)

</div>
