<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ephesians Index](eph.md)  
  [Previous](gal006)  [Next](eph001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001.md)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Ephesians

The epistle to the Ephesians gives us the richest exposition of the
blessings of the saints individually, and of the assembly, setting
forth, at the same time, the counsels of God with regard to the glory of
Christ. Christ Himself is viewed as the One who is to hold all things
united in one under His hand, as Head of the assembly. We see the
assembly placed in the most intimate relationship with Him, as those who
compose it are with the Father Himself, and in the heavenly position
dispensed to her by the sovereign grace of God. Now these ways of grace
to her reveal God Himself, and in two distinct characters; as well in
connection with Christ as with Christians. He is the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. He is the God of Christ, when Christ is looked at
as man; the Father of Christ when Christ is looked at as the Son of His
love. In the first character, the nature of God is revealed; in the
second, we see the intimate relationship which we enjoy to Him who bears
this character of Father, and that according to the excellence of
Christ's own relationship to Him. It is this relationship to the Father,
as well as that in which we stand to Christ as His body and His bride,
that is the source of blessing to the saints and to the assembly of God,
of which grace has made us members as a whole.

The form even of the epistle shews how much the apostle's mind was
filled with the sense of the blessing that belongs to the assembly.
After having wished grace and peace to the saints and the faithful \[See
Note \#1\] at Ephesus from God, the Father of true Christians, and from
Jesus Christ their Lord, he begins at once to speak of the blessings in
which all the members of Christ participate. His heart was full of the
immensity of grace; and nothing in the state of the Ephesian Christians
required any particular remarks adapted to that state. It is nearness of
heart to God that produces simplicity, and that enables us in simplicity
to enjoy the blessings of God as God Himself bestows them, as they flow
from His heart, in all their own excellence to enjoy them in connection
with Him who imparts them, and not merely in a mode adapted to the state
of those to whom they are imparted; or through a communication that only
reveals a part of these blessings, because the soul would not be able to
receive more. Yes, when near to God, we are in simplicity, and the whole
extent of His grace and of our blessings unfolds itself as it is found
in Him.

It is important to remark two things here in passing: first, that moral
nearness to God, and communion with Him, is the only means of any true
enlargement in the knowledge of His ways and of the blessings which He
imparts to His children, because it is the only position in which we can
perceive them, or be morally capable of so doing; and, also, that all
conduct which is not suitable to this nearness to God, all levity of
thought, which His presence does not admit of, makes us lose these
communications from Him and renders us incapable of receiving them.
(Compare [Joh 14:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021).md). Secondly, it
is not that the Lord forsakes us on account of these faults or this
carelessness; He intercedes for us, and we experience His grace, but it
is no longer communion or intelligent progress in the riches of the
revelation of Himself, of the fulness which is in Christ. It is grace
adapted to our wants, an answer to our misery. Jesus stretches out His
hand to us according to the need that we feel need produced in our
hearts by the operation of the Holy Ghost. This is infinitely precious
grace, a sweet experience of His faithfulness and love: we learn by this
means to discern good and evil by judging self; but the grace had to be
adapted to our wants, and to receive a character according to those
wants, as an answer made to them; we have had to think of ourselves.

In a case like this the Holy Ghost occupies us with ourselves (in grace,
no doubt), and when we have lost communion with God, we cannot neglect
this turning back upon ourselves without deceiving and hardening
ourselves. Alas! the dealings of many souls with Christ hardly go beyond
this character. It is with all too often the case. In a word, when this
happens the thought of sin having been admitted into the heart, our
dealings with the Lord to be true must be on the ground of this sad
admission of sin (in thought, at least). It is grace alone which allows
us again to have to do with God. The fact that He restores us enhances
His grace in our eyes; but this is not communion. When we walk with God,
when we walk after the Spirit without grieving Him, He maintains us in
communion, in the enjoyment of God, the positive source of joy of an
everlasting joy. This is a position in which He can occupy us as being
ourselves interested in all that interests Him with all the development
of His counsels, His glory, and His goodness, in the Person of Jesus the
Christ, Jesus the Son of His love; and the heart is enlarged in the
measure of the objects that occupy it. This is our normal condition.
This, in the main, was the case with the Ephesians.

We have already remarked, that Paul was specially gifted of God to
communicate His counsels and His ways in Christ; as John was gifted to
reveal His character and life as it was manifested in Jesus. The result
of this particular gift in our apostle is naturally found in the epistle
we are considering. Nevertheless we, as being ourselves in Christ, find
in it a remarkable development of our relationships with God, of the
intimacy of those relationships, and of the effect of that intimacy.
Christ is the foundation on which our blessings are built. It is as
being in Him that we enjoy them. We thus become the actual and present
object of the favour of God the Father, even as Christ Himself is its
object. The Father has given us to Him; Christ has died for us, has
redeemed, washed, and quickened us, and presents us, according to the
efficacy of His work, and according to the acceptance of His Person,
before God His Father. The secret of all the assembly's blessing is,
that it is blessed with Jesus Himself; and thus like Him, viewed as a
man is accepted before God; for the assembly is His body, and enjoys in
Him and by Him all that His Father has bestowed on Him. Individually the
Christian is loved as Christ on earth was loved; he will hereafter share
in the glory of Christ before the eyes of the world, as a proof that he
was so loved, in connection with the name of Father, which God maintains
in regard to this (see [Joh 17:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#023).md).
Hence in general we have in this epistle the believer in Christ, not
Christ in the believer, though that of course be true. It leads up to
the privileges of the believer and of the assembly, more than to the
fulness of Christ Himself, and we find more the contrast of this new
position with what we were as of the world than development of the life
of Christ: this is more largely found in Colossians, which looks more at
Christ in us. But this epistle, setting us in Christ's relationship with
God and the Father, and sitting in heavenly places, gives the highest
character of our testimony here.

Now Christ stands in two relationships with God, His Father. He is a
perfect man before His God; He is a Son with His Father. We are to share
both these relationships. This He announced to His disciples ere He went
back to heaven: it is unfolded in all its extent by the words He spoke,
"I go to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God." This
precious this inappreciable truth is the foundation of the apostle's
teaching in this place. He considered God in this double aspect, as the
God of our Lord Jesus Christ, and as the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and our blessings are in connection with these two titles.

But before attempting to set forth in detail the apostle's thought, let
us remark that he begins here entirely with God, His thoughts and His
counsels, not with what man is. We may lay hold of the truth, so to
speak, by one or the other of two ends by that of the sinner's condition
in connection with man's responsibility, or by that of the thoughts and
eternal counsels of God in view of His own glory. The latter is that
side of the truth on which the Spirit here makes us look. Even
redemption, all glorious as it is in itself, is consigned to the second
place, as the means by which we enjoy the effect of God's counsels.

It was necessary that the ways of God should be considered on this side,
that is, His own thoughts, not merely the means of bringing man into the
enjoyment of the fruit of them. It is the epistle to the Ephesians which
thus presents them to us; as that to the Romans, after saying it is
God's goodness, begins with man's end, demonstrating the evil and
presenting grace as meeting and delivering from it.

Note \#1:

The word translated "faithful" might be rendered "believers." It is used
as a term of superscription both here and in the epistle to the
Colossians. We must remember that the apostle was now in prison, and
that Christianity had been established for some years, and was exposed
to all kinds of attack. To say that one was a believer as at the
beginning, was to say that he was faithful. The word then does not
merely express that they believed, nor that each individual walked
faithfully, but that the apostle addressed himself to those who by grace
faithfully maintained the faith they had received.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 1](eph001.md)

</div>
