<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo031)  [Next](exo033.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001.md)

Whilst God was thus preparing the precious things connected with His
relationship with His people \[See Note \#1\], the people, only thinking
of what they saw in the human instrument of their deliverance,
completely abandon Jehovah: a sad and early, but sure fruit of having
undertaken obedience to the law as a condition, in order to the
enjoyment of the promises. Aaron falls with them.

Such being the state of the people, God tells Moses to go down; and now
everything begins to be put on another footing. God, in His counsels of
grace, has not only seen the people when they were in affliction, but in
their ways. They were a stiff-necked people. He tells Moses to let Him
alone, and that He would destroy them, and make of Moses a great nation.
Moses takes the place of mediator, and, true to his love for the people
as God's people, and to the glory of God in them, with a self-denial
which cared only for this glory, sacrificing every thought of self,
intercedes in that magnificent pleading which appeals to what that glory
necessitates, and to the unconditional promises made to the fathers
\[See Note \#2\]. And Jehovah repented. The character of Moses shines in
all its beauty here, and is remarkable amongst those which the Holy
Ghost has taken pleasure in delineating, according to the precious grace
of God, who loves to describe the exploits of His people, and the fruit
they have borne, though He Himself is the source of them.

But it was all over with the covenant of the law; the first and
fundamental link-that of having no other gods-was broken on the part of
the people. The tables of the covenant never even came into the camp on
the simple ground of law. The people had made a complete separation
between themselves and God. Moses, who had not asked God what was to be
done with the law, comes down. His exercised ear, quick to discern how
matters stood with the people, hears their light and profane joy. Soon
after he sees the golden calf, which had even preceded the tabernacle of
God in the camp, and he breaks the tables at the foot of the mount; and,
zealous on high for the people towards God because of His glory, he is
below on earth zealous for God towards the people because of that same
glory. For faith does more than see that God is glorious (every
reasonable person would own that); it connects the glory of God and His
people, and hence counts on God to bless them in every state of things,
as in the interest of His glory, and insists on holiness in them, at all
cost, in conformity with that glory, that it may not be blasphemed in
those who are identified with it.

Levi, responding to Moses's call, says to his brethren, the children of
his mother, "I have not known you;" and consecrates himself to Jehovah.
Moses now, full of zeal though not according to knowledge, but which was
permitted of God for our instruction, proposes to the people his going
up, and "peradventure" he shall make an atonement for this sin. And he
asks God to blot him out of His book rather than that the people should
not be forgiven. God refuses him; and, while sparing them through his
mediation, and placing them under the government of His patience and
long-suffering, puts each one of them under responsibility to
Himself-that is, under the law, declaring that the soul that sinned He
would blot out of His book.

Thus the mediation of Moses was available for forgiveness, as regards
government, and to put them under a government, the principles of which
we shall see by-and-by; but it was useless as regards any atonement
which would protect them from the final effect of their sin (its effect
as regarded their eternal relationship with God), and withdraw them from
under the judgment of the law \[See Note \#3\]. God spares them and
commands Moses to lead the people to the place of which He had spoken,
and His angel should go before him. What a contrast do we here remark,
in passing, with the work of our precious Saviour! He comes down from
above-from His dwelling-place in the glory of the Father-to do His will,
and did it perfectly; and (instead of destroying the tables, the signs
of this covenant, the requirements of which man was unable to meet), He
Himself bears the penalty of its infringement, bearing its curse; and,
having accomplished the atonement before returning above, instead of
going up with a cheerless "peradventure" in His mouth, which the
holiness of God instantly nullified, He ascends, with the sign of the
accomplishment of the atonement, and of the confirmation of the new
covenant, with His precious blood, the value of which was anything but
doubtful to that God before whom He presented it. Alas! the church has
but too faithfully reflected the conduct of Israel during the absence of
the true Moses, and attributed to providence what she had fashioned with
her own hands, because she would see something.

Note \#1

The tabernacle had a double character. It was the manifestation of the
heavenly things, and a provision for a sinful people to be brought near
again to God there. It is interesting to consider the tabernacle under
another aspect; for, as a pattern of heavenly things, it is of the
highest interest. First, it signifies the heavens themselves; for Christ
is not entered into the tabernacle, but into heaven itself. In a certain
sense, even the universe is the house of God; but, moreover, the unity
of the church as a heavenly building is presented by it: we are His
house, the tabernacle of God in Spirit. These two meanings are closely
connected in the beginning of Hebrews 3-Christ, God, has built all
things, and we are His house. He fills all in all, but He dwells in the
church; it is a concentric circle, although quite different in its
nature. Compare the prayer in Ephesians 1, which also connects these two
things under the headship of Christ, and still more distinctly in
Ephesians 3; Ephesians 1 being headship, not dwelling, though the
relationship be the same. Compare [Eph
4:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004.md), though there it is in the form
of Spirit, Lord, and God, that is, not simply dwelling in. What most
fully answers is the prayer of Ephesians 3, where, note, "height," &c.,
is not of the love, but of the whole scene of God's glory, we being at
the centre to look out into it all, because Christ, who is the centre,
dwells in us. In another point of view, the person and the fulness of
Christ Himself are there; for God was in Him, and thus the rending of
the veil is applied by the apostle to the flesh of Christ, or, if you
please, the veil itself; "through the veil, that is to say, his flesh."
It is evident that the dwelling place of God is the central idea of
these things, just as a man lives in his house, in his property, &c.

Note \#2

This is a universal principle, where the full restoration of Israel is
in question. Solomon, Nehemiah, and Daniel only go back to Moses; an
important remark as to the fulfilment of God's ways toward Israel.

Note \#3

Hence it is that this revelation of God, though the character proclaimed
be so abundant in goodness, is called by the apostle (2 Corinthians 3)
the ministration of death and condemnation. For if the people were still
under the law, the more gracious God was, the more guilty they were.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 33](exo033.md)

</div>
