<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo013)  [Next](exo015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#001.md)

At the Red Sea God acts in power according to the purposes of His love;
consequently the enemy, who was closely pursuing His people, is
destroyed without resource. This is what will happen to the people at
the last day, already in reality-to the eye of God-sheltered through the
blood.

As a moral type, the Red Sea is evidently the death and resurrection of
Jesus, so far as the real effecting of the work goes in its own
efficacy, as deliverance by redemption, and of His people as seen in
Him; God acting in it, to bring them, through death, out of sin and the
flesh, giving absolute deliverance from them by \[See Note \#1\] death,
into which Christ had gone, and consequently from all the power of the
enemy. As to our standing and acceptance we are brought to God: our
actual place is thus in the world, become the wilderness on our way to
glory. We are made partakers of it already through faith. Sheltered from
the judgment of God by the blood, we are delivered, by His power which
acts for us, from the power of Satan, the prince of this world. The
blood keeping us from the judgment of God was the beginning. The power
which has made us alive in Christ, who has gone down into death for us,
has made us free from the whole power of Satan who followed us, and, as
to conscience, from all his attacks and accusations. We have done with
the flesh as our standing, and Satan's power, and, brought to God, are
in the world with Him. The world, who will follow that way \[See Note
\#2\], is swallowed up in it.

Considered as the historical type of God's ways towards Israel, the Red
Sea terminates the sequel of events; and so for us. We are brought to
God. Thus the forgiven thief could go straight to Paradise. As a moral
type, it is the beginning of the christian path, properly so called;
that is to say, the accomplishment of the redemption \[See Note \#3\] by
which the soul begins its christian course, but is viewed as in the
world, and the world become the wilderness of its pilgrimage; we are not
in the flesh.

Note \#1

Jordan adds our death with Christ, and, as to our state subjectively,
our resurrection with Him-analogous to the forty days He passed on
earth. To this the teaching of Colossians answers. Hence heaven is in
hope. Romans 3:20 to 5:11 gives Christ's death for sins, and
resurrection for our justification; thence to the end of chapter 8,
death to sin. Sin in the flesh is not forgiven, but condemned ([Rom
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003).md); but we as having died are not in
the flesh at all, we are alive unto God through, or rather in, Jesus
Christ. This takes us no farther than the wilderness, though passing
through it as alive to God in Christ. In Romans we are not risen with
Christ. That involves, as a consequence, our being identified with Him
where He is; and so, by the Holy Ghost when we are sealed, union. In
Colossians we are risen with Him, but not in heavenly places. Colossians
treats of life, with a hope laid up for us in heavenly places; not at
all of the Holy Ghost. In Ephesians 2 we are risen with Him and sitting
in heavenly places in Him, and then begins the conflict with spiritual
wickedness in heavenly places, and testimony according to what is
heavenly; so far this is Jordan and Canaan, and here the sealing and
gift of the Holy Ghost is fully spoken of, and our relationship with the
Father and with Christ, as sons, and as body and bride. Only Ephesians
begins with our being dead in sins, so that it is a new creation; it is
not death to sin. The blood-shedding, however, in one respect, has a
more glorious character. God is glorified in it, though by crossing
Jordan we are experimentally placed higher. That too is the fruit of the
blood-shedding, in which there is not only the bearing of sins to meet
our responsibility, but a glorifying of God, so as to bring us withal
into God's glory with Him, which is beyond all questions of
responsibility.

Note \#2

This is a solemn warning; for the worldlings, who call themselves
Christians, do take the ground of judgment to come, and the need of
righteousness, but not according to God. The Christian goes through it
in Christ, knowing himself otherwise lost and hopeless; the worldling in
his own strength, and is swallowed up. Israel saw the Red Sea in its
strength, and thought escape was hopeless: so an awakened conscience,
death and judgment. But Christ has died and borne judgment for us, and
we are secured and delivered by what we dreaded in itself. The
worldling, seeing this, adopts the truth in his own strength, as if
there were no danger, and is lost in his false confidence.

Note \#3

In itself, it is Christ's death and resurrection. But that is not only
meeting the holiness of God's nature, which is the blood-shedding, but
entering into the whole power of evil that was against us and making it
null. Hence, though it be not our realising death and resurrection so as
to be in heavenly places, we are owned as having died in Him, and He our
life, so that we have left our old standing altogether. In Colossians,
we are risen with Him; in Ephesians, also sitting in Him in heavenly
places. Colossians is the risen man still on earth, the subjective
state, what refers to heaven but is not there, as Christ Himself for
forty days-Jordan crossed, but not Canaan taken possession of.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 15](exo015.md)

</div>
