<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo014)  [Next](exo016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)

Hereupon we enter the desert. They sing (chap. 15) the song of triumph.
God has led them by His power to His holy habitation. But they are on
this journey, not in Canaan. He will lead them into the place which He
has made, which His hands have established. Their enemies shall be
unable to oppose themselves to this. So with us. There is a third thing
which is found in this beautiful song-the desire to build a tabernacle
for Jehovah. This is one of the great privileges which are the result of
redemption. God did not dwell with Adam innocent, nor with Abraham,
vessel of promise and root of the enjoyment of it. But when redemption
was accomplished, on the one hand, God was fully revealed; and, on the
other, man perfectly redeemed. Then God naturally, so to speak, comes to
dwell with men as amongst them ([Exo
29:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#046)). Here it is an external
deliverance; for us an eternal; but the principle, a blessed and
important one, is clearly brought out. And note this desire is not our
dwelling with God, though the thoughts are linked one with another, but
His dwelling with us; and the heart's desire is that He should do so
down here. It will never really be effectually so, till Verse 17 be
accomplished ([Exo 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017)); but the
desire is good, like David's, and we are now builded together for an
habitation of God through the Spirit. There are the three things: we are
brought to God's holy habitation; there is the desire to prepare Him
one; and, then, that which He has prepared. The tabernacle belonged to
the wilderness; what they sing is the deliverance effected already by
the power of God, and the hope of entering into the sanctuary which the
hands of Jehovah have made \[See Note \#1\].

The deliverance, then, of the people is accompanied by a full and entire
joy, which, having the consciousness of this complete deliverance by the
power of God, grasps the whole extent of His intentions towards them,
and knows how to apply this same power to the destruction of all the
power of the enemy \[See Note \#2\]. They sing the deliverance of God,
note, before a step has been taken in the desert. The soul, in
connection with Egypt (that is in the flesh on the ground of a child of
Adam), not only is responsible, but its position with God, dependent on
its acting up to this responsibility, is still uncertain and in fear.
The desert may be never so bitter and trying; but we are free and with
God there (brought to His holy habitation), through the redemption and
deliverance of God. But the redeemed one is looked at still as on the
way to glory, not yet in possession of the promised dwelling-place of
God. We are come to God's habitation, to God Himself, but the prepared
place is future. Edom and Moab will be still as a stone, but the people
have yet to pass over. This difference is important to notice. However,
the redeemed soul is looked at in both ways; as in Christ, where as to
acceptance all is settled-"as he is so are we in this world" giving
boldness for the day of judgment ([Jo1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#017)); and as in the wilderness, where
faith is put to the test. For the wilderness is what the world is for
the new man.

Remark here too some other important elements of the position of the
people. First, it is a people. This till then there had never been: just
men by grace, believers, called ones, there had been; now, though
according to the flesh, these are a people of God on the earth. This was
based on redemption wrought by God. Further, God, as we have seen,
dwells amongst His people on earth when redemption is accomplished. That
is the distinct fruit of redemption; He had not dwelt with innocent
Adam; He had not with called Abraham; He does with redeemed Israel \[See
Note \#3\]. But thirdly, this dwelling of God, His presence, brings in
the definite claim of holiness. Holiness becomes His house for ever. We
do not find holiness mentioned in Genesis, if it be not sanctifying the
sabbath day. The moment redemption is accomplished, He is glorious in
holiness, and there is a holy habitation. All these are important
principles.

Note \#1

It is practically important to see that the wilderness is no part of
God's purpose; of His ways, a most important part. They were brought to
God by redemption-Christ's death and resurrection-but not in Canaan. The
thief went straight to Paradise with Christ. He has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light. See Exodus 3, 6 and
15, where there is no question of the wilderness; see on the other hand,
Deuteronomy 8, where it is reviewed when through it. For the difference
of our spiritual judgment of ourselves, and God's judgment of us, see
Deuteronomy 9 and [Num 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#021).

Note \#2

The wilderness formed no part of the counsel of God as we have seen, and
the song does not refer to it, to its sorrows or its joys, nor the
provision for it. That, as far as revealed here, belongs to the book of
Numbers.

Note \#3

[Exo 29:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#046).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 16](exo016)

</div>
