<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo023)  [Next](exo025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 24 and 25.

This covenant, made on condition of the obedience of the people, was
confirmed by blood \[See Note \#1\] (chap. 24.) The blood being shed,
death having thus come in as God's judgment, the elders go up to enter
into relationship with God. They see His glory, and continue their human
and terrestrial life; they eat and drink.

But Moses is called near to God, to see the patterns of things more
excellent, of heavenly things-of things which make provision indeed for
the faults and the failures of God's people, but reveal to them the
perfection and varied glories of Him whom they approach as His people.
Only they still carry the stamp of the dispensation to which they
belong, as is true of everything which is not founded on, and
characterised by, association with a glorified Christ, the fruit of
eternal redemption, the eternal expression of the counsels of God. That
however in which the figures do not answer to the antitypes, as we know
them, is not in the things themselves, but in the liberty of access, and
the way that has been opened, and we admitted to them, things connected
withal with far higher privileges \[See Note \#2\]. The form of
realisation was dependent on the actual state of things. Priesthood
there was, but many priests because they were mortal; we, but one,
because He dies not. The veil, behind which God was and which barred the
way to God, is for us rent, and the way into the holiest open, so that
the holy and the most holy place are for us in spirit thrown together.
Still the general figure remains, and it does not appear that there will
be a rent veil in the millennium, though all the blessing depends on
Christ's death. Our place is peculiar; associated with Christ as sons
with the Father, and as members of His body; also heavenly in our hope
and calling, as belonging to the new creation.

The glories in every way of Christ the Mediator are presented in the
tabernacle; not precisely, as yet, the unity of His people, considered
as His body, but in every manner in which the ways and the perfections
of God are manifested through Him, whether in the full extent of the
creation, in His people, or in His Person. The scene of the
manifestation of the glory of God, His house, His domain, in which He
displays His being (in so far as it can be seen); the ways of His grace
and His glory; and His relationship through Christ with us-poor and
feeble creatures, but who draw nigh unto Him-are unfolded to us in it,
but still with a veil over His presence, and with God, not the Father
\[See Note \#3\]. The question is, How is man with God-can he approach?
not love coming out to seek, and reception by the Father. God is on the
throne justly requiring righteousness and holiness according to His own
nature, not in sovereign love seeking men when in a state contrary to
it. This, and the relationship of sons, make the whole basis different
as to the relationship with God. But the moral ground of its possibility
is found in these types, with the contrast already mentioned. Thus the
tabernacle had two aspects-the glory which was His own, and the means of
the relationship of God with His people. This is true even of the Lord
Jesus. I can view His cross in its absolute perfectness, according to
the thoughts and the heart of God; I can also find there that which
answers all my wants and failures.

It would lead me too far to enter into the details of the construction
of the tabernacle and its utensils, but I will make some general
remarks. There is a certain appearance of disorder in the description,
in that it is interrupted by the description of the vesture, and of the
order of consecration, of Aaron. Thus the altar of burnt offering comes
before the priest's vesture and consecration, the laver after. But this
arises from what I have just said. There are things which are the
manifestation of God, the place of meeting with Him and what belongs to
it, others which refer to the presentation of man to God, and his
service in these places; these things are linked together, for there are
some manifestations of God which are the points and means of the
approach of man, as the cross; for there indeed man in the height of his
sin, and God in infinite love and laying the ground of righteousness,
and righteousness for us, meet. It is the central point in all moral
history, where every issue of good and evil was settled for eternity;
and while it is the point at which man draws nigh, there is something
there besides the act of drawing near, or even of serving God \[See Note
\#4\].

The description of the tabernacle presents to us, first, the things in
which God manifests Himself, as the object, however, of the spiritual
knowledge of human intelligence (by faith of course); and then the
priesthood, and that which man does or uses in drawing near to Him who
thus reveals Himself.

First, then, there are the things which are found in the holy of holies,
and the holy place: the ark of the covenant, the table of the shewbread,
and the candlestick with seven branches. This is what God had
established for the manifestation of Himself within the house where His
glory dwelt, where those who enter into His presence could have
communion with Him. In result none could enter into the most holy place,
for the high priest only went in to place the blood on the mercy-seat,
and not for communion then, and with a cloud of incense that he might
not die \[See Note \#5\] (see Heb. 9). But it was in itself the place of
approach to God. Then we have the arrangement and structure of the
tabernacle which enclosed all these things, and which was divided into
two parts; and then the altar of burnt-offerings, and the court where it
stood, to the end of Verse 19, chapter 27 ([Exo
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#019).md). We will consider these things
first. It is there the first part ends.

In that which follows there is what regards the action of man therein-of
the priests; and God orders certain things to be brought in for that.
This it is which consequently introduces the priesthood, which acted in
it, and which alone could, in fact, so act. Hence the description of the
priesthood interrupts the description of the various parts and furniture
of the tabernacle; what follows it refers to its exercise.

The ark of the covenant was the throne where God manifested Himself, if
any could go in in righteousness \[See Note \#6\], and as the seat of
His sovereignty over every living man-the God of the whole earth. It was
also, however, the throne of relationship with His people. The law-the
testimony of what He required of men-was to be placed there. Over it was
the mercy-seat, which covered it in, which formed the throne, or rather
the basis of the throne, as the cherubim (formed of the same piece),
which were its supporters, did its sides. In itself it seems to me a
marvellous connection of the human and divine righteousness in the Lord
Jesus. The law was hid in it, and, in divine government of man on earth,
this formed the perfect rule; it was the measure of responsibility of
man as a child of Adam, in its abstract foundations, which the Lord
adduces-the perfection of creature relationship with God; and we know
that the law was in Christ's heart. He was perfect in human obedience
and love to His Father. He lived perfectly up to the responsibility of
man according to God in His inner man \[See Note \#7\]. But He also
glorified God-all that God is in love, divine righteousness, truth,
majesty. All God is was glorified by the Son of man, and not only the
Son of man goes righteously into the glory of God, but God is fully
revealed as the place of access for us in that character: righteousness
is proved by His going to His Father. The shittim-wood and the tables of
the law are there, but all is clothed with the gold-God's own
righteousness is there too. It is with this communion is \[See Note
\#8\], only as yet the veil hid it within. The character as yet was a
judicial throne. At that time man (save Moses owned in grace) could not
go in, and God did not come out. Now He has come out in grace, clothing
Himself in humiliation that He in perfect grace may be with us; and man
is gone into the glory according to the title of an accomplished
redemption.

The cherubim, throughout the Old Testament, wherever they act, are
connected with the judicial power of God, or are the executors of the
will of that power; and in the Apocalypse they are generally connected
with providential judgments, and belong to the throne, but the seraphic
character is connected with them there, so that the throne judges, not
merely in present governmental judgment, but finally according to God's.

Here, then, God manifested Himself as the Supreme God in His moral
being, armed with power to enforce respect to His laws, and to keep
account of all that was done. This character of God in Himself also is
why the blood-witness of all that had been done for those who were thus
responsible, and satisfying all the moral nature of Him who sat
there-was put upon the mercy-seat; but every year, a witness that the
work which did that was yet undone \[See Note \#9\]. Nor was it exactly
there that God was directly in connection with His people; but thence
came forth the communications which were to be made to them: "And there
will I meet with thee," said God to Moses, "and I will commune with thee
from above the mercy-seat, from between the two cherubim which are upon
the ark of the testimony, of all the things which I will give thee in
commandment unto the children of Israel." Moses, who receives the
thoughts of God for the people, was there to have his intercourse with
Jehovah, and that without the veil \[See Note \#10\].

It was, then, the most intimate and most immediate manifestation of God,
and that which came nearest to His very nature, which does not thus
manifest itself. But it was a manifestation of Himself in judgment and
in government \[See Note \#11\], it was not as yet in man, neither
according to man, but within the veil. In Christ we find Him thus, and
then it is in perfect grace and divine righteousness, proved by man's
place, and the latter only when the veil has been rent; till then Christ
remained alone, for grace was rejected as well as law broken.

Outside the veil was the table with its twelve loaves and the golden
candlestick. Twelve is administrative perfection in man-seven, spiritual
completeness, whether in good or evil The two are found outside the
veil, inside which was the most immediate manifestation of God, the
Supreme, but who hid Himself, as it were, yet, in darkness. Here was
light and nourishment: God in power manifested in man; administrative
power revealed amongst men, and, in historical fact, in connection with
the twelve tribes. But faith recognises both in Christ, and the light of
the Holy Ghost makes us know it, if priests, to enter into the holy
place, before it is actually revealed in power, while all is otherwise
darkness, and God is giving the light of the Holy Ghost \[See Note
\#12\]. The twelve tribes were, for the time being, that which answered
externally to this manifestation. It is found in the new Jerusalem. The
primary idea was the manifestation of God in the holy place in man, and
by the Spirit.

Note \#1

Death was the penal sanction, as it was also, because such, the
delivering power in grace

Note \#2

Hence in Hebrews you never have the Father and our relationship with
Him, nor with Christ, and in what is found there is more contrast than
comparison.

Note \#3

We see the glory unveiled in the face of Jesus Christ and approach
boldly, because the glory in His face is the proof of redemption and the
perfect putting away of our sins, for He who bore them has them not on
Him in the glory.

Note \#4

We are apt to consider the cross simply in respect of our sins. In
coming to God it is the only right, the only possible way. But when, at
peace with God, we weigh what it is, we shall find every moral question
brought to an issue there; man in absolute wickedness, that is,
rejecting God in goodness with scorn and hatred; Satan's full and
universal power over him; Man in perfectness in Christ-absolute
obedience and absolute love to the Father; God in righteousness against
sin in the highest way ("it became Him"), and infinite love to the
sinner; all is brought out on the cross in Christ, and all to our
blessing, and so that we should be in glory with Him, and like Him, as
the fruit of the travail of His soul-a blessed portion.

Note \#5

This was the result of the failure of the priesthood, in the person of
Nadab and Abihu, which, as everything placed under man's responsibility
(and all, save of course actual redemption, has been so) was immediate.
So in the case of Adam, Noah, the law, here the priesthood, Solomon son
of David, Nebuchadnezzar, and so, as Paul testifies, the church.

Note \#6

But not, I think, separate from holiness, for it was in the holiest, and
could not be if God was there as His dwelling, and not taking merely
duty as the measure of what was accepted. But, while God Himself was to
be approached who is holy, it was a throne, and judicial, and so
righteous in character. Holiness is the character of a nature delighting
in purity, and which repels evil. Righteousness Judges it with
authority. It was not merely man's responsibility, but what God was.

Note \#7

The first is the essence of creature perfection, adding the place of
Son. The second, the actual responsibility of man's place measured by
that place.

Note \#8

Only now, as already noticed, there is another relationship entered into
with the Father. This is relationship, not nature, though of course that
nature is necessarily involved in it. Hence, but only after His
resurrection, Christ says, I go to my Father and your Father, my God and
your God. There is that with God according to the character here spoken
of, but there is that with the Father in the relationship and liberty in
which Christ Himself is, and into which we are adopted. This difference
of nature and relationship is strikingly brought out in John's
writings-grace, and what the divine nature makes necessary. See John 4
as to worshippers, and 1 John 1. The Father could not be revealed but by
the Son. But also the veil was rent in the cross, and we are before God
in divine righteousness according to what He is as such. In the full
character of this as to both, we are in Him. Elsewhere I have touched on
the difference of the sense of relationship with God as sons, and the
knowledge of the Father as such, personally revealed in the Son. The
first is Paul's ground, and he seldom goes beyond it; the latter,
John's. The epistle to the Hebrews gives direct access to God in the
holiest, but the Father is not found in it.

Note \#9

Hence there was still an unrent veil.

Note \#10

The communications of the Old Testament, and all that belongs to the law
come directly from God, but do not belong to a system which gives direct
access to Him.

Note \#11

This is true; but, in its typical (or perhaps I should say spiritual)
application, not in the letter, but in the spirit, there was another
important element of truth in it. It was the place where God was
approached not where He dealt with man's responsibility as man. This was
at the brazen altar, the place of sacrifice, the first thing met, when
man had to come as a sinner, when consequently what man ought to be was
in question, what he ought to be for God surely, still what man ought to
be as man. In coming to the mercy-seat in the holiest of all, what God
is was in question. Man has to be meet for God's own presence, then, in
the holiest. And in truth the rest was only testing man. He was not
innocent in Paradise, and as a sinner could not come to God, according
to what God is, being a sinner. It is only through the rent veil in a
heavenly Paradise he can have to say to Him; though on the ground of the
work then accomplished He will have an earthly people also, in whose
heart the law will be written.

Note \#12

Therefore it is that, in another sense, we have twelve apostles attached
to the Lord in the flesh, and seven churches for Him who has the seven
Spirits of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 25](exo025.md)

</div>
