<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo032)  [Next](exo034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 33 and 34.

We have now to examine a little what was taking place among the people,
and on Moses's part, the faithful and zealous witness, as a servant of
God in His house; for we shall find a new mediation going on peacefully,
if one may so speak, and holily, weighing by faith, these relationships
where the mercy and the justice of God meet in their application to His
government. It is not the indignation of holy wrath, which had indeed
its place at the sight of the evil, while it knew not what to do-for how
put the law of God beside the golden calf? Jehovah says that He will
send an angel, and that He will not go in the midst of the people,
seeing it is stiff-necked, lest He should destroy them by the way. But I
will state succinctly the facts connected with this new intercession,
which are of touching interest.

God had first said that He would come up in a moment in the midst of
them to destroy them. This present excision of the people in judgment,
Moses's intercession had averted, and Jehovah calls upon Israel now to
put off their ornaments, that He might know what to do unto them. Holy
grace of God! who, if He sees the insolence of sin before His eyes, must
strike, but wills that the people should at least strip themselves of
that, and that He may have time (to speak the language of men) to
reflect as to what He should do with the sin of a people now humbled for
having forsaken Him. However, God does not forsake the people. Moses
enters holily, and by the just judgment of conscience, into the mind of
God by the Spirit; and, before the tabernacle of the congregation was
pitched, he entirely leaves the camp, and makes a place for God outside
the camp, afar off from the camp, which had put a false god in His
place, and changed their glory into the similitude of an ox which eateth
grass. He calls it the tabernacle of the congregation-the meeting-place
between God and those who sought Him. This name is in itself important,
because it is no longer simply God in the midst of a recognised
assembly, which was one of the characters we have already observed
connected with the tabernacle. \[See Note \#1\] Moses being outside the
camp, God now declares that He will not go up in the midst of them, lest
He should destroy them by the way, as He had threatened. Moses begins
his intercession, having taken an individual position, the only one now
of faithfulness to God; but his connection with the people being so much
the stronger by his being nearer to God, more separated unto Him. This
is the effect of faithful separation when it is for God's glory, and one
is brought near to God in it. It must be remarked here, that God had
taken the people at their word. They had said, acting according to their
faith, or rather to their want of faith, "This Moses that brought us up
out of Egypt." God says, "Thy people, which thou broughtest out of
Egypt, have corrupted themselves." Hence God says to Moses, "Thou,"
addressing Himself to the mediator. Moses says to God, "Thy people."
This earnest power of faith does not, though separating from evil, loose
God from this blessed claim ([Exo
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001); [Exo
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007); [Exo
32:12-34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012)). Afterwards, however, the
people having stripped themselves of their ornaments, and Moses being in
the position of mediator, God says ([Exo
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#001)), "Thou and the people which thou
hast brought up." \[See Note \#2\] Everything now hangs upon the
mediator. Moses having taken his place outside the camp, God reveals
Himself to him as He never had done before. The people see God standing
at the door of the tabernacle which Moses had pitched; and they worship,
every man at his tent door. Jehovah speaks unto Moses face to face, as a
man speaks unto his friend. We shall see that it is to these
communications that God alludes when He speaks of the glory of Moses
([Num 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008)), and not to those on Mount
Sinai. Moses, as mediator in the way of testimony, goes into the camp;
but Joshua, the spiritual chief of the people (Christ in Spirit), does
not depart out of the tabernacle \[See Note \#3\] Moses now recognises
what God had told him, that he has to bring up the people; he is there
as the mediator on whom everything depends. But he dares not entertain
the thought of going up alone, of going up without knowing who would be
with him. God has fully acknowledged him in grace, and he desires to
know who will go before him. He therefore asks, since he has found grace
(for so God had told him), that he may know His way, the way of God; not
only to have a way for him (Moses) to get to Canaan, but "thy way;" thus
will he know God, and in His path and conduct, will find grace in His
sight. God replies that His presence shall go, and He will give rest to
Moses: the two things he perfectly needed as crossing the wilderness.
Moses then brings in the people, and says, "Carry us not up hence," and
that "we have found grace, I and thy people." This also is granted of
Jehovah; and now he desires for himself to see the glory of Jehovah; but
that face which is to go and lead Moses and the people, God cannot shew
unto Moses. He will hide him while He passes by, and Moses shall see His
back parts. We cannot meet God on His way as independent of Him. After
He has passed by, one sees all the beauty of His ways. Who could have
been beforehand in proposing such a thing as the cross? After God of
Himself has done it, then all the perfectness of God in it overflows the
heart. God then lays down two principles: His sovereignty, which allows
Him to act in goodness towards the wicked-into this He retreats that any
may be saved-for in justice He would have cut off the whole people: and
the conditions of His government under which He was putting the people,
His character such as it is manifested in His ways towards them. Hid
whilst He passes by, Moses bows down at the voice of God, who proclaims
His name and reveals what He is as JEHOVAH. These words give the
principles contained in the character of God Himself in connection with
the Jewish people-principles which form the basis of His government. It
is not at all the name of His relationship with the sinner for his
justification, but with Israel for His government. Mercy, holiness, and
patience, mark His ways with them; but He does not clear the guilty.
Moses, ever bearing the people of God on his heart, beseeches God,
according to the favour in which he stands as mediator, that the Lord
Himself, thus revealed, may go up in their midst; and this, because they
were a stiff-necked people. How should he bring such a people safe
through without Him? The relationship between Moses personally and God
was fully established, so that he could present the people such as they
were, because of his (Moses's own) position; and, consequently, make of
the difficulty and sin of the people a reason for the presence of God,
according to the character He had revealed. It is the proper effect of
mediation; but it is exceedingly beautiful to see, grace having thus
come in, the reason God had given for the destruction of the people, or
at the very least for His absence, becoming the motive for His presence
\[See Note \#4\]. It, no doubt, supposed forgiveness as well. This Moses
asks for, and adds, in the consciousness of the blessing of the name and
being of God, "Take us for thine inheritance." In answer to this prayer,
God establishes a new covenant with the people. The basis of it is
complete separation from the nations which God was going to drive out
from before the people. It supposes the entrance of the people into
Canaan in virtue of the mediation of Moses, and the presence of God with
the people consequent upon his intercession. He is commanded to maintain
their relationship with Him in the solemn feasts under the blessing and
safeguard of God. It is well to have the order of facts clear here as to
Moses's position. He broke the tables; the Levites at his summons slay
their friends and relations; and then he pitches the tabernacle far off
from the camp. There the cloud comes down ([Exo
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#009)). There the basis of all was
laid, first in absolute sovereign grace, and then in the character of
Moses's personal relationship. This was at the door of the tabernacle
outside the camp. Then chapter 34 he goes up again, and there, he being
in this relationship, quite a new governmental covenant is made, founded
on God's character mediatorially, and the law put into the ark. They
were put back in principle under law; real atonement could not be made,
of course, by Moses ([Exo 34:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#010)).
But Israel was never directly and properly under the covenant of the
law, but mediatorially under [Exo
34:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#005); though the commandments were,
of course, before them as their rule. But this new covenant of chapter
34 was what they were under as to the law; and hence they, as under the
law, were apostate and left of God before they got it; and Moses and the
cloud of God's presence outside the camp. People sought the Lord and
went there. Utter separation from all mixture with the idolatrous
people, and consecration, characterises the new covenant of chapter 34.
In chapter 23 they were told to destroy their altars and serve Jehovah
who would cut these nations off But the covenant is not so
characterised. It is of moment to see that God retreats into His own
sovereign grace to spare them. But this was at the door of the
tabernacle and with Moses alone; the covenant of gracious government was
based on it. That was on the mount. The people were only on that ground.
There was no real basis of relationship; the law, which would have been
one, broken, and no atonement made, nor could be. Moses had a special
revelation of grace. But this seems to have been personal and
unrecorded. I have rather enlarged upon these conversations of Moses
with the people, because (and it is very important to remark it) Israel
never entered the land under the Sinai covenant, that is, under simple
law (for all this passed under Mount Sinai); it had been immediately
broken. It is under the mediation of Moses that they were able to find
again the way of entering it. However, they are placed again under the
law, but the government of patience and grace is added to it. In [Deu
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001), we see there is no longer
question of introducing the law openly into the camp where God had been
dishonoured. It was to be put into the ark, according to the
predetermined plans of God \[See Note \#5\], arranged to enable the
people, miserable as they were, to draw near unto Him, though only
outside unto the brazen altar. Moses abides there with Jehovah. There
was enough in the contemplation of what God was, as He had revealed
Himself, to occupy him. He had not now to be occupied with the
instructions \[See Note \#6\] God was giving him on the details of the
tabernacle, but with God according to the revelation He had made of
Himself; he neither ate nor drank; he was in a state above nature, where
the flesh could not intermeddle, in some sort apart from humanity \[See
Note \#7\]. The Lord writes His law anew on the tables which Moses had
prepared. But the effect of this communion with God was manifest; the
skin of his face shone when he came down. However, here it was a glory
as it were external and legal, not like that of Jehovah Himself in the
Person of Jesus. Thus Israel could not behold it. We are in quite a
different position: for us, there is no longer a veil; and we behold
with open (that is unveiled) face the glory of the Lord. For the glory
now is not applied to make good the law in the conscience; for the glory
in the face of Moses did this, only the people consequently could not
bear it \[See Note \#8\], nor consequently understand the figures of
grace: the law (as rule of human righteousness) being broken and gone as
ground of relationship with God, and laid up in the ark, they turned the
figures of grace into law, as men do. The glory we see is the proof of
the putting away of sins and divine righteousness, for it is seen in Him
who bore our sins and is that righteousness for us. We are rather in the
position of Moses when he entered into the most holy place.

Note \#1

He anticipates by faith, jealous of God's glory, the tabernacle which
was to be set up according to the thoughts and commandments of God,
which he had seen in communion with Jehovah. That was indeed the
principal thing; but it was without the camp, and a sort of disorder in
the eyes of men, and was without the ornaments and the forms commanded
of God in the tabernacle, and there was not one express word of God for
it to be done. Nevertheless, the presence of God was there, and the main
thing for faith was there; that is, a tent where God was seen, and where
He might be sought, even in a manner in which faith was more manifest
than when the tabernacle was regularly set up. Then the pillar came down
as a blessed testimony to the faith of Moses.

Note \#2

And Moses really represents Christ here, not Christ outside the camp.

Note \#3

This is the place we have in spirit, but it is sometimes hard to connect
the two.

Note \#4

We know this ourselves; my sinfulness in itself would be the reason for
God's giving me up. But now I am in grace, I can plead it with God as a
reason, blessed be His name, for His going with me; never should I
overcome and get safe across the wilderness, if He was not with me.
Surely the flesh is there. But it is wondrous grace. Nothing shews more
clearly the difference between justifying forgiveness, and governmental
mercy, than this part of Israel's history. God forgives, but does not
clear the guilty-atonement was not made: no doubt, even in possibility
of government all was based on it.

Note \#5

Thus Christ was in reserve, though at the same time fore-ordained, even
from eternity. He was only manifested as the true propitiation when the
law had been presented, and man had failed under it. Its only existence
now is, as giving great recognised principles of the righteousness
required from man (in its highest elements we may add from the creature)
but hidden and buried in Him who gives His character to the throne of
God. But it was necessary to break or hide those tables (terrible to
man) of the perfect but inflexible law of God. God will write them on
the heart of once disobedient Israel in the latter day.

Note \#6

The little that was said to Moses in the covenant was prohibitory of all
association with the nations strangers to Jehovah, and the establishment
of links with Him, consecration to Him in everything as redeemed,
absence of leaven, and I think the prohibition of what was devilishly
against nature. What was of nature as of God, was not to be violated
There was redemption, as the key to all connected with the judgment of
evil, but also the firstfruits of nature were to be consecrated to God,
and the relationship of nature not violated.

Note \#7

Here, however, is seen the excellency of the Lord Jesus, who in all
things must have the pre-eminence Moses, naturally far off, is separated
from his natural state, in order to draw near unto God. Christ was
naturally near there, and more than near; He separates Himself from
nature to meet the adversary on the behalf of man.

Note \#8

It had the character of claim on them coming with the law from above,
and thus they could not see the prefigurement of Christ, when it came
out either (see 2 Cor. 3). The whole position is of all importance. On
the ground of law, that is, man's responsibility, all being gone, God
retreated into His own sovereignty (Moses pleading as to Israel God's
unconditional promises), and Israel were placed under the governmental
name and dealings of God as they are to this day, only having since
rejected Christ and promise and grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 34](exo034)

</div>
