<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo029)  [Next](exo031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 30 and 31.

Having thus established the priesthood, and the relationship of the
people with God who dwelt in the midst of them, the intercession of
Christ in grace (all that was in Him ascending as a sweet savour to
Jehovah), is presented ([Exo 30:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001));
and His service in making the manifestation of God in the Spirit shine
forth ([Exo 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#007)). The people were
identified with this service through redemption ([Exo
30:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#011)). They could neither be
there, nor serve \[See Note \#1\]; but they were all represented as
redeemed. We then have the laver between the brazen altar and the
tabernacle-purification \[See Note \#2\] for communion with God, and for
service to Him therein: the hands and feet (for us only the feet, as our
walk alone is concerned), every time they took part in it.

Finally, we have the oil and the incense, the fragrant oil, which were
for priests only: the nature of man, as man, or his natural condition in
the flesh could not partake of it. The incense typifies the precious
perfume of the graces of Christ, the savour of divine graces manifested,
and a sweet odour in the world in man. He alone answers to it, though we
may seek of and from Him to walk in them.

The institution and obligation of the sabbath was associated with the
tabernacle of the congregation, as a sign, as it had been with every
form of relationship between God and His people: for to be made
partakers of God's rest is what distinguishes His people. In fine, God
gave Moses the two tables of the law.

Note \#1

The places were seen; but not our entrance into them, with all the rent
veil brings with it.

Note \#2

It was the washing of water by the word, the purification of the
worshipper (first, of the heart) to constitute him one by being born
again of the word. But this was not the laver. The priests had their
bodies washed first to be such, but it is not said this was in the
laver. There they washed their hands and their feet, when they had come
into priestly service by the sacrifices, being already washed as to
their bodies. That is, they were priests already when they washed their
hands and feet in the laver; their bodies had been washed, and the
consecrating sacrifices offered; and then in respect of practice,
according to the purity of divine life by the Spirit, there was the
washing through the word, and especially if they had failed (compare
John 13). For communion requires not only acceptance but purification.
Without this the presence of God acts on the conscience, not in giving
communion, but in shewing the defilement. Christ, even as a man, was
pure by nature, and He kept Himself by the words of God's lips. With us,
this purity is received from Him; and we must also use the word to
purify ourselves. The idea and measure of the purity are the same for
Christ and for us: "he that saith he abideth in him ought himself also
so to walk, even as he walked"-"to purify himself, even as he is pure."
For the ordinary relationship of the people, looked at as worshippers,
it was the red heifer (Num. 19); its ashes, which typified this
purification on failure, were put into running water; that is, the Holy
Spirit applied, by the word, to the heart and conscience, the sufferings
of Christ for sin to purify man; sufferings which could have all their
moral and purifying power, since the ashes of separation shewed forth
that sin had been consumed in the sacrifice of Christ Himself for sin,
as to imputation, by the fire of the judgment of God. The blood of the
heifer had been sprinkled seven times before the door of the
tabernacle-the place where, we have just seen, God met the people; but
to worship and serve there must be the actual purification according to
the standard of Christ: at least as far as realised, so that the
conscience be not bad. This being in His presence, and the judgment of
failure, is the means of progress also. Note, the rules as to the red
heifer, shew that however it came (for there were cases viewed merely
humanly which were inevitable, but, they shew that however it came), God
could not have impurity in His presence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 31](exo031)

</div>
