<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze005)  [Next](eze007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 5 and 6.

In the revelation given to Ezekiel Jerusalem is taken, and its
population almost entirely destroyed. The dispersed remnant are pursued
by the sword, and a portion only of this remnant is spared. There would
be some even of this portion cast into the fire \[See Note \#1\]. And
this fire should reach to the whole house of Israel. That is to say, the
judgment that should fall upon the remnant who do not perish in the city
should represent the position of all Israel. It is thus that the prophet
is constantly led to speak of the whole nation. For, as long as there
was a remnant at Jerusalem, the nation had a place on the earth. But
when the iniquitous rebellion of Zedekiah had led to the destruction of
Jerusalem, this was no longer the case. But this judgment of Jerusalem
contains very important elements for the understanding of all this part
of the history of the people and of the dealings of God, "This is
Jerusalem, saith the Lord Jehovah; I have set it in the midst of the
nations and countries round about her." And instead of being a testimony
in the midst of the nations, so that the house of Jehovah should have
attracted them, or at least have placed them under responsibility by a
true testimony to God who dwelt there-instead of this, her inhabitants
had even gone beyond the idolatrous nations in wickedness. Therefore God
would execute judgments upon her in the sight of all the nations-a just
retribution for her sins. She should also be laid waste and made a
reproach among the nations round about her; and (chap. 6) the judgment
should not be confined to Jerusalem, it should be executed on all the
high places, on all the mountains of Israel. Every city should be
desolate, all their idols destroyed, and the people scattered. They
should know that the Lord had not threatened them in vain with His
judgments. The fire should reach those that were afar off as well as
those that were in the land; and the land should be laid waste, and the
worshippers of idols slain around their infamous gods. Nevertheless God
would remember mercy in the midst of judgment; He would spare a little
remnant of those who were scattered, and those who should escape should
loathe themselves for the abominations they had committed. Thus
Jerusalem was judged as well as the mountains of Israel, which were but
too notorious for their idols and their high places.

Note \#1

It is thus that I understand this passage. We should imagine, from our
translation, that it was some of the hairs that were cast into the fire.
But in the Hebrew the pronoun is in the singular, and it is masculine as
well as feminine.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 7](eze007.md)

</div>
