<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](lam005)  [Next](eze001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Ezekiel

In the prophecy of Ezekiel we have left the touching ground we were on
in Jeremiah. He was within with the judgment hanging over the guilty
city, and under the oppressive sense of the evil which brought on the
ruin, bearing a testimony which, as to apparent result, was of no avail,
though it maintained, in personal sorrow of heart according to human
measure, the glory of God.

Ezekiel had been carried into captivity with the king Jehoiachin; at
least, he was one of those made captive at that time, and he habitually
dates his prophecies from that period-an important thing to remark that
we may understand the revelations made to him. For himself there is no
more question either of dates or of kings, of Judah or of Israel. The
people of God are in captivity among the Gentiles. Israel is looked at
as a whole; the interests of the whole nation are before the eye of the
prophet. At the same time the capture of Jerusalem under Zedekiah had
not yet taken place. This occasions the revelation of that king's
iniquity, the measure of which was filled up by his rebellion. For
Nebuchadnezzar attached value to the oath made in the name of Jehovah.
He counted upon the respect due to that name, and Zedekiah had not
respected it.

The first twenty-three chapters contain testimonies from God against
Israel in general, and against Jerusalem in particular. After that the
surrounding nations are judged; and then, beginning with chapter 33, the
prophet resumes the subject of Israel, announcing their restoration as
well as their judgment. Finally from chapter 40 to the end we have the
description of the temple and of the division of the land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 1](eze001.md)

</div>
