<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze025)  [Next](eze027.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 26, 27, and 28.

Although in a certain sense upon Israel's territory, Tyre has another
character, and is the subject of a separate prophecy (chaps. 26-28),
because it represents the world and its riches, in contrast with Israel
as the people of God; and rejoices, not like the others from personal
hatred, but because (having opposite interests) the destruction of that
which restrained its career gave free course to its natural selfishness.
It is worthy of remark in these prophecies, how God lays open all the
thoughts of man with respect to His people and that which they have been
towards Him.

In chapter 27, Tyre is judged for its ill-will to the people and the
city of God. It is overthrown as a worldly system, and all that formed
its glory disappears before the breath of Jehovah.

In chapter 28 it is the prince and the king of Tyre that are judged for
their pride. Verses 1-10 ([Eze
28:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#001).md) set before us the prince of
this world's glory as a man, exalting himself and seeking to present
himself as a god, having acquired riches and glory by his wisdom. Verses
11-19 ([Eze 28:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#011).md), while
continuing to speak of Tyre, go, I think, much farther, and disclose,
though darkly, the fall and the ways of Satan, become through our sin
the prince and god of this world. The prince of Tyre represents Tyre and
the spirit of Tyre. The Verses which follow ( ([Eze
28:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#011).md) are much more personal. I do
not doubt that, historically, Tyre itself is referred to; Verses 16-19
([Eze 28:16-\`9](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#016).md) prove it. But, I
repeat, the mind of the Spirit goes much farther. The world and its
kings are presented as the garden of Jehovah on account of the
advantages they enjoy. (The outward government of God is in question,
which till then had recognised the different nations around Israel).
This however applies more especially to Tyre, which was situated in the
territory of Israel, in Emmanuel's land, and which, in the person of
Hiram, had been allied with Solomon, and had even helped to build the
temple. Its guilt was proportionate. It is the world in relation with
God, and if the prince of Tyre represents this state of things as being
the world, and a world that has been highly exalted in its capabilities
by this position-an exaltation of which it boasts in deifying itself,
the king represents the position itself in which, under this aspect, the
world has been placed, and the forsaking of which gives it the character
of apostasy. It is this character which gives occasion for the
declaration of the enemy's apostasy contained in these verses. He had
been where the plants of God flourished \[See Note \#1\], he had been
covered with precious stones (that is to say, with all the variety of
beauty and perfection, in which the light of God is reflected and
transformed when manifested in, and with respect to, creation). Here the
varied reflection of these perfections had been in the creature: a
creature was the means of their manifestation. It was not light,
properly so called. (God is light; Christ is the light here below, and
so far as He lives in us, we are light in Him). It was the effect of
light acting in the creature, like a sunbeam in a prism. It is a
development of its beauty, which is not its essential perfection, but
which proceeds from it.

The following are the features of the king of Tyre's character, or that
of the enemy of God, the prince of this world. He is the anointed
cherub-he is covered with precious stones-he has been in Eden the
paradise of God, upon the mountain of God-he walked in the midst of the
stones of fire-he was perfect in his ways until iniquity was found in
him. He is cast out of the mountain of God on account of his iniquities;
his heart was lifted up because of his beauty, and he corrupted himself.
Farther, we find that which, as to the creature, is most exalted; he
acts in the judicial government of God according to the intelligence of
God (this is the character of the anointed cherub). He is clothed with
the moral beauty that variously reflects the character of God as light
\[See Note \#2\]. He is recognised among the plants of God, in which God
displayed His wisdom and His power in creation, according to His good
pleasure, as Creator. He had been there also where the authority of God
was exercised-on the mountain of God. He walked where the moral
perfections of God were displayed in their glory, a glory before which
evil could not stand-"the stones of fire." His ways had been perfect.
But all these advantages were the occasion of his fall, and
characterised it. For the privileges we enjoy always characterise our
fall. Whence have we fallen? is the question; for it is the having
failed there, when we possessed it, that degrades our condition.
Moreover it is not an outward temptation, as in man's case-a
circumstance which did not indeed take away man's guilt, but which
modified its character. "Thy heart was lifted up because of thy beauty."
He exalted himself against God, and he was cast out as profane from the
mountain of God. His spirit, independent in security, was humbled when
he was cast to the ground. His nakedness is manifested to all; his folly
shall in the end be apparent to all.

The judgment of Sidon is added. And then, all hope having been taken
from Israel, when the judgment of the nations is accomplished, God
gathers them and causes them to dwell in their land in peace for ever.

Note \#1

We may see, [Eze 31:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#008.md); [Eze
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#016.md), that this is a description of
the kings of the earth, at least before Nebuchadnezzar, who first
substituted one sole dominion given by God, for the many kings of the
nations recognised by God as the result of Babel, and in the centre of
which His people were placed, to make the government of God known
through their means. The special relation of Tyre with Israel added
something to the position of the merchant city, and gave room also for
the use made here of the history of its king as a type or figure of the
prince of this world.

Note \#2

Observe that this takes place in the creature. In the case of Aaron, the
type of Christ as priest, it exists in the absolute perfection of grace,
which presents us to God according to His perfection in the light. It is
afterwards seen in the glory as the foundation of the city, the bride,
the Lamb's wife, in the Revelation. That is, these stones present the
fruit of perfect light-what God is in His nature shining in and through
the creature, in creation, grace, and glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 27](eze027.md)

</div>
