<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze015)  [Next](eze017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#001)

In reading chapter 16 it must be remembered that Jerusalem is the
subject, and not Israel. Moreover, the subject treated of is not
redemption, but God's dealings. He had caused to live, He had cleansed,
ornamented, and anointed, that which was in misery and devoid of beauty.
But Jerusalem had used all that Jehovah had given her in the service of
her idols, and also to purchase the succour and the favour of the
Egyptians and the Assyrians. She has had no idea of independence and of
standing alone, leaning on Jehovah. She should be judged as an
adulterous woman. Jehovah would bring against her those whom she had
sought. Nevertheless, filled with pride, she would hear nothing of
Samaria or of Sodom-names which Jehovah now uses to humble her. She was
even more worthless than those whom she must own for her sisters, in
spite of her pride. Jerusalem being thus justly condemned and humbled,
God will yet act in full grace towards her, and will re-establish her,
remembering His love and His covenant. She will never be restored on the
former ground, any more than Samaria or Sodom; and the grace that will
be exercised towards her shall suffice to bring them back also, namely,
the sovereign grace of redemption and pardon, which is by no means the
covenant of Jerusalem under the law. With Jerusalem Jehovah will also
establish a special covenant, and her two sisters shall be given her for
daughters. Her mouth shall be shut at the thought of all the grace of
God who shall have pardoned her. The fifty-fifth Verse ([Eze
16:55](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#055)) is absolute and perpetual. The
promise, in Verse 60 ([Eze 16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060)), is
on entirely new ground. Samaria, Sodom, Jerusalem, go together in
judgment; but sovereign grace has its own way and time, and thus all
three might be and would be restored, but Jehovah would establish His
covenant with Jerusalem. The free unconditional covenant of promise
would be made good to Jerusalem ([Eze
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#008)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 17](eze017)

</div>
