<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze016)  [Next](eze018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#001.md)

Chapter 17 present the judgment of Zedekiah for despising the oath that
Nebuchadnezzar made him take in the name of Jehovah. Israel not having
been able to stand in integrity before God, Jehovah had committed the
kingdom to the head of the Gentiles, whom He had raised up. This was His
determinate purpose; but He had disposed the heart of Nebuchadnezzar to
respect the name of Jehovah, and Judah might still have remained the
centre of religious blessing, and the lamp of David might still have
given light there, although the royalty had been subjected to the head
of the Gentiles, until the time should come for the result of the
judgment and dealings of God. The covenant between Nebuchadnezzar and
Zedekiah was made on this ground, and the name of Jehovah was brought in
to confirm it. It was not the Gentile who broke the covenant. Zedekiah
added to his other sins that of rendering impossible the existence of a
people and a kingdom that belonged to God. The name of Jehovah was more
despised and trampled under foot by him than by the Gentile king. He
intrigues with Egypt to escape from the dominion of Nebuchadnezzar, whom
God Himself, in judgment, had set up as supreme. This filled up the
measure of iniquity, and brought on the final judgment. But it left room
for the sovereignty of God, who would bring down the high tree and exalt
the low tree, who would dry up the green tree and make the dry tree to
flourish. His grace would take the little forgotten branch of the house
of David and raise it up in Israel upon the mountain of His power, where
He would cause it to become a goodly cedar, bearing fruit, and
sheltering all that would seek the protection of its shadow. All the
powers of the earth should know the word and the works of Jehovah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 18](eze018.md)

</div>
