<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr009)  [Next](neh000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 9 and 10.

Alas! as soon as he can look into these things, he finds the law already
broken, evil already come in. The people of Israel had not kept
themselves separate from the people of the lands, and even the princes
and rulers had been chief in this trespass. Ezra is confounded at this,
and remains overwhelmed with grief the whole day. Can it be that the
remnant, whom God had snatched, as it were, from the fire, have so soon
forgotten the hand that delivered them, and married the daughters of a
strange god? Those who trembled at Jehovah's word having assembled with
him, Ezra humbles himself on account of it. At the time of the evening
sacrifice, he pours out the deep sorrows of his heart before the Lord. A
great multitude have their hearts touched by grace. There is no
prophetic answer, as so often before had happened in similar
circumstances; but there is an answer from God in the hearts of the
guilty. "We have sinned," said one among them; "yet now there is hope in
Israel concerning this thing." And they set themselves heartily to the
work. Israel is summoned, each one under pain of exclusion, to come up
to Jerusalem, and they assembled at the time of rain, for the matter was
urgent; and the congregation acknowledge it to be their duty to conform
to the law. Under the hand of Ezra, and by the diligence of those who
were appointed to this work, it was accomplished in two months. As for
all those who had taken strange wives, they gave their hand that they
would put away their wives: they confessed their sin and offered a ram
for this trespass.

Once more we find that that which characterises the operation of the
Spirit of God, and the intervention of God among His people, with
respect to their walk and moral condition, is separation from all who
are not the people of God as they were. Those of the priestly family who
were unable to produce their genealogy had been excluded from the
priesthood as polluted; and those among the people who were in the same
case were not acknowledged. They positively refuse any participation in
the work to the people of the land who wished to join them in building
the temple; and, finally, with respect to their own wives, several of
whom had borne them children, they have to put them away, and to
separate themselves, at whatever cost, from all that was not Israel. It
is this which characterises faithfulness in a position like theirs; that
is, a remnant come out from Babylon, and occupied in restoring the
temple and service of God, according to that which yet remained to them.

Moreover, we see that God did not fail to comfort them by His
testimony-sweet and precious consolation! But the power of the Gentiles
was there. That which appertained to authority and the throne at
Jerusalem, and to the power of ordaining, which belonged to it, was not
re-established. The public sanction of God was not granted.
Nevertheless, God blessed the remnant of His people, when they were
faithful; and the most prominent thing, and that which should dwell on
our hearts, is the grace which, in the midst of such ruin, and in the
presence of the Gentile throne set up through Israel's sin, could still
bless His people, though acknowledging the Gentile throne, which God had
established in judgment upon them. Their position is clearly and
touchingly stated in [Ezr 9:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#008). \[See
Note \#1\] It is a solemn season, when God, in His compassion,
encourages and sustains the little remnant of His people in the midst of
their difficulties; and owns them, as far as possible, after the ruin
which their unfaithfulness has brought upon them-such ruin that God had
been constrained to say of them, Lo-ammi. It is most afflicting to see
the people, after such grace as this, plunging again into fresh
unfaithfulness and departure from God. But such is God, and such is man.

We must ever bear in mind that Israel was an earthly people, and their
full place in blessing now \[See Note \#2\] that of the seat of God's
power in righteousness upon earth, so that their relationship to another
power, now set up among the Gentiles, was peculiar. But, if this be
borne in mind in the application of the contents to other circumstances,
the instructions afforded by this book are extremely interesting, as
exhibiting the principles of conduct in which faith is displayed in the
difficulties connected with a partial restoration from a ruined state,
the dependence on God by which man is sustained in the midst of these
difficulties, God's own ways in respect to His servants, and the absence
of all pretensions to re-establish what could not be set up in power.
Besides this, we have to view the Book of Ezra as giving that peculiar
display of God's mercy and ways which left the rod of Judah subsisting
till Shiloh came. No Shechinah was in the temple; no Urim and Thummim
with the priest. But there was a sovereign intervention of God in that
mercy which endures for ever, so that occasion was given to Messiah's
coming according to the promises made to the fathers. The judgment of
the Gentile power of Babylon carried with it the witness of a better
deliverance, but for this the full time of God's purposes was to be
awaited.

Note \#1

Only for 'were' in Verse 9 ([Ezr 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#009)),
we must read 'are.'

Note \#2

I say "now," because, till Samuel's time, Israel was called to be
blessed in obedience under priesthood, God being their King. But after
David's time in view of Christ, the nation became the seat of God's
power in righteousness, so far as it enjoyed the blessing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Introduction](neh000)

</div>
