<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezra Index](ezr.md)  
  [Previous](ezr000)  [Next](ezr002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001.md)

[Ezra 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 1:1</span></span>

But God now brings back a little remnant, that the true King might be
presented to them, and causes the temple to be rebuilt in its place,
according to the promises given by the mouth of Jeremiah, and at the
request of His servant Daniel. The latter, indeed, still at Babylon, had
a deeper sense of the real condition of the people, than they had who
were rebuilding the temple, and received also much more extensive
information as to the future destiny of Israel and the intentions of God
respecting it. But a due appreciation of this return from captivity also
is not without importance, since it is evident that the understanding of
God's dealings with respect to the restoration of Israel, and the coming
amongst them upon earth of Messiah Himself is connected with this event.
It was the will of God that there should be some respite. The current of
His purposes, however, concerning the times of the Gentiles, and the
position of His people, was unaltered. They were still in subjection to
the Gentiles. \[See Note \#1\]

It is Cyrus, king of Persia, who commands the people to return to
Jerusalem, and to rebuild the temple. A type himself in some respects,
of a far more glorious deliverer, he confesses Jehovah, the God of
Israel, to be the true God. He is "the righteous man, raised up from the
east, who treads down the princes like mortar." Called of Jehovah by
name for this purpose, he favours Israel and honours Jehovah.
Distinguished and blessed by the favour of the mighty God, a man whose
conduct was certainly under the guidance of God, his personal character
did not interfere with its being the times of the Gentiles,
notwithstanding that God had put it into the heart of one of these
Gentiles to favour His people. The word of God, by Jeremiah, is
fulfilled. Babylon is judged, a characteristic event of all importance.
But, in fact, that which still exists is a prolongation of its power.
The seat of the royal authority which God bestows on man is a city which
is not the city of God, which is neither the earthly Jerusalem nor the
heavenly. The house of David no longer holds the sceptre entrusted to
it.

It is true that the rod of the tribe of Judah is preserved, in order
that "the Branch" of the root of Jesse may be presented to this tribe.
But the power of the Gentiles still continues; it existed even when the
Messiah was on the earth, and the Jews had to be commanded to render
unto Caesar the things that were Caesar's. The presentation of Jesus,
the true Messiah, was but the occasion of fully demonstrating this in
the cry, "We have no king but Caesar."

Note \#1

The coming of Christ did not change this. The restoration of the remnant
gave occasion to the presentation of Christ to the people according to
the promises; but His rejection left their house desolate to see Him no
more till their repentance in the last days. Meanwhile, during His
lifetime on earth, not only have we, in Luke, the epoch divinely dated
by the reigns of Gentile rulers, but, pressed on the point, the Lord
refers to their position and baffles their hypocrisy, which would have
profited by what was the fruit and wages of their own sin to put Him in
an inextricable difficulty, by telling them to give to Caesar what was
Caesar's, and to God what was God's. Meanwhile deeper and more blessed
counsels were accomplished.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 2](ezr002.md)

</div>
