<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezra Index](ezr.md)  
  [Previous](ezr005)  [Next](ezr007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001.md)

All this shews us that, in ceasing to build the temple, Israel was in
fault. It appears from Haggai ([Ezr
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#015).md) that they had made no progress
at all. The terror with which the adversaries had inspired the Jews had
stopped them. They had no excuse for this, since even the king's
commandment was on their side. That which they lacked was faith in God.
We have seen that, when there was faith they dared to build, although
there was a decree against it. The effect of this faith is to give rise
to a decree in their favour, and that even through the intervention of
their adversaries. It is good to trust in God. Blessed be His gracious
name! Under the influence of the prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah the
house was finished ([Ezr 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#015).md).

Jehovah's great grace in this was a real occasion for joy. The priests
are set in their divisions, and the Levites in their courses, according
to the law of Moses, and we find more faithfulness than in the best days
of the kings (compare [Ezr 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#020.md) with
[Ch2 29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034).md). But we hear nothing of
the ordinances of David, and a still greater deficiency is seen in their
celebration of the feast of dedication. They kept the passover-a proof
that the redemption of the people could be remembered in the land. Happy
privilege of the restored remnant! Many also had joined them, separating
themselves from the filthiness of the heathen of the land. Jehovah had
given them cause for joy; but fire no longer came down from heaven to
testify divine acceptance of the sacrifice offered for the dedication of
the house. This was indeed a negative difference, but one of deep
significance. And even that which formed the subject of their joy
betrayed their condition. "Jehovah had turned the heart of the king of
Assyria unto them, to strengthen their hands in the work of the house of
God, the God of Israel." It was great kindness and touching grace on His
part. But what a change!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 7](ezr007.md)

</div>
