<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezra Index](ezr.md)  
  [Previous](ezr003)  [Next](ezr005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001.md)

But, in such a case, difficulties do not arise only from the weakness of
the remnant; they proceed, also, from elements with which the remnant
are outwardly connected, and which, at the same time, are foreign to the
relationship of God's people with Himself. In Israel's case, there was
real weakness, because God-although faithful to His people according to
their need-did not, in fact, come forward to establish them on the
original footing. To do so would not have been morally suitable, either
with respect to the position in which the people stood with God, or with
regard to the power which He had established among the Gentiles apart
from Israel, or with a view to the instruction of His own people in all
ages as to the government of God. Relationship with God is never
despised with impunity. But besides this, in such a state of things the
power of the world having gained so much ground already in the land of
promise, even among the people to whom the promise belonged,
difficulties arose from the fact that persons who, in consequence of the
intervention of the civil powers, were within the borders of the
promised land, desired to participate with the Jews in constructing the
temple. They alleged, in support of their claim, that they called upon
God as the Jews did, and had sacrificed unto Him since Esarhaddon had
brought them into the land. This was not enmity. Why repel such a
desire? The Spirit of God calls them the adversaries of Judah and
Benjamin. The people of God-the assembly of God-ought to be conscious of
their own peculiar privileges, and that they are the assembly of the
Lord. The Lord loved Judah and Benjamin. From His grace towards this
people flowed all the blessing of which they were the object; and the
people were bound fully to recognise this grace. Not to recognise it was
to despise it. Now this grace was the sovereign goodness of God. To
admit strangers would have been insensibility to this grace as the only
source of good; it would have been to lose it, and to say that they were
not its objects according to the sovereign goodness of God, more than
other persons of the world. But the faithfulness and intelligence of the
chiefs among Israel delivered them from this snare. "We ourselves
together," said they, "will build unto Jehovah the God of Israel." "Ye
have nothing to do with us to build a house unto our God." In fact, it
would have been to deny that He was their God, the God of Israel. This
is especially the case of the assembly when called to remember her
privileges after long forgetfulness and painful chastisement. If God
allow it for the trial or the chastening of His people, it is possible
that the work may be stopped through the practices and the malice of
those who will praise the great and noble Asnapper to the powers of the
earth; before whom they will appear in their true earthly character,
just as they assumed the garb of piety when seeking to insinuate
themselves among the remnant of Israel. The power that belonged to God's
people, at the time of their former independence, will alarm one who,
not trusting in God, dreads the effect upon his own authority of the
energy which the Spirit of God produces in the people of God
independently of this authority, however submissive the people may be.
Israel was acting here according to Cyrus's own decree; but this is of
no avail. That which depends on God is absolute; that which does not
depend on Him is arbitrary; but the faithful have nothing to do with all
this. God may see that trial and chastening are needful to them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 5](ezr005.md)

</div>
