<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr002)  [Next](ezr004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001)

In the seventh month \[See Note \#1\], the children of Israel gather
themselves together at Jerusalem, each one going up from the place where
he dwelt. The first thing which they do there, under the direction of
Joshua and Zerubbabel, is to build the altar, to place themselves under
the wings of the God of Israel, the sole Help and sole Protector of His
people; for fear was upon them because of the people of those countries.
Their refuge is in God. Beautiful testimony of faith! precious effect of
the state of trial and abasement they were in! Surrounded by enemies,
the unwalled city is protected by the altar of her God erected by the
faith of God's people; and she is in greater security than when she had
her kings and her walls. Faith, strict in following the word, confides
in the goodness of its God. This exactness in following the word
characterised the Jews, at this time in several respects. We have seen
it, [Ezr 2:59-63](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#059), where some could not
shew their genealogy; we find it again here, [Ezr
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#002); and again in Verse 4 ([Ezr
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#004)), on the occasion of the feast of
tabernacles. Customs, traditions, all were lost. They were very careful
not to follow the ways of Babylon. What had they left except the word? A
condition like this gave it its full power. All this takes place before
the house is built. It was faith seeking the will of God, although far
from having set everything in order. We find, then, no attempt at doing
without God those things which required a discernment that they did not
possess. But with touching faith these Jews exercise piety towards God,
worship God, and, as we may say, set Him in their midst, rendering Him
that which duty required. They acknowledged God by faith; but until the
Urim and Thummim should be there, they placed no one, on God's part,
with the object of giving some competency to act for Him, in a position
which required the exercise of God's authority.

Having at length, brought together the materials which the king of
Persia had granted them, the Jews begin to build the temple and lay its
foundations. The joy of the people, generally, was great. This was
natural and right. They praise Jehovah according to the ordinance of
David, and sing, (how well it became them now to do so!) "His mercy
endureth for ever." Nevertheless, the ancient men wept, for they had
seen the former house, built according to the inspired direction of God.
Alas! we understand this. He who now thinks of what the assembly \[See
Note \#2\] of God was at the first will understand the tears of these
old men. This suited nearness to God. Farther off, it was right that
joy, or at least the confused shout, which only proclaimed the public
event, should be heard; for, in truth, God had interposed in His
people's behalf. Joy was in His presence and acceptable. Tears confessed
the truth, and testified a just sense of what God had been for His
people, and of the blessing they had once enjoyed under His hand. Tears
recognised, alas! that which the people of God had been for God; and
these tears were acceptable to Him. The weeping could not be discerned
from the shout of joy; this was a truthful result, natural and sad, yet
becoming in the presence of God. For He rejoices in the joy of His
people, and He understands their tears. It was, indeed, a true
expression of the state of things.

Note \#1

This was the month in which the blowing of trumpets took place-a figure
of the restoration of Israel in the last days.

Note \#2

See Acts 2 and 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 4](ezr004)

</div>
