<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal005)  [Next](eph000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)

Here is the answer to those who then sought, and now seek, to bring in
law for sanctification and as a guide: the strength and the rule for
holiness are in the Spirit. The law does not give the Spirit. Moreover
(for it is evident that these pretensions of observing the law had given
liberty to the pride of the flesh) the Christian was not to be desirous
of vain-glory, provoking one another, envying one another. If any one,
through carelessness, committed some fault, the Christian's part was to
restore this member of Christ, dear to Christ and to the Christian,
according to the love of Christ, in a spirit of meekness, remembering
that he himself mig ht fall. If they wished for a law, here was one: to
bear each other's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ (that is, the
rule of all His own life here below). It is not by boasting, when one is
nothing, that true glory was acquired. It is but deceiving oneself, says
the apostle, in language which, by its simplicity, pours unspeakable
contempt on those who did so. These legalists boasted much of
themselves, imposed burdens on others; and investing themselves with
their Judaic glory that which was a burden to others, and one which they
did not help them to bear, was vain-glory to themselves they gloried in
their Judaism, and in making others subject to it. But what was their
work? Had they laboured really for the Lord? In no wise. Let them prove
their own work; then they would have reason to glory in what they had
done themselves, if there was any christian work of which they had been
the instruments. It certainly would not be in what they were doing then,
for it was another who had done the work of Christ in Galatia. And after
all, every one should bear his own burden.

The apostle adds a few practical words. He who was taught should, in
temporal things, succour those who taught him. Furthermore, although
grace was perfect and redemption complete, so that the believer received
the Holy Ghost as a seal thereof, God had attached infallible
consequences to a man's walk, be it after the flesh or after the Spirit.
The effects followed the cause; and they could not mock God by making a
profession of grace or Christianity, if they did not walk according to
its spirit, as led, in a word, by the Holy Ghost, who is its practical
power. Of the flesh they would reap corruption; of the Spirit, life
everlasting. But, as Christians, they must have patience in order to
reap, and not grow weary of well-doing: the harvest was sure. Let
believers, then, do good to all, especially to those of the house of
God.

Paul had written this letter with his own hand an unusual thing for him.
He generally employed others (as Tertius for the epistle to the Romans),
dictating to them that which he wished to say, adding the benediction
with his own hand, as certifying the correctness of that which was
written ([Co1 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#021); [Th2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017)): a remarkable proof of the
importance that the apostle attached to his writings, and that he did
not send them forth as ordinary letters from man to man, but as being
furnished with an authority that required the use of such precautions.
They were carefully invested with the apostolic authority. In this case,
full of sorrow, and feeling that the foundations had been overthrown, he
wrote the whole with his own hand. Accordingly, in saying this, he
returns immediately to the subject which had caused him to do so.

Those who desired to make a fair show after the flesh constrained the
Gentiles to be circumcised, in order to avoid the persecution that
attached to the doctrine of the cross to free salvation by Christ. The
circumcised were Jews, of a religion known and received even in this
world; but to become the disciples of a crucified man, a man who had
been hung as a malefactor, and to confess Him as the only Saviour how
could the world be expected to receive it? But the reproach of the cross
was the life of Christianity; the world was judged, it was dead in its
sin; the prince of the world was judged, he had only the empire of
death, he was (with his followers) the impotent enemy of God. In the
presence of such a judgment, Judaism was honourable wisdom in the eyes
of the world. Satan would make himself a partisan of the doctrine of one
only God; and those who believed in it join themselves to their former
adversaries, the worshippers of devils, in order to withstand this new
enemy who cast reproach on the whole of fallen humanity, denouncing them
as rebels against God, and as devoid of the life which was manifested in
Jesus only. The cross was the sentence of death upon nature; and the Jew
in the flesh was offended at it, even more than the Gentile, because he
lost the glory with which he had been invested beforeothers on account
of his knowledge of the only true God.

The carnal heart did not like to suffer, and to lose the good opinion of
the world, in which a certain measure of light was accepted or tolerated
by people of sense (and by sincere persons when there was no greater
light to be had), provided they did not set up pretensions that
condemned everybody, and judged everything which the flesh desired and
relied on for its importance. A compromise which more or less accepts
the flesh which does not judge it as dead and lost, which, in however
small a degree, will acknowledge that the world and the flesh are its
basis the world will accept. It cannot hope to strive against the truth
that judges the whole conscience, and it will accept a religion that
tolerates its spirit and adapts itself to the flesh, which it desires to
spare even when painful sacrifices must be made; provided only that the
flesh itself be not entirely set aside. Man will make himself a fakeer
sacrifice his life provided that it is self that does it, and that God
shall not have done the whole in grace, condemning the flesh as
incapable of well doing, having nothing good in itself.

The circumcised did not observe the law that would have been too
wearisome, but they desired to glory in proselytes to their religion. In
the world the apostle has seen nothing but vanity and sin and death; the
spirit of the world, of the carnal man, was morally degraded, corrupt,
and guilty, boasting in self, because ignorant of God. Elsewhere he had
seen grace, love, purity, obedience, devotedness to the Father's glory
and to the happiness of poor sinners. The cross declared the two things:
it told what man was; it told what God was, and what holiness and love
were. But it was the utmost degradation in the eyes of the world, and
put down all its pride. It was another who had accomplished it at the
cost of His own life, bearing all possible sufferings; so that the
apostle could give free course to all the affections of his heart
without boasting himself of anything; on the contrary, forgetting
himself. It is not self that we glory in when we look at the cross of
Christ: one is stript of self. It was He who hung upon that cross who
was great in Paul's eyes. The world which had crucified Him was thus
seen by the apostle in its true character; the Christ who had suffered
on the cross in His likewise. In that cross would the apostle glory,
happy, by this means to be dead to the world, and to have the world
ended, crucified, put to shame, as it deserved to be, for his heart.
Faith in the crucified Son of God overcomes the world.

To the believer the world has its true character; for, in fact, in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision has any value (all
that has passed away with a dead Christ), but a new creature, according
to which we estimate everything as God estimates it. It is to such, the
true children of God, that the apostle wishes peace. It was not Israel
circumcised after the flesh that was the Israel of God. If there were
any of that people who were circumcised in heart, who gloried in the
cross according to the sentiments of the new creature, those were the
Israel of God. Moreover every true Christian was of them according to
the spirit of his walk.

Finally, let no one trouble him with regard to his ministry. He bore the
stigmata of the Lord. It is known that marks were printed on a slave
with a hot iron to indicate the person to whom he belonged. The wounds
which the apostle had received, fully shewed who was his Master. Let his
right then to call himself the servant of Christ be no more questioned.
Touching appeal from one whose heart was wounded at finding his service
to the Master whom he had loved called in question! Moreover, Satan, who
imprinted those marks, ought indeed to recognise them those beautiful
initials of Jesus.

The apostle desires that grace be with them (according to the divine
love that animated him) as souls dear to Christ, whatever their state
might be. But there is no outpouring of heart in greetings
affectionately addressed to Christians. It was a duty a duty of love
which he fulfilled; but for the rest, what bonds of affection could he
have with persons who sought their glory in the flesh, and who accepted
that which dishonoured Jesus and which weakened and even annulled the
glory of His cross? Without any wish of his, the current of affection
was checked. The heart turned to the dishonoured Christ, although loving
those that were His in Him. This is the real feeling contained in the
last Verses of this epistle.

In Galatians we have indeed Christ living in us, in contrast with the
flesh, or I still living in flesh. But, as systematic truth, we have
neither the believer in Christ nor Christ in the believer. We have the
Christian's practical state at the end of Chapter 2. Otherwise the whole
epistle is a judgment of all return to Judaism, as identical with
heathen idolatry. The law and man in the flesh were correlative; law
came in between the promise and Christ, the Seed; was a most useful
testing of man, but when really known putting him to death, and
condemning him. Now this was fully met in grace in the cross, the end in
death of man in flesh, of sin, in Christ made sin. All return to law was
giving up both promise and the work of grace in Christ, and going back
again to flesh proved to be sin and lost, as if there could be
relationship with God in it, denying grace, and denying even the true
effect of law, and denying man's estate proved in the cross. It was
heathenism. And days and years, etc., took man up as alive in flesh, was
not the end of the old man in the cross in grace. We have Christ as our
life thereupon, or death would leave us of course hopeless. But we have
not the christian condition, we in Christ and Christ in us. It is the
discussion of the work that brings us there, and where man is, and of
vital importance in this respect. Man in the flesh is wholly gone from
all relationship with God, and none can be formed: there must be a new
creation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Introduction](eph000)

</div>
