<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen001)  [Next](gen003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001.md)

In chapter 2 we have man's relationship with God, and his own portion as
such. Hence the LORD \[See Note \#1\] God is introduced: not merely God
as a creator, but God in relationship with those He has created. Hence
we have the special manner of man's creation.

Only a word or two is called for as to the garden. It was a place of
delights. Eden means pleasure. It has wholly disappeared, and it was
meant that it should; only we find, by two at least of the rivers, that
it was on this earth substantially as we have it. Jehovah Elohim had
formed the man, Jehovah Elohim had planted the garden. The river of God
to water the earth had its rise there. The fresh springs of God are
found in the place of His delight. Man was set there to dress and keep
it. Man and the earth are both now in ruin.

But we have in this chapter, more particularly, the special relationship
of man with God, with his wife (type of Christ and His church), with the
creation; and the two great principles, from which everything flows as
regards man, established in the garden where man was placed in blessing;
namely, responsibility in obedience, and a sovereign source of life the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and the tree of life. In these
two things, in conciliating these two, lies the lot of every man \[See
Note \#2\]. It is impossible out of Christ. It is the question raised in
the law, and answered in grace in Christ. The law put life as the result
of the perfect obedience of him who knew good and evil, that is, made it
depend on the result of our responsibility. Christ, having undergone the
consequence of man's having failed, becomes (in the power of a life
which had gained the victory over death which was the consequence of
that disobedience) a source of life eternal that evil could not reach,
and that in a righteousness perfect according to a work which has taken
away all guilt from him that has share in it, a righteousness moreover
in which we stand before God according to His own mind and righteous
will and nature, according to His own glory. His priesthood \[See Note
\#3\] applies to the details of the development of this life in the
midst of evil, and the place of divine perfectness in which we are set
by His work, and reconciles our present infirmities with our divinely
given place before God. In the garden the knowledge of good and evil did
not yet exist: obedience only in refraining from an act, which was no
sin if it had not been forbidden, constituted the test. It was not a
prohibition of sin as at Sinai, and a claim of good when good and evil
were known.

The condition of man, in contrast with every other creature here below,
found its source in this, that, instead of springing from the earth or
water by the sole word of God, as a living being, man was formed and
fashioned from the dust, and God places him in immediate relationship,
as a living being, with Himself; inasmuch as he becomes a living being
through God Himself's breathing into his nostrils the breath of life.

All animated creatures are called living souls, and said to have the
breath of life; but God did not breathe into the nostrils of any in
order to their becoming living souls. Man was, by his existence, in
immediate relationship with God, as deriving his life immediately from
Himself; hence he is called in Acts 17 the offspring of God, and in Luke
it is said "the \[son\] of Adam the \[son\] of God."

It is important to consider this chapter as laying down, in a special
manner, all the principles of the relationship of man, whether with God,
with his wife, or with the inferior creation. Here were all things in
their own order as creatures of God in connection with the earth; but
man's labour not the means of their growth and fruitfulness. Nor did
rain from heaven minister fruitfulness from above. The mist that watered
it rose from the earth, drawn up by power and blessing, but not coming
down. Yet man was, as to his place, in a peculiar one in reference to
God. Man did not dwell in heaven; God did not dwell on earth. But God
had formed a place of peculiar blessing and delight for man's
habitation, and there He visited him. Out of this garden, where he was
placed by the hand of God as sovereign of the world, flowed rivers which
watered and characterised the world without. Upon Adam reposed the duty
of obedience. The image of God upon earth, in the absence of evil from
his nature, and as the centre of a vast system around him and in
connection with him, his own proper blessing was in his immediate
connection and intercourse with God, according to the place he was set
in.

As soon as God had redeemed a people, He dwelt among them. His abiding
presence is the consequence of redemption and through it only ([Exo
29:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#046).md). Here He created, blessed, and
visited. Adam, created the conscious centre of all around him, had his
blessing and security in dependence on and intercourse with God. This,
as we shall see, he forfeited, and became the craving centre of his own
wishes and ambition, which he could never satisfy.

Earthly nature then in its perfection, with man, in relationship with
God by creation and the breath of life that was in him, for its centre;
enjoyment; a source of abiding life, and a means of putting
responsibility to the test; the sources of universal refreshment to the
world without; and if continuing in his created condition, blessed
intercourse with God on this ground such was the position of the first
and innocent Adam. That he might not be alone here, but have a
companion, fellowship, and the enjoyment of affection, God formed not
another man, for then the one were not a centre but out of the one man
himself, his wife, that the union might be the most absolute and
intimate possible, and Adam head and centre of all. He receives her,
moreover, from the hand of God Himself. Such was nature around man: what
God always owns, and man never sins against with impunity, though sin
has spoiled it all; the picture of what Christ, the church, and the
universe shall be at the end in power in the obedient man. As yet all
was innocence, unconscious of evil.

Note \#1

That is Jehovah Elohim, a personal name as well as Godhead. It was
important too that Israel should know that their God was the original
Creator of all. Still it is only used when special ways and connection
with man are introduced. The distinction of Jehovistic and Elohistic
documents is the merest child's play, and flows from entire ignorance of
the ways and mind of God. There is always a reason for one or the other.
Elohim is simply God; Jehovah is the acting governing person in time
though self-existing, who abides ever the same and having to do with
others, who is, and was, and is to come.

Note \#2

In Eden the two principles were there, obedience and life; man failed,
incurred death, and was excluded from life there. The law did not treat
man as lost, though it proves him so, but takes up the two principles
and makes life dependent on obedience. Christ takes the consequence of
failure for us on the cross, and is the source of divine life to us, and
that in a new resurrection state.

Note \#3

The difference between priesthood and advocacy will be treated in its
place in John and Hebrews. I only remark here that priesthood refers to
help and access to God, advocacy to failure.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 3](gen003.md)

</div>
