<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen037)  [Next](gen039.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 37 through 41.

What follows from chapter 37 is the interesting history of Joseph, to
which even children ever yield a ready ear, although ignorant of all the
beauties which the believer finds who knows Jesus, and recognises Him as
prefigured there: for there is an intrinsic beauty, where the heart is
not yet hardened, in all that reveals Him. Joseph, as revealed in his
dreams (faith alone could thus own it), is, in the counsels of God, heir
of the glory and chief of all the family. His brothers are jealous of
this; so much the more that he is the beloved of his father. He is sold
to the Gentiles by his brethren, and, in the figure, instead of being
put to death, as the Jews did to the true Joseph (that being not
possible), is passed for dead. Meanwhile Judah falls into every kind of
shame and sin, which does not deprive him, however, of the royal
genealogy. Joseph is brought low among the Gentiles, through false
accusations put in prison, his "feet made fast in the stocks." "The iron
enters into his soul:" "till the time came that his cause was known, the
word of the Lord tried him."

Rising out of his humiliation, he is elevated, unknown now of his
brethren, to the right hand of the throne; and the administration of all
power over the Gentiles committed to him. In his humiliation,
interpreter of the thoughts and counsels of God; in his elevation, he
administers with power according to the same wisdom, and reduces all
under the immediate authority of him who was seated on the throne.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 39](gen039.md)

</div>
