<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen025)  [Next](gen027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#001)

Here (chap. 26) Isaac replaces Abraham as heir upon the earth. It is a
new revelation, when Isaac is himself in a strange land, like the one
made to Abraham at the first; only that Isaac was already in connection
with the calling of God, but not in enjoyment of the promise. There was
a famine in the land, and Isaac could not dwell in it, and he goes to
those who had part of the land in possession, but had no title the
future enemies and oppressors of his people. But God appears to him
there, and tells him not to return into the world, but to dwell in the
land which He should tell him of. He is maintained in the heavenly
places, but still as a place of promise, though not now seeking it as
unknown, but still as an object of faith. It was a fresh calling under
different circumstances (the Lord appearing to him anew), not indeed to
journey to a land, but to dwell where He should shew him, and not to
seek natural resources (Egypt). He was not to go back, but to live by
faith. But the land is also shewn and the promises renewed, both as to
Israel, and the nations, and the land. For the moment he was to sojourn
in the land where he was, that is, where the Philistines were. Thus the
whole land, Philistines and all, was given to him, and he dwelt in
Gerar.

This is the position of Isaac; as the first half of chapter 12 is the
position of Abraham. From Verse 7 to the end we have his personal walk
as to faith, as Abraham's in the latter part of chapter 12; and the
settlement of what should be his portion in his posterity according to
the faith that he had. He fails like Abraham, and yet more as to energy.
He denies his wife, as Abraham had done, and he leaves in the hand of
the enemy the wells which Abraham had dug: he had failed in faith in God
before Abimelech, and, though God had said to him "Sojourn in this
land," he has to recede before the will of Abimelech, then driven from
well to well, and has room only where the Philistine has room. In
Beersheba he meets with God, where he has pitched his tent, where
Abraham had set his bounds with Abimelech when Isaac was born. But
Abraham had not received direction as to sojourning in the land, and had
reproved Abimelech, whose servants had taken the well and Abimelech had
given it up. Abraham had dug all these wells as he needed, as a
stranger, and they were not taken away: the only one contended for was
Beersheba, and that Abimelech gave up. However Beersheba was, in divine
providence, the limit of the land according to the faith of Israel. The
Philistines did remain till David came, the representative of Christ.
The otherwise heirs of the land possessed it not fully. There the Lord
appeared and blessed Isaac: there Israel reposed and worshipped. This
chapter is Isaac's history; it answers to Abraham's (chaps. 12, 20).

Esau's ways were as careless, as his thoughts as to the birthright were
profane. He marries with the women of the land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 27](gen027)

</div>
