<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen016)  [Next](gen018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001.md)

In chapter 17 we have a fresh revelation of the Lord to Abram, and, I
think, are upon higher and holier ground. It is not here calling, or
worship, or the world and victory over it in Lot (12-14 \[See Note \#1\]
), or a revelation by the word of how God would accomplish His earthly
promises, and what His people should go through (15) not what God was
for Abram, but what He was Himself. It is not, I am thy shield and thine
exceeding great reward; but I am God Almighty. This is not all He was,
but it is what He was His own name; and Abram is called upon to walk
correspondently to this name. Hence, also, he does not worship or
request anything from God, however high the privilege, but Elohim talks
with him. The various parts of His purposes are unfolded, and what Abram
is to be before Him in whom he believed. It is the starting-point of
God's history of His connection with, and ways in, the world, Jew and
Gentile starting from His original sovereign title. That which brings in
the Gentiles as well as Israel is before us. It is not the individual
seed of promise, as in chapter 22, to which the promise of chapter 12
was confirmed, but the title of God with the first vessels of promise as
root of a people set apart to God. In general God's covenant was with
him. It is not a legal binding, but a free engagement of God in grace,
according to His own mind, that Abraham should be the father of many
nations. It is in three parts. God would be a God to Abraham, and to his
seed after him; the land wherein he was a stranger is to be to him and
to his seed after him; and nations and kings should come out of him.

All these promises are without condition; but principles are set forth
binding on Abraham, and expressive of the character of those who enjoy
the privileges of God circumcision and free sovereign promise.
Circumcision in contrast with law (see [Joh
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#022).md), but expressive of the death of
the flesh (compare [Rom 4:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#010).md) \[See
Note \#2\], and next, the promise of the seed is given; but this when
Abraham, as to the body, was now dead; and as the character of
circumcision was peremptory for flesh cannot have to say to God in light
so was it as to the promise; it was to the son of promise. Though God
might outwardly bless the seed according to flesh, the covenant was
exclusively with the heir of promise. Death of flesh (for we are away
from God), and simple sovereign grace, are peremptory. The barren woman
must be the mother of thousands. Abraham rejoices in the promise, and
acts obediently in the order of God.

There is another element here, a common one to this purport in
scripture; God's giving a name to Abram and to Sarai also. It signifies
the title of direct authority, and entering into relationship on this
ground. So Adam, so Pharaoh, so Nebuchadnezzar. Here God having revealed
His own name gives one to Abram in connection with Himself. Thenceforth
He is the God of Abraham, revealing Abraham's place, and the sign of the
covenant in separation to Himself too; Abraham is the father of many
nations; Ishmael even is preserved and blessed; but the promised seed
stands alone, also has his name (laughter), the child of mere promise of
her whom God named too, intimating, though not revealing, resurrection
(compare [Rom 4:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019).md). For this
world, Israel as to promise holds the place of Sarah thus named, but
when dead according to the flesh. \[See Note \#1\] In chapter 12 it is
the path of faith, though with failing, that failing the not owning the
separated relationship of God's people (the church) to the heir of the
world. Then chapters 13, 14 the believer in a worldly place taken as his
portion, the victory of the separated ones, the faith which would not
take a shoe-latchet. Chapter 15 the revelation of a numerous seed and
Israel's place. Chapter 16 the attempt to have the promise in flesh
Hagar. See Galatians.

Note \#2

I read Verse 12 ([Gen 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#012).md) thus:
"And father of circumcision \[that is, of true separation to God, such
as God owns\], not only to those of the circumcision, but to those who
walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham, which he had being yet
uncircumcised." That is, God recognises them (believers from among the
Gentiles) as being truly circumcised.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 18](gen018.md)

</div>
