<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen003)  [Next](gen005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001.md)

But grace could work. The grace of a God above the evil of man, and Abel
approaches Him by faith. Hereon follows the separation of the families
of God and of the enemy, of the world and of faith. Abel comes as
guilty, and, unable as he is to draw near to God, setting the death of
another between himself and God, recognises the judgment of sin has
faith in expiation. Cain, labouring honestly outwardly where God had set
him to do so, externally a worshipper of the true God, has not the
conscience of sin; he brings as an offering the fruits which are signs
of the curse, proof of the complete blinding of the heart, and hardening
of the conscience of a sinful race driven out from God. He supposes that
all is well; why should not God receive him? There is no sense of sin
and ruin. Thus is brought in sin, not only against God which Adam had
fully wrought, but against one's neighbour, as it has been displayed in
the case of Jesus; and Cain himself is a striking type of the state of
the Jews.

In these two chapters we have sin in all its forms, as a picture set
before us, in Adam's and Cain's conduct sin in its proper original
character against God, and then more particularly against Christ (in
figure) in the conduct of Cain, with its present consequences set forth
as regards the earth. We may remark, in both Adam's and Cain's case, how
the government of God on the earth is set in prominence as to the
effects of sin. Separation from God of a being capable of, and naturally
formed for, intercourse with Him, is there, but left rather for the
moral weighing of the soul. The publicly revealed judgment is that of
consequences on earth. It is clearly said no doubt, "He drove out the
man" with whom He was to have held intercourse (chap. 3); and "from thy
face," says Cain, "am I driven out" (chap. 4). But what is developed is
the earthly condition. Adam is shut out from a peaceful and unlaborious
paradise, to labour and till the ground. Cain is cursed from the earth
in this very position, and a fugitive and a vagabond; but he will be as
happy there as he can, and frustrate God's judgment as far as he can,
and settle himself in comfort in the earth as his, where God had made
him a vagabond \[See Note \#1\]; and that is the world. Here it is first
pictured in its true character.

Remark also the two solemn questions of God: "Where art thou?" man's own
state apart from God intercourse with Him lost; and, "What hast thou
done?" sin committed in that state; of which the consummation and full
witness is in the rejection and death of the Lord.

In the history of Lamech we have on man's part, self-will in lust (he
had two wives), and vengeance in self-defence; but, I apprehend, an
intimation in God's judgment, that as Cain was the preserved though
punished Jew, his posterity at the end, before the heir was raised up
and men called on Jehovah in the earth, would be sevenfold watched over
of God. Lamech acknowledges he had slain to his hurt, but shall be
avenged.

In the second chapter then we have man in the order of created blessing,
the state in which he is; in the third, man's fall from God, by which
his intercourse with God on this ground is foreclosed; in the fourth,
his wickedness in connection with grace in the evil state resulting from
his fall; what the world thereupon became; man being driven out from the
presence of Him who accepted by sacrifice in grace, and ordering its
comforts and pleasures without God, yet borne with; and a remnant
preserved, and the heir of God's counsels, Seth, set up, and men calling
on the name of God in relationship with them, that is, on Jehovah.
Driven from the presence of God, Cain seeks, in the importance of his
family, in the arts and the enjoyments of life, temporal consolation,
and tries to render the world, where God had sent him forth as a
vagabond, a settled abode and as agreeable as possible, far from God.
Sin has here the character of forgetfulness of all that had passed in
the history of man; of hatred against grace and against him who was the
object and vessel of it; of pride and indifference; and then despair,
which seeks comfort in worldliness. We have also the man of grace (Abel,
type of Christ and of them that are His) rejected, and left without
heritage here below; man, his enemy, judged and abandoned to himself;
and another (Seth) the object of the counsels of God, who becomes heir
of the world on the part of God. We must remember however that they are
only figures of these things, and that in the antitype the Man who is
heir of all is the same as He who has been put to death.

Note \#1

Nod is "vagabond." God had made him Nod; and he settles himself, calls
"the land after his own name," or at least his son's name, as an
inheritance, and embellishes his city with arts and the delights of
music a remarkable picture.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 5](gen005.md)

</div>
