<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen021)  [Next](gen023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 22, 23, and 24.

But on this introduction of the heir, he necessarily becomes the main
subject; and chapter 22 opens with it: "It came to pass after these
things," for, indeed, a new scene now opens. The heir of the promise is
sacrificed and raised again in figure, and the promise is confirmed to
the seed \[See Note \#1\]. The ancient depositary or form of the
covenant (even that of promise), mother of the heir (Sarah), now
disappears. Abraham sends Eliezer, the steward of his house, to seek a
wife for the risen heir, for his only son Isaac, from the country
whither Isaac was not to return in the world such as it is: beautiful
figure of the mission of the Holy Spirit, who, fulfilling His office
(after the Lord's death and resurrection) with the elect of God who are
to form the Lamb's wife in the counsels of God, conducts her (already
adorned with His gifts, but waiting the moment when she shall see Him
who is heir of all things that belong to His Father) across the desert
to her heavenly bridegroom. The call and readiness of the appointed
bride is beautifully depicted, and she goes with him, who prefigures the
Spirit, to the bridegroom who is heir of all. But mark how false and
wretched the position of the espoused wife, if Isaac had lost his hold
upon her heart her home in nature left, and she in the wilderness with
one who was nothing to her, if not her guide to Isaac. The walk of the
Spirit, moreover, in man, is depicted in the most instructive manner in
the details of this history, in the conduct of Eliezer: his simple
subjection to what was for him the word of God even when all seemed well
([Gen 22:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#021)); heart reference in
thankfulness to God the first feeling ([Gen
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#026)); purpose of heart in service
([Gen 22:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#033)), and the like.

Note \#1

This distinct confirmation to (not in) the seed, is what the apostle
refers to as the one seed, that is Christ. The general promises as to
Israel were of a seed as the stars of heaven for number. This is the
confirmation to the one seed, when risen, of the promise given in
chapter 12.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 23](gen023)

</div>
