<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Habakkuk Index](hab)  
  [Previous](hab002)  [Next](zep000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Habakkuk Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001)

This answer brings home to the heart of the prophet the solemn presence
of God, and leads him to look for a revival of God's working in the
midst of the people in grace, and turns him back to God's first favour,
and recalls to the prophet all the glory of Jehovah, when He appeared
for His people at the beginning, when He came out of His place and
overturned every obstacle in order to establish His people in blessing.
At this remembrance of His power, the prophet trembles, but in the
consciousness that it is the source of a perfect and assured rest in the
day of trouble, when the destroyer should come up and invade the people.

He concludes his prophecy with the blessed result of all these precious
lessons, namely, the expression of perfect confidence in Jehovah. He
would rejoice and be glad in Him, if all the blessing should fail.
Jehovah Himself was his strength, his trust, and his support, and He
would set him on the high places of His blessing, giving him, as it
were, hinds' feet to ascend there by His favour. There is nothing finer
than this development of the thoughts of the Spirit of God, the sorrows
and anxieties produced by Him, the answer of God to give understanding
and strengthen faith, in order that the heart may be in full communion
with Himself. It will be remarked here, that it is the idolatrous
oppressor who especially appears, although the first invasion is
described, for that was the immediate cause of the prophet's anguish.
The Chaldeans, therefore, are distinctly named. It is that people, as we
know, who reduced the people of God to captivity.

In sum, in this prophet we have (for the comfort of the faithful heart,
which loves God's people because they are His, and hence is distressed
by the wickedness found among them, and still more by the judgment which
falls upon them) the answer of God, explaining His ways to faith, and
His sure faithfulness to His promises. He knows the oppressor, but the
just must live by faith.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah Introduction](zep000)

</div>
