<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Haggai Index](hag.md)  
  [Previous](zep003)  [Next](hag001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Haggai Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001.md)

[Haggai](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hag 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Haggai

The last three prophets prophesied after the Babylonish captivity. God,
as we have seen in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, brought back a small
remnant of His people, who were re-established in Jerusalem and in the
land; but the throne of God was not again set up there, neither was the
royalty of the house of David reinstated in its original authority. The
empire of the Gentile head had been in a certain sense judged as not
having fulfilled its duty to God, who had given it its authority. But
another empire, raised up among the Gentiles, had taken the place of the
first; and, while under the overruling hand of God (who disposes of the
hearts of all) favourable to the Jews, still held the people of God in
subjection to its yoke-the yoke of those who were not in covenant with
God, but still aliens to His promises. God recognised the power of the
empire which He had established. Israel was therefore dependent on the
favour of those who ruled over them because of their sins, and had to
wait upon God to render them favourable, worshipping Him according to
His merciful appointments, until the Messiah should come, who would be
their Redeemer and Deliverer.

Deprived of almost everything, Israel were not deprived of the
lovingkindness of their God, on which they should have reckoned, and of
which they had received a striking testimony, in the return of the
remnant from the lands in which they had been captive. If all else were
lost, the fear of God and His law in their hearts remained to them; and
godliness might now be exercised in the manner which He had prescribed
(compare Deuteronomy 30).

The three prophets, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, set before us the
encouragements which God gave the people, that they might be faithful in
their new position; and the testimony against their unfaithfulness,
called for by the decay of their piety, and the total want of reverence
for Jehovah into which the people had fallen. The temple was necessarily
the centre of this imperfect and intermediate state of the people. It
was there, if God allowed the re-establishment of their worship, that
the hearts of the people should centre. That was the outward form in
which their piety as a people should be expressed. It was thus that the
return of their heart to God should be manifested. Whatever deficiencies
there might be in the restored Levitical service, still, it was the
house of God, to which was attached all that could be re-established,
and was the centre of its exercise.

But the faith of the Jews was quickly enfeebled, and they ceased to
build. There were difficulties, no doubt. It was not now as in the days
of Solomon, when everything was at the disposal of the king whose power
extended over all the neighbouring countries. But God had shewn His
goodness towards His people by inclining the heart of the king of Persia
to favour them; and Israel should have had confidence in the kindness of
God, and have expected its fruits; but, full of unbelief, they were
speedily discouraged.

God chastised His people, but He did so at the fitting time. He employs
the means which His sovereign grace so often used in the history we have
been considering. He raises up a prophet, and even two, to revive their
courage and stimulate them to the work. In the dealings of God, two
things aid in deciding the right time for His intervention, namely,
moral considerations and God's arrangement of events. In this case God
had sufficiently chastised His people, to make manifest His governmental
dealings in the relations of grace, which He now established with them
by means of the prophets; and He had raised up a prince who was
disposed-if the people acted in faith-to acknowledge the will of God and
the decrees of Cyrus.

Having thus prepared all both morally and providentially (for He makes
everything work together for our good), He sends His prophets to animate
their courage and their faith, so as to lead them to accomplish that
which had always been their duty.

They should always have leaned directly upon God, and have gone on with
the work, unless hindered by force. \[See Note \#1\] Now, also, they are
called to proceed with it, resting on God, without knowing the king's
mind. Their confidence must be in God, Himself. Moreover, without this,
there would have been neither piety nor faith in their labours. The
king's support had been prepared by God for the moment in which their
faith should have been manifested. In fact, the difficulty did not fail
to arise; but, faith being in exercise, they continued to build in spite
of their enemies, being directed in their reply to these enemies by the
wisdom of God, and the king gives it his sanction. A difficulty may be a
real one, but it is only for the unbelief of hearts that it is an
obstacle, if on the path of God's will; for faith reckons upon God, and
performs that which He wills, and difficulties are as nothing before
Him. Unbelief can always find excuses, and excuses too that are
apparently well founded: they have only this capital defect, that they
leave God out.

The subject of Haggai is the temple. God having brought back the
captives, they immediately seek their own ease without seeking to
rebuild the house of Jehovah. Was it then a time to rebuild their own?
There was tranquillity enough for the latter-it required no faith-the
world made no opposition. The prophet exhibits the practical effect of
this, the sensible chastisements of God even as to their temporal
interests. And why these chastisements? They neglected God in neglecting
His house. In truth, if they had thought of God, His house would have
been their first object.

The people, moved by the fear of Jehovah, hearkened to the words of His
servant the prophet. But another difficulty stands in the way of faith;
the painful inferiority of all that can be accomplished by the remnant
of His people, when God brings them back from captivity. They can do
nothing in comparison with the former manifestation of His glory in the
midst of His people. The effect of the people's fall and of the
captivity they had suffered is felt in everything. God cannot identify
His glory with an authority different from His own, exercised over His
people (and which must needs be so) as the result of His righteous
judgment, of His government on earth. He may lift them up-may restore
them, because He loves them; but it is no longer the same thing. He
cannot re-establish that direct connection which brings with it the
manifestation of His power and glory. That relationship had ended in the
judgment. The consciousness of this inferiority tends to weaken faith.

The grace of God meets this difficulty by the testimony of the prophet.
It is a very sorrowful thing to see the ruin of that which God
established in blessing, and the weakness and imperfection of that which
is raised upon those ruins, although even this is the fruit of His
precious grace.

The prophet, without troubling himself as to the king's intentions,
encourages the people by turning their thoughts to Jehovah Himself, and
shewing them that, after all, Jehovah reigned, cared for them, and would
have them act in view of what He was for them, and seek His glory. For,
weak as they were, He would thus be in relationship with them.

Note \#1:

This actually happened (see Ezra 4: 24): but it is evident that, in
consequence of the spirit of unbelief working in them, its effect was to
discourage them entirely, so that they made no effort to recommence
their work, saying, "The time is not come that Jehovah's house should be
built." It was only the testimony of the Spirit by the prophet that
aroused them from their moral torpor.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai Chapter 1](hag001.md)

</div>
