<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hebrews Index](heb.md)  
  [Previous](heb003)  [Next](heb005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001.md)

The apostle goes on to apply this part of Israel's history to those whom
he was addressing, laying stress on two points:1st, That Israel had
failed of entering into rest, through unbelief; 2nd, That the rest was
yet to come, and that believers (those who were not seeking rest here,
but who accepted the wilderness for the time being) should enter into
it.

He begins by saying, "Let us fear lest, a promise being left us of
entering into his rest, any should seem to come short of it," not attain
to it. For we have been the objects of the proclamation of glad tidings,
as they were in times past. But the word addressed to them remained
fruitless, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it: for we
which have believed do enter into rest. The rest itself is yet to come,
and it is believers who enter into it. For a rest of God there is, and
there are some who enter into it: inasmuch as it is written, "They,"
that is, those (pointing out a certain class who are to be excluded)
"shall not enter into my rest."

God had wrought in creation, and then rested from His works when He had
finished them. Thus, from the foundation of the world, He has shewn that
He had a rest, as in the passage already quoted, "If they shall enter
into my rest;" but this, shewing that the entering in was yet in
question, shewed that into God's rest in the first creation man had not
entered. Two things then are evident some were to enter in, and the
Israel to whom it was first proposed did not enter in because of their
unbelief. Therefore He again fixes a day, saying, in David, long after
the entrance into Canaan, "Today as it is written today, if ye will hear
his voice, harden not your hearts."

Here a natural objection occurs to which the passage gives a complete
answer, without speaking of the objection itself. The Israelites had
indeed fallen in the wilderness, but Joshua had brought the people into
Canaan which the unbelievers never reached; the Jews were there, so that
they did enter into the rest as to which the others failed. The answer
is evident. It was long after this that God said by David, I sware in my
wrath, if they shall enter into my rest." If Joshua had given rest to
Israel, David could not afterwards have spoken of another day. There
remains therefore a rest for the people of God. It is yet to come; but
it is assured by the word of God a truth, the bearing of which is
immediately seen with regard to the connection of the believing Jews
with the nation, in the midst of which they were tempted to seek a rest
that, for the moment, faith did not afford them, and being enfeebled saw
but dimly before it. To have God's rest was still to be waited for.
Faith alone acknowledged this, and sought for none in the wilderness,
trusting to the promise. God still said "Today."

The state of the people was worse than the rest that Joshua gave them;
which, as their own Psalms prove, was no rest at all.

As to the order of the Verses, the exhortation in Verse 11 ([Heb
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011).md) depends on the whole course of
what precedes, the argument having been completed by the testimony of
David coming after Joshua. After the creation God indeed rested; but He
said after that, "If they shall enter into my rest," so that men had not
entered into that rest. Joshua entered into the land; but the word by
David, coming long after, proves that the rest of God was not yet
attained. Nevertheless this same testimony, which forbade the entrance
into rest because of unbelief, shewed that some are to enter in:
otherwise there was no need of declaring the exclusion of others for an
especial cause, nor warning men that they might escape what hindered
their entering in. No parenthesis is needed.

Now, as long as any one had not ceased from his works, he had not
entered into rest; he who has entered into it has ceased from work, even
as God ceased from His own works when He entered into His rest. "Let us
therefore use all diligence" is the exhortation of the faithful witness
of God, "that we may enter into that rest" the rest of God in order that
we may not fall after the same example of unbelief.

We should especially observe here, that it is the rest of God which is
spoken of. This enables us to understand the happiness and perfection of
the rest. God must rest in that which satisfies His heart. This was the
case even in creation all was very good. And now it must be in a perfect
blessing that perfect love can be satisfied with, with regard to us, who
will possess a heavenly portion in the blessing which we shall have in
His own presence, in perfect holiness and perfect light. Accordingly all
the toilsome work of faith, the exercise of faith in the wilderness, the
warfare (although there are many joys), the good works practiced there,
labour of every kind will cease. It is not only that we shall be
delivered from the power of indwelling sin; all the efforts and all the
troubles of the new man will cease. We are already set free from the law
of sin; then our spiritual exercise for God will cease. We have already
rested from our works with regard to justification,and therefore in that
sense we have now rest in our consciences, but that is not the subject
here it is the Christian's rest from all his works. God rested from His
works assuredly good ones and so shall we also then with Him.

We are now in the wilderness; we also wrestle with wicked spirits in
heavenly places. A blessed rest remains for us, in which our hearts will
repose in the presence of God, where nothing will trouble the perfection
of our rest, where God will rest in the perfection of the blessing He
has bestowed on His people.

The great thought of the passage is, that there remains a rest (that is
to say, that the believer is not to expect it here) without saying where
it is. And it does not speak in detail of the character of the rest,
because it leaves the door open to an earthly rest for the earthly
people on the ground of the promises, although to Christian partakers of
the heavenly calling God's rest is evidently a heavenly one.

The apostle then sets before us the instrument which God employs to
judge the unbelief and all the workings of the heart which tend, as we
have seen, to lead the believer into departure from the position of
faith, and to hide God from him by inducing him to satisfy his flesh and
to seek for rest in the wilderness.

To the believer who is upright in heart this judgment is of great value,
as that which enables him to discern all that has a tendency to hinder
his progress or make him slacken his steps. It is the word of God, which
being the revelation of God, the expression of what He is, and of all
that surrounds Him, and of what His will is in all the circumstances
that surround us judges everything in the heart which is not of Him. It
is more penetrating than a two-edged sword. Living and energetic, it
separates all that is most intimately linked together in our hearts and
minds. Whenever nature the "soul" and its feelings mingles with that
which is spiritual, it brings the edge of the sword of the living truth
of God between the two, and judges the hidden movements of the heart
respecting them. It discerns all the thoughts and intentions of the
heart. But it has another character, coming from God (being, as it were,
His eye upon the conscience), it brings us into His presence; and all
that it forces us to discover, it sets in our conscience before the eye
of God Himself. Nothing is hidden, all is naked and manifested to the
eye of Him with whom we have to do. \[See Note \#11\] Such is the true
help, the mighty instrument of God to judge everything in us that would
hinder us from pursuing our course through the wilderness with joy, and
with a buoyant heart strengthened by faith and confidence in Him.
Precious instrument of a faithful God, solemn and serious in its
operation; but of priceless and infinite blessing in its effects, in its
consequences.

It is an instrument which, in its operations, does not allow "the
desires of the flesh and of the mind" liberty to act; which does not
permit the heart to deceive itself; but which procures us strength, and
places us without any consciousness of evil in the presence of God, to
pursue our course with joy and spiritual energy. Here the exhortation,
founded on the power of the word concludes.

But there is another succour, one of a different character, to aid us in
our passage through the wilderness; and that is priesthood a subject
which the epistle here begins and carries on through several Chapters.

We have a High Priest who has passed through the heavens as Aaron
through the successive parts of the tabernacle Jesus, the Son of David.

He has, in all things, been tempted like ourselves, sin apart; so that
He can sympathize with our infirmities. The word brings to light the
intents of the heart, judges the will, and all that has not God for its
object and its source. Then, as far as weakness is concerned, we have
His sympathy. Christ of course had no evil desires: he was tempted in
every way, apart from sin. Sin had no part in it at all. But I do not
wish for sympathy with the sin that is in me; I detest it, I wish it to
be mortified judged unsparingly. This the word does. For my weakness and
my difficulties I seek sympathy; and I find it in the priesthood of
Jesus. It is not necessary, in order to sympathize with me, that a
person should feel at the same moment that which I am feeling rather the
contrary. If I am suffering pain, I am not in a condition to think as
much of another's pain. But in order to sympathize with him I must have
a nature capable of appreciating his pain.

Thus it is with Jesus, when exercising His priesthood. He is in every
sense beyond the reach of pain and trial, but He is man; and not only
has He the human nature which in time suffered grief, but He experienced
the trials a saint has to go through more fully than any of ourselves;
and His heart, free and full of love, can entirely sympathize with us,
according to His experience of ill, and according to the glorious
liberty which He now has, to provide and care for it. This encourages us
to hold fast our profession in spite of the difficulties that beset our
path; for Jesus concerns Himself about them, according to His own
knowledge and experience of what they are, and according to the power of
His grace.

Therefore, our High Priest being there, we can go with all boldness to
the throne of grace, to find mercy and the grace suited to us in all
times of need: mercy, because we are weak and wavering; needful grace,
because we are engaged in a warfare which God owns.

Observe, it is not that we go to the High Priest. It is often done, and
God may have compassion; but it is a proof that we do not fully
understand grace. The Priest, the Lord Jesus, occupies Himself about us
sympathises with us, on the one hand; and on the other, we go directly
to the throne of grace.

The Spirit does not here speak positively of falls; we find that in 1
John 2. There also it is in connection with communion with His Father,
here with access to God. His purpose here is to strengthen us, to
encourage us to persevere in the way, conscious of the sympathies which
we possess in heaven, and that the throne is always open to us.

Note \#11

The connection between the word addressed to man and God Himself is very
remarkable here.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 5](heb005.md)

</div>
