<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hebrews Index](heb.md)  
  [Previous](heb012)  [Next](jam001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#001.md)

In this next Chapter there is more than one truth important to notice.
The exhortations are as simple as they are weighty, and require but few
remarks. They rest in the sphere in which the whole of the epistle does:
what relates to the Christian's path as walking here, not what flows
from union with Christ in heavenly places. Brotherly love, hospitality,
care for those in bonds, the strict maintenance of the marriage tie and
persona! purity, the avoiding of covetousness: such are the subjects of
exhortation, all important and connected with the gracious walk of a
Christian, but not drawn from the higher and more heavenly sources and
principles of the christian life as we see in Ephesians and Colossians.
Nor, even though there be more analogy for the Epistle to the Romans
rests in general in life in Christ in this world, presenting Christ's
resurrection, without going on to His ascension \[See Note \#40\] are
the exhortations such as in this latter epistle. Those which follow
connect themselves with the circumstances in which the Hebrews found
themselves, and rest on the approaching abolition and judgment of
Judaism, from which they had now definitely to separate themselves.

In exhorting them ([Heb 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#007).md) to
remember those who have guided the flock, he speaks of those already
departed in contrast with those still living. ([Heb
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017).md) The issue of their faith might
well encourage others to follow their steps, to walk by those principles
of faith which had led them to so noble a result.

Moreover Christ never changed; He was the same yesterday, today, and for
ever. Let them abide in the simplicity and integrity of faith. Nothing
is a plainer proof that the heart is not practically in possession of
that which gives rest in Christ, that it does not realise what Christ
is, than the restless search after something new "divers and strange
doctrines." To grow in the knowledge of Christ is our life and our
privilege. The search after novelties which are foreign to Him, is a
proof of not being satisfied with Him. But he who is not satisfied with
Jesus does not know Him, or, at least, has forgotten Him. It is
impossible to enjoy Him, and not to feel that He is everything, that is
to say, that He satisfies us, and that by the nature of what He is, He
shuts out everything else.

Now with regard to Judaism, in which the Hebrews were naturally inclined
to seek satisfaction for the flesh, the apostle goes farther. They were
no longer Jews in the possession of the true worship of God, a
privileged worship in which others had no right to participate. The
altar of God belonged now to the Christians. Christians only had a right
to it. An earthly worship, in which there was no entering within the
veil, into God's own presence in the sanctuary, could no longer subsist
a worship that had its worldly glory, that belonged to the elements of
this world and had its place there. Now, it is either heaven or the
cross and shame. The great sacrifice for sin has been offered; but by
its efficacy, it brings us into the sanctuary, into heaven itself, where
the blood has been carried in; and on the other hand it takes us outside
the camp, a religious people connected with the world down here, into
shame and rejection on earth. This is the portion of Christ. In heaven
He is accepted, He has gone in with His own blood on earth cast out and
despised.

A worldly religion, which forms a system in which the world can walk,
and in which the religious element is adapted to man on the earth, is
the denial of Christianity.

Here we have no continuing city, we seek the one which is to come. By
Christ we offer our sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving. By sharing
also our goods with others, by doing good in every way we offer
sacrifices with which God is well pleased. (Ver 16).

He then exhorts them to obey those who, as responsible to God, watch
over souls, and who go before the saints in order to lead them on. It is
a proof of that humble spirit of grace which seeks only to please the
Lord.

The sense of this responsibility makes Paul ask the saints to pray for
him, but with the declaration that he had assuredly a good conscience.
We serve God, we act for Him, when He is not obliged to be acting on us.
That is to say, the Spirit of God acts by our means when He has not to
occupy us with ourselves. When the latter is the case, one could not ask
for the prayers of saints as a labourer. While the Spirit is exercising
us in our conscience, we cannot call our selves lahourers of God. When
the conscience is good we can ask unreservedly for the prayers of the
saints. The apostle so much the more asked for them because he hoped
thus the sooner to see them again.

Finally, he invokes blessing upon them, giving God the title he so often
ascribes to Him " the God of peace." In the midst of exercise of heart
with regard to the Hebrews, of arguments to preserve their love from
growing cold, in the midst of the moral unsteadiness that enfeebled the
walk of these Christians, and their trials in the breaking down of what
they considered stable and holy, this title has a peculiarly precious
character.

The Spirit sets them also in the presence of a risen Christ, of a God
who had founded and secured peace by the death of Christ, and had given
a proof of it in His resurrection. He had brought Christ again from the
dead according to the power of the blood of the everlasting \[See Note
\#41\] covenant. On this blood the believing people might build a hope
that nothing could shake. For it was not, as at Sinai, promises founded
on the condition of the people's obedience, but on the ransom which had
been paid, and the perfect expiation of their disobedience. The blessing
was therefore unchangeable, the covenant (as the inheritance and the
redemption) was everlasting. He prays that the God who had wrought it,
would work in them to grant them full power and energy for the
accomplishment of His will, working Himself in them that which was well
pleasing in His sight.

He urges them to give heed to exhortation; he had only sent them a few
words.

He who wrote the letter desires they should know that Timothy had been
set at liberty; he himself was so already; he was in Italy;
circumstances which tend to confirm the idea that it was Paul who wrote
this letter a very interesting point, although in nowise affecting its
authority.

It is the Spirit of God who everywhere gives His own authority to the
word.

Note \#40

It is only spoken of in [Heb 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#034.md), and
an allusion in [Heb 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#006.md).

Note \#41

The word "everlasting" is specific, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, in
contrast with a system which was passing away. It speaks of eternal
redemption, eternal inheritance, the eternal Spirit even.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 1](jam001.md)

</div>
