<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb007)  [Next](heb009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001)

Chapter 8 in this respect is simple and clear; the last Verses only give
room for a few remarks.

The sum of the doctrine we have been considering is, that we have a High
Priest who is seated on the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, a
Minister of the heavenly sanctuary which is not made with hands. As
such, He must have an offering to present there. Jesus, were He on
earth, would not be a Priest; there were priests on earth according to
the law, in which all things were but figures of the heavenly things; as
Moses was told to make all according to the pattern that was shewn him
in the mount. But the ministry of Jesus is more excellent, because He is
the Mediator of a better covenant, spoken of in Jeremiah 31, which is
here quoted; a clear and simple proof that the first covenant was not to
continue.

We again find here that particular development of the truth which was
called for by the character of the persons to whom this letter was
addressed.

The first covenant was made with Israel; the second must be so likewise,
according to the prophecy of Jeremiah. The epistle however in this
passage only makes use of the fact that there was to be a second
covenant, in order to demonstrate that the first was to last no longer.
It had grown old, and was to vanish away. He recites the terms of the
new covenant. We shall find that he makes use of it afterwards. In that
which follows, he contrasts the services that belonged to the first with
the perfect work on which Christianity is founded. Thus the extent and
the value of the work of Christ are introduced.

Although there is no difficulty here, it is important to have light with
regard to these two covenants, because some have very vague ideas on
this point, and many souls, putting themselves under covenants, that is,
in relationship with God under conditions in which He has not placed
them lose their simplicity, and do not hold fast grace and the fullness
of the work of Christ, and the position He has acquired for them in
heaven.

A covenant is a principle of relationship with God on the earth
conditions established by God under which man is to live with Him. The
word may perhaps be used figuratively, or by accommodation. It is
applied to details of the relationship of God with Israel, and so to
Abraham (Gen.15), and like cases; but, strictly speaking, there are but
two covenants, in which God has dealt with man on earth, or will the old
and the new. The old was established at Sinai. The new covenant is made
also with the two houses of Israel. \[See Note \#15\]

The gospel is not a covenant, but the revelation of the salvation of
God. It proclaims the, great salvation of God. We enjoy indeed all the
essential privileges of the new covenant, its foundation being laid on
God's part in the blood of Christ, but we do so in spirit, not according
to the letter.

The new covenant will be established formally with Israel in the
millennium. Meanwhile the old covenant is judged by the fact that there
is a new one.

Note \#15

We have also, at the end of the epistle, the expression " the blood of
the everlasting covenant." " Covenant" he uses I doubt not (as the word
"law" also is used), because it was commonly employed as the condition
of relationship with God, and " eternal " is characteristic of the
Hebrews. There have been, and will be, covenants in time and for the
earth; but we have eternal conditions of relationship with God, of which
the blood of Christ is the expression and security, founded in
everlasting grace, and righteousness as well as grace, by that precious
blood, in which all the character and all the purpose of God has been
made good and glorified, as well as our sins been put away.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 9](heb009)

</div>
