<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb006)  [Next](heb008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001)

The epistle, returning to the subject of Melchizedec, reviews therefore
the dignity of his person and the importance of his priesthood. For on
priesthood, as a means of drawing nigh to God, the whole system
connected with it depended.

Melchizedec then (a typical and characteristic person, as the use of his
name in Psalm 110 proves) was king of Salem, that is king of peace, and,
by name, king of righteousness. Righteousness and peace characterise his
reign. But above all he was priest of the Most High God. This is the
name of God as supreme Governor of all things Possessor, as is added in
Genesis, of heaven and earth. It is thus that Nebuchadnezzar, the
humbled earthly potentate, acknowledged Him. It was thus He revealed
Himself to Abraham, when Melchizedec blessed the patriarch after he had
conquered his enemies. In connection with his walk of faith, the name of
Abraham, victorious over the kings of the earth, is blessed by
Melchizedec, by the king of righteousness, in connection with God as
Possessor of heaven and earth, the Most High. This looks onward to the
royalty of Christ, a Priest upon His throne, when by the will and the
power of God He shall have triumphed over all His enemies a time not yet
arrived first fulfilled in the millennium, as it is commonly expressed,
though this rather refers to the earthly part. Abraham gave tithes to
Melchizedec. His royalty was not all, for Psalm 110 is very clear in
describing Melchizedec as priest, and as possessing a lasting and
uninterrupted priesthood. He had no sacredotal parentage form whom he
derived his priest hood As a priest, he had neither father nor mother;
unlike the sons of Aaron, he had no genealogy (compare [Ezr
2:62](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#062)); he had no limits assigned to
the term of his priestly service, as was the case with the sons of
Aaron. ([Num 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003)) He was made a pries,
like in his priestly character to the Son of God; but, as yet, the
latter is in heaven.

The fact that he received tithes from Abraham, and that he blessed
Abraham, shewed the high and preeminent dignity of this otherwise
unknown and mysterious personage. The only thing that is testified of
him without naming father or mother, commencement of life, or death that
may have taken place is, that he lived.

The dignity of his person was beyond that of Abraham, the depositary of
the promises; that of his priesthood was above Aaron's, who in Abraham
paid the tithes which Levi himself received from his brethren. The
priesthood then is changed, and with it the whole system that depended
on it.

Psalm 110 interpreted by faith in Christ for the epistle, we need not
say, speaks always to Christians is still the point on which its
argument is founded. The first proof the, that the whole was changed, is
that the Lord Jesus, the Messiah (a Priest after the order of
Melchizedec, did not spring evidently from the sacredotal tribe, but
from another, namely, that of Judah. For that Jesus was the Messiah,
they believed. But, according to the Jewish scriptures, the Messiah was
such as He is here presented; and in that case the priesthood was
changed, and with it the whole system. And this was not only a
consequence that must be drawn from the fact that the Messiah was of the
tribe of Judah, although a Priest; but it was requisite that another
priest than the priest of Aaron's family should arise, and one after the
similitude of Melchizedec, who should not be after the law of a
commandment which had no more power than the flesh to which it was
applied, but who should be according to the power of a never ending
life. The testimony of the psalm to this was positive: "Thou art a
priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek."

For there is in fact a disannulling of the commandment that existed
previously, because it was unprofitable (for the law brought nothing to
perfection); and there is the bringing in of a better hope, by which we
draw nigh to God.

Precious difference! A commandment to man, sinful and afar from God,
rep\] aced by a hope, a confidence, founded on grace and on divine
promise, through which we can come even into God's presence.

The law, doubtless, was good; but separation still subsisted between man
and God. The law made nothing perfect. God was ever perfect, and human
perfection was required; all must be according to what divine perfection
required of man. But sin was there, and the law was consequently without
power (save to condemn); its ceremonies and ordinances were but figures,
and a heavy yoke. Even that which temporarily relieved the conscience
brought sin to mind and never made the conscience perfect towards God.
They were still at a distance from Him.. Grace brings the soul to God,
who is known in love and in a righteousness which is for us.

The character of the new priesthood bore the stamp in all its features,
of its superiority to that which existed under the order of the law and
with which the whole system of the law either stood or fell.

The covenant connected with the new priesthood answered likewise to the
superiority of the latter over the former priesthood.

The priesthood of Jesus was established by oath; that of Aaron was not.
The priesthood of Aaron passed from one person to another, because death
put an end to its exercise by the individuals who were invested with it.
But Jesus abides the same for ever; He has a priesthood that is not
transmitted to others. Thus He saves completely, and to the end, those
that come unto God by Him, seeing that He ever lives to intercede for
them.

Accordingly "such a high priest became us." Glorious thought! Called to
be in the presence of God, to be in relationship with Him in the
heavenly glory, to draw near to Him on high, where nothing that defiles
can enter, we needed a High Priest in the place to which access was
given us (as the Jews in the earthly temple), and such a one as the
glory and purity of heaven required.What a demonstration that we belong
to heaven, and of the exalted nature of our relationship with God ! Such
a Priest became us: " Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,
exalted above the heavens" for so are we, as to our position, having to
do with God there-a Pr iest who needs not to renew the sacrifices, as
though any work to put away sin still remained to be done, or their sins
could still be imputed to believers; for then it would be impossible to
stay in the heavenly sanctuary. As having once for all completed His
work for the putting away of sin, our Priest offered His sacrifice once
for all when He offered up Himself,

For the law made high priests who had the infirmities of men, for they
were men themselves; the oath of God, which came after the law,
establishes the Son, when He is perfected for ever, consecrated in
heaven unto God.

We see here that, although there was an analogy and the figures of
heavenly things, there is more of contrast than of comparison in this
epistle. The legal priests had the same infirmities as other men; Jesus
has a glorified priesthood according to the power of an endless life.

The introduction of this new priesthood, exercised in heaven, implies a
change in the sacrifices and in the covenant. This the inspired writer
develops here setting forth the value of the sacrifice of Christ, and
the long-promised new covenant. The direct connection is with the
sacrifices; but he turns aside for a moment to the two covenants, a so
wide-embracing and all-weighty consideration for the christian Jews who
had been under the first.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 8](heb008)

</div>
