<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hebrews Index](heb.md)  
  [Previous](heb008)  [Next](heb010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001.md)

The epistle, recounting some particular circumstances which
characterised the first covenant shews that neither were sins put away,
nor was the conscience purged by its means, nor the entrance into the
holiest granted to the worshipers. The veil concealed God. The high
priest went in once a year to make reconciliation no one else. The way
to God in holiness was barred. Perfect, as pertaining to the conscience,
they could not be through the blood of bulls and of goats. These were
but previsionary and figurative ordinances, until God took up the real
work itself, in order to accomplish it fully and for ever.

But this brings us to the focus of the light which God gives us by the
Holy Ghost in this epistle. Before proving by the scriptures of the Old
Testament the doctrine that he announced and the discontinuance of the
actual sacrifices of all sacrifice for sin, the writer, with a heart
full of the truth and of the importance of that truth, teaches the value
and the extent of the sacrifice of Christ (still in contrast with the
former offerings, but a contrast that rests on the intrinsic value of
the offering of Christ). These three results are presented: first, the
opened way into the sanctuary was manifested, that is , access to God
Himself, where He is, second, the purification of the conscience; third,
and eternal redemption (I may add the promise of an eternal
inheritance).

One feels the immense importance, the inestimable value, of the first.
'The believer is admitted into God's own presence by a new and living
way which he has consecrated for us through the veil, that is to say,
His flesh; has constant access to God, immediate access to the place
where He is, in the light. What complete salvation, what blessedness,
what security! For how could we have access to God in the light, if
everything that would separate us from Him, were not entirely taken away
through Him who was once offered to bear the sins of many? But here it
is the precious and perfect result, in this respect, which is revealed
to us, and formally proved in Chapter 10, as a right that we possess,
that access to God Himself is entirely and freely open to us. We are not
indeed told in this passage that we are seated there, for it is not our
union with Christ that is the subject of this epistle, but our access to
God in the sanctuary. And it is important to note this last, and it is
as precious in its p\] ace as the other. We are viewed as on earth and
being on earth we have free and full access to God in the sanctuary. We
go in perfect liberty to God, where His holiness dwells, and where
nothing that is contrary to Him can be admitted. What happiness! What
perfect grace! What a glorious result, supreme and complete ! Could
anything better be desired, remembering too that it is our
dwelling-place? This is our position in the presence of God through the
entrance of Christ into the sanctuary.

The second result shews us the personal state we are brought into, in
order to the enjoyment of our position; that we may, on our part, enter
in freely. It is that our Saviour has rendered our conscience perfect,
so that we can go into the sanctuary without an idea of fear, without
one question as to sin arising in our minds. A perfect conscience is not
an innocent conscience which, happy in its unconsciousness, does not
know evil, and does not know God revealed in holiness. A perfect
conscience knows God; it is cleansed, and, having the knowledge of good
and evil according to the light of God Himself, it knows that it is
purified from all evil according to His purity. Now the blood of bulls
and goats, and the washing repeated under the law, could never make the
conscience perfect. They could sanctify carnally, so as to enable the
worshiper to approach God outwardly, yet only afar off, with the veil
still unrent. But a real purification from sin and sins, so that the
soul can be in the presence of God Himself in the light without spot,
with the consciousness of being so the offerings under the law could
never produce. They were but figures. but, thanks be to God, Christ has
accomplished the work; and, present for us now in the heavenly and
eternal sanctuary, He is the witness there that our sins are put away;
so that all conscience of sin before God is destroyed, because we know
that He who bore our sins is in the presence of God, after having
accomplished the work of expiation. Thus we have the consciousness of
being in the light without spot. We have the purification not only of
sins but of the conscience, so that we can use this access to God in
full liberty and joy, presenting ourselves before Him who has so loved
us.

The third result, which seals and characterises the two others, is that
Christ, having once entered in abides in heaven. He has gone into the
heavenly sanctuary to remain there by virtue of an eternal redemption,
of blood that has everlasting validity. The work is completely done, and
can never change in value. If our sins are effectually put away, God
glorified, and righteousness complete, that which once availed to effect
this can never not avail. The blood shed once for all is ever
efficacious.

Our High Priest is in the sanctuary, not with the blood of sacrifices,
which are but figures of the true. The work has been done which puts sin
away. This redemption is neither temporal not transitory. It is the
redemption of the soul, and for eternity, according to the moral
efficacy of that which has been done.

Here then are the three aspects of the result of the work of Christ:
immediate access to God; a purged conscience; and eternal redemption.

Three points remain to be noticed before entering on the subject of the
covenants, which is here resumed.

First, Christ is a High Priest of good things to come. In saying "things
to come",the starting-point is Israel under the law before the advent of
our Lord. Nevertheless, if these good things were now acquired, if it
could be said, "we have them," because Christianity was their
fulfillment, it could hardly be still said when Christianity was
established "good things to come." They are yet to come. These "good
things" consist of all that the Messiah will enjoy when He reigns. This
also is the reason that the earthly things have their place. But our
present relationship with Him is only and altogether heavenly. He acts
as Priest in a tabernacle which is not of this creation: it is heavenly,
in the presence of God, not made with hands. Our place is in heaven.

In the second place, "Christ offered himself, by the eternal Spirit
\[See Note \#16\] , without spot, to God." Here the precious offering up
of Christ is viewed as an act that He performed as man, though in the
perfection and Value of His Person. He offered Himself to God but as
moved by the power, and according to the perfection of the Eternal
Spirit. All the motives that governed this action, and the
accomplishment of the fact according to those motives, were purely and
perfectly those of the Holy Ghost; that is, absolutely divine in their
perfection, but of the Holy Ghost acting in a man (a man without sin
who, born and living ever by the power of the Holy Ghost, had never
known sin; who, being exempt from it by birth, never allowed it to enter
into Him); so that it is the Man Christ who offers Himself. This was
requisite.

Thus the offering was in itself perfect and pure, with out defilement;
and the act of offering was perfect, whether in love or in obedience, or
in the desire to glorify God, or to accomplish the purpose of God.
Nothing mingled itself with the perfection of His intent in offering
Himself. Moreover, it v.was not a temporary offering, which applied to
one sin with which the conscience was burdened and which went no farther
than that one an offering which could not, by its nature, have the
perfection spoken of, because it was not the Person offering up Himself,
nor was it absolutely for God, because there was in it neither the
perfection of will nor of obedience. But the offering of Christ was one
which, being perfect in its moral nature, being in itself perfect in the
eyes of God, was necessarily eternal in its value. For this value was as
enduring as the nature of God who was glorified in it.

It was made, not of necessity, but of free will, and in obedience. It
was made by a man for the glory of God, but through the Eternal Spirit,
ever the same in its nature and value.

All being, thus perfectly fulfilled for the glory of God, the conscience
of every one that comes to Him by this offering is purged; dead works
are blotted out and set aside; we stand before God on the ground of that
which Christ has done.

And here the third point comes in. Being perfectly cleansed in
conscience from all that man in his sinful nature produces, and having
to do with God in light and in love, there being no question of
conscience with Him, we are in a position to serve the living God.
Precious liberty! in which, happy and without question before God
according to His nature in light, we can serve Him according to the
activity of His nature in love. Judaism knew no more of this than it did
of perfection in conscience. Obligation towards God that system indeed
maintained; and it offered a certain provision for that which was needed
for outward failure. But to have a perfect conscience, and then to serve
God in love, according to His will of this it knew nothing.

This is christian position: the conscience perfect by Christ, \[See Note
\#17\] according to the nature of God Himself; the service of God in
liberty, according to His nature of love acting towards others.

For the Jewish system, in its utmost advantages, was characterised by
the holy place. There were duties and obligations to be fulfilled in
order to draw near, sacrifices to cleanse outwardly him who drew near
outwardly. Meanwhile God was always concealed. No one entered into "the
holy place :" it is implied that the "most holy" was inaccessible. No
sacrifice had yet been offered which gave free access, and at all times.
God was concealed: that He was so characterised the position. They could
not stand before Him. Neither did He manifest Himself. They served Him
out of His presence without going in.

It is important to notice this truth, that the whole system in its
highest and nearest access to God was characterised by the holy place,
in order to understand the passage before us.

Now the first tabernacle Judaism as a system is identified with the
first part of the tabernacle, and that open only to the priestly part of
the nation, the second part (that is, the sanctuary) only shewing, by
the circumstances connected with it, that there was no access to God.
When the author of the epistle goes on to the present position of
Christ, he leaves the earthly tabernacle it is heaven itself he then
speaks of, a tabernacle not made with hands, nor of this creation, into
which he introduces us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 10](heb010.md)

</div>
