<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos001)  [Next](hos003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#001)

Chapter 2 introduces some new elements of exceeding interest; and, at
the same time, a magnificent revelation of the dealings of God in grace,
towards Israel. The opening words of the chapter appear to me to
recognise the principle of a remnant, acknowledged by the heart of God
as a people, and an object of mercy, while the nation, as a body, is
rejected by the Lord. But the thought of Israel's restoration, announced
in the last Verse of chapter 1 ([Hos
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011)), gives the remnant its value and
its place, according to the counsels of God: "God has not cast off his
people whom he foreknew." Nevertheless, Jehovah says by the Holy Ghost
to the prophet, not "I have married thy mother, and I will not put her
away," but "Say unto your brethren, Ammi (my people), and to your
sisters, Ruhamah (received in mercy)"; that is to say, to those who,
acted upon by the Spirit of God, really enter in heart into the mind of
the prophet-those who possess the character which made Jesus say, These
are my brethren and my sisters. Such a position, in the eyes of the
prophet, have the people and the beloved of God. It is thus that Peter
applies [Hos 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023) to the remnant, that
Paul reasons in Romans 9, and that the Lord Himself can take the name of
"the true vine."

The prophet, then (he alone could do it), was to acknowledge his
brothers and sisters as in relation with God, according to the whole
effect of the promise, although that effect was not yet accomplished.
But, in fact, with respect to God's dealings, God had to plead with the
mother-with Israel, looked at as a whole. God could not own her as
married to Him: He would not be her husband. She must repent, if she
would not be punished and made bare before the world. Neither would
Jehovah have pity on her children, for they were born while she was
going after false gods. Israel ascribed all the blessings that Jehovah
had poured upon her to the favour of false gods. Therefore Jehovah had
forcibly turned her back in her path. And since she knew not that it was
Jehovah who filled her with this abundance, He would take it from her,
and leave her naked and destitute, and visit upon her all the days of
Baalim, during which Israel had served them and had forgotten Jehovah.
But having brought this unfaithful woman into the wilderness, where she
must learn that these false gods could not enrich her, Jehovah Himself,
having allured her into it, would speak to her heart in grace. There it
should be, when she had understood where her sin had brought her and was
alone with Jehovah in the wilderness to which He had allured her, that
He would comfort her, and give her entrance through grace into the power
of those blessings which He alone could bestow.

The circumstance by which God expresses this return to grace is of
touching interest. The valley of Achor should be her door of hope.
There, where the judgment of God began to fall on the unfaithful people
after their entrance into the land, when God acted according to the
responsibility of the people-there would He now shew that grace abounded
over all their sin. The joy of their first deliverance and redemption
should be restored to them. It should be a recommencement of their
history in grace, only it should be an assured blessing. The principle
of the relationship of Israel with Jehovah should be changed. He would
not be as a Master (Baal) to whom she was responsible, but as a Husband
who had espoused her.. The Baalim should be entirely forgotten. He would
take every kind of enemy out of their land, whether wild beast or wicked
man, and He would betroth her unto Him in righteousness and in judgment,
in lovingkindness, in mercies, and in faithfulness. She should know that
it was Jehovah. Israel being thus betrothed in faithfulness to Jehovah,
and such being the assured principles of His relationship with her, the
chain of blessing between Jehovah and His people on earth should be
secured and uninterrupted. Jehovah should be in connection with the
heavens, the heavens with the earth, the earth should yield her
blessings, and these should meet all the wants of Israel, the seed of
God. And He would sow Israel unto Himself in the earth, and her name
should be Ruhamah (that is, received in mercy or grace), Ammi (that is,
my people); and Israel should say, "Thou art my God." In a word, there
should be an entire restoration of blessing, but on the ground of grace
and of the faithfulness of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 3](hos003)

</div>
