<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos005)  [Next](hos007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 6 and 7.

Chapter 6 calls forth a touching address from the prophet, in which he
entreats the people to return to Jehovah. Faith has always this
resource, because it sees the hand of God, its God, in the chastisement,
and can appeal to the mercy of a well-known God. In [Hos
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004) the Spirit expresses the
lovingkindness of God towards His rebellious children, and His readiness
to meet the smallest movement in their heart towards good. Therefore had
God sent unto them the testimony of the prophets-an extraordinary means,
as we have seen, for maintaining in grace the relationship of the people
with God, and that morally and in reality. In the heart and mind of God
it was not a question of outward forms; the moral relationship with God
had failed. He had raised up prophets, as a means of relationship with
Himself, to bring back the hearts of the people. But, as Adam \[See Note
\#1\] did in the garden of Eden, they had broken the covenant on which
the enjoyment of the blessings God had heaped upon them depended. They
had acted treacherously towards Him. Jehovah their God was ready to
raise them up from their ruin; but if He came in, His presence brought
to light that iniquity which formed a moral barrier to this restoration.
Thereupon the heart of the prophet overflows anew in lamentation over
their iniquity. The prophecy of Hosea is important in this respect, that
it furnishes us with the moral picture of the people whom God has
judged, the condition of this people which made the judgment inevitable.
There is nothing more affecting than this mixture, on God's part, of
reproaches, of lovingkindness, of appeal, of reference to happier
moments. But all was in vain. He must needs judge, and have recourse to
His sovereign grace, which would bring Israel back to repentance and to
Him. They encouraged the king and the princes in their wickedness.
Already the fruit of Israel's iniquity was seen in the weakness of the
people; strangers also devoured them; yet, for all this they did not
return to Jehovah. If at times, under the sense of their misery, they
howled upon their beds, they did not cry unto God. What a picture of man
under the effect of sin, who will not turn to the Lord!

Note \#1

It should be read, "But they, like Adam, have transgressed the
covenant." Adam, in Hebrew, is a proper name and a generic name; but the
latter generally with the article, The Adam, as in [Gen
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027). It is to this passage Paul
refers in [Rom 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 7](hos007)

</div>
