<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos013)  [Next](joe000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)

Chapter 14. It is this last work that we find in chapter 14 of the
prophet. Israel, returning to Jehovah, acknowledges his iniquity, and
addresses himself to the grace of his God. Thus only could he render Him
acceptable worship. His heart, instructed now and cleansed, refuses the
help of Asshur, whom he had sought in his unbelief, when he rejected his
God who searched his ways; he will no longer lean upon an arm of flesh,
nor on carnal strength, and he casts off the false gods to whom he had
bowed the knee. His refuge should be with Him in whom the fatherless
find mercy. God, therefore, who only waited for the return of His people
(a return which He had wrought in their hearts by His grace, when the
chastisement, necessary to His moral glory, and to the good of the
people, was ended)-God Himself would heal their backsliding; He would
love them freely. His anger was turned away from His people. His
blessing and grace should be as the dew unto them. Divine fertility and
beauty should again be seen in Israel, His people. I would read thus:
"Ephraim \[shall say\] What have I to do with idols?" Jehovah says, "I
have heard him and observed him." Then Ephraim, "I am like a green
fir-tree." And Jehovah answers, "From me is thy fruit found. There is
repentance, which Jehovah acknowledges; and the joyful consciousness of
blessing, which God causes to be felt, proceeds from Himself, who both
secures and augments it. The last Verse ([Hos
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009)) teaches us that which we have
already endeavoured to point out, namely, that this history makes known
the ways of God, which the wise-divinely taught in heart-will readily
understand. "For the ways of Jehovah are right. His path of action is
straight onwards, however great His mercy may be. The just, sustained
and helped by the strength of God, can walk there; but the
transgressors, through the very power that is present, shall fall
therein. There is indeed no prophet who gives the dealings of God, as a
whole, so completely as Hosea.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel Introduction](joe000)

</div>
