<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hosea Index](hos.md)  
  [Previous](hos011)  [Next](hos013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#001.md)

The Spirit presents another aspect of the relationship of Israel with
God. He would punish Ephraim, and the sins of Judah should be
remembered. But He reminds them, that there was a time when Jacob could
wrestle with his God, and make supplication to Him, and prevail; that
afterwards He found him in Bethel, and there God, even Jehovah, spake to
him, and revealed to him His name, which, in fact, He had not done in
Peniel. Take notice here of the way in which God enters into all the
details of His moral relationship with Israel, in order that the force,
the meaning, and the righteousness of the "Lo-ruhamah," which He
pronounces on His people, may be understood. His love for them at first,
His tender care, the manner in which He had already been requited at
Baal-peor, the horrible iniquity of Gibeah now renewed, their
corruption, their idolatry, their refusal to hearken, all is recounted;
and finally, the way in which Jacob had formerly succeeded in turning
away wrath, and how God had then revealed Himself to him. Now, the name
which He had proclaimed on that occasion was His memorial for ever. Let
them then return unto God, and wait on Him continually. But no; all is
corruption, and Ephraim will not even confess his sin. He who had
brought them up out of Egypt would make them dwell again in tents
without a country. God had constantly spoken to them by His prophets,
but the iniquity was there. Israel had already been poor-a fugitive and
a wanderer. And God had interposed in sovereignty by a messenger of
deliverance, when there was no covenant in force on which the people
could reckon to deliver them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 13](hos013.md)

</div>
