<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hosea Index](hos.md)  
  [Previous](dan012)  [Next](hos001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001.md)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Hosea

The prophet Hosea prophesied during the same period of time as Isaiah;
but he is more occupied with the existing condition of the people, and
especially of Israel, although he often speaks of Judah likewise. His
prophecy is more simple in its character than that of Isaiah. His style
on the contrary, is extremely energetic, and full of abrupt transitions.
The reign of that king of Israel, which is given as a date to the
prophecy, was outwardly a moment of prosperity to that portion of the
land. The prophecy itself will inform us of its moral condition. The
patience of God bore long with the rebellion of His people taking pity
on their affliction (see 2 Kings 17), even as long as this patience
could be a testimony to the real character of the God who exercised it,
and did not deny holiness and righteousness, nor give a sanction to sin,
so that it was still possible to bless the people, without sacrificing
all true testimony (even in the eyes of the heathen) to what God is-in a
word, "until there was no remedy."

Jeroboam reigned during a period which commenced some years before the
reigns of Uzziah, etc., kings of Judah. Uzziah began his reign fourteen
years before the end of Jeroboam's reign. He reigned fifty-two years;
Jotham reigned sixteen years; Ahaz, sixteen years; Hezekiah, twenty-nine
years. So that Hosea prophesied over fifty years, \[See Note \#1\] and
perhaps longer; being a witness, during those long years, to Israel's
rebellion against Jehovah, his heart grieved and broken by the iniquity
of a people whom he loved, and whose happiness, as being the people of
Jehovah, he had at heart.

The prophecy of Hosea is divided into two parts: the revelation of God's
purposes with respect to Israel; and the remonstrances which the prophet
addresses to the people in the name of Jehovah. In this latter part he
frequently speaks of Israel as a whole; frequently also he distinguishes
between Israel or Ephraim and Judah. But I do not see that he addresses
himself directly to Ephraim (that is, to the ten tribes). He speaks of
Ephraim, but not to Ephraim. Moreover, this is the general character of
his prophecy-a kind of prolonged lamentation, expressing his anguish at
the people's condition, while unfolding all the dealings of God towards
them, except chapter 14, in which he calls Israel to such a repentance
as shall take place in the last days.

Note \#1:

The reign of Jotham was as to some part, possibly the most of it,
coincident with that of Uzziah, who was put aside as a leper.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 1](hos001.md)

</div>
