<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa065)  [Next](jer000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 66](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)

Chapter 66 speaks of the judgment that introduces it, and consequently
gives us more historical details. The temple is rebuilt in Jerusalem
([Isa 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#006)), but Jehovah does not own
it, man alone being concerned in its building; neither does He
acknowledge the sacrifices offered in it. He looks to the meek and
contrite spirit. There were some who mocked at the hopes of these, and
said mockingly, "Let Jehovah display his glory"; but He will appear to
their confusion, and for the blessing of those who waited for Him. Zion
shall suddenly be as the mother of a people, blessed in Jehovah and
comforted. The remnant is thus distinguished in these two chapters in
the most explicit manner.

Let us retrace here the use of the word servant. First of all it was
Israel; then Christ Himself, the only true Servant amidst this people;
afterwards the remnant who hearkened to His words as the Servant, or
Spirit of prophecy. For the Spirit of prophecy is the testimony of
Jesus. The latter are called servants here: they shall be comforted in
Jerusalem, as one whom his mother comforteth; and the hand of Jehovah
shall be known toward His servants, and His indignation toward His
enemies. For He shall come and execute judgment against all flesh.
Salvation has been made known to all flesh. And now Jehovah shall plead
in judgment with all flesh. The unbelieving and idolatrous Israelites
shall be there, confounded with the nations, all of whom God will
assemble, who shall come and see His glory. He will execute judgment on
the multitude by fire and by His sword. But there shall be some who
through grace will escape. God will send these to the distant nations
who have never seen His glory nor heard His fame. There is no question
here of the election by grace for heaven. They will declare (not that
grace, but) the glory which they have seen; and the nations will bring
back the dispersed of Israel, as an offering to Jehovah in His holy
mountain. And the seed of Jacob, and the priests whom Jehovah shall
choose, shall be as the new heavens and the new earth before Jehovah,
and all flesh shall come to worship before Him. Those who have been the
objects of Jehovah's judgments, who have transgressed against Him,
especially it seems to me the apostate Jews, shall be an abiding
testimony of Jehovah's terrible judgment. For if the full blessing of
His presence shall shine upon His people, it is the principle of
judgment that brought it in and that maintains it.

There remains a general remark to be made here. The sinful condition
thus judged existed in the days of the prophet. The patience of God bore
with it, but the principle that brought in judgment was there (witness
chap. 6). Until the rejection of Christ, and in a certain sense until
the reception of Antichrist coming in his own name, the evil is not
fully consummated, nor the final judgment executed. But already in Ahaz
the occasion had been given for pronouncing it. Thus, the occasion being
in this manner given, the whole condition of Israel, the grace that
received the Gentiles, the nothingness of forms and ceremonies-in a
word, all the great moral principles of truth are laid down in this part
of the prophecy; and we see Stephen, Paul, the Lord Himself, making use
of passages that speak of these principles, applying them to the times
in which they lived: the Lord, to the hardened state of the people;
Stephen, to the unprofitableness of an already judged system; Paul, to
the Jews' state of condemnation, and to the manifestation of grace to
the Gentiles. What remains is the accomplishment of the great result, in
which these things shall be demonstrated to the world by the judgment
and the sovereign blessing of God.

As to the coming of Jesus in humiliation, we have seen it as clearly
revealed as His coming in glory. In short, all the ways of God in the
government of His people, with respect to their conduct under the law,
to the promises made to the house of David, and at last to their
treatment of Christ-Jehovah in humiliation amongst His people-the
government, I repeat, and the ways of God towards Israel in all these
respects, are developed in the clearest and most wonderful manner in the
course of this prophecy. But the judgment pronounced now by the prophet
the patience of God suspended nearly 800 years. It was only accomplished
when they rejected Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Introduction](jer000)

</div>
