<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa027)  [Next](isa029.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001.md)

Chapter 28 sets before us the first elements of these final scenes in
the history of this wonderful people. The scourge comes from the north.
Ephraim is invaded as by an overflowing torrent, by a tempest of hail
that smites and destroys; he is trodden under foot. But in that day
Jehovah shall be for a crown of glory to the residue of His people. The
people morally besotted, do not hear. And this is the judicial sentence
of Jehovah who turns to Jerusalem in pronouncing it. There they had made
a covenant with death and the powers of darkness, \[See Note \#1\] that
they might escape the overflowing torrent. But the covenant shall be
disannulled, the scourge shall overtake them; they shall be trodden
down, and smitten by this terrible rod. We have then this revelation,
that when Ephraim shall be invaded by this terrible scourge, the princes
of Jerusalem will seek to preserve themselves from it by making a
covenant with the power of evil. But it shall come to nought. The waters
shall overflow and sweep away the refuge of lies. Jerusalem, as well as
Ephraim, undergoes the consequences of the assault of the enemy. But the
Messiah is the elect corner-stone, the sure foundation for the remnant;
he that believes in Him shall not be confounded. Thus Ephraim is invaded
and Jerusalem taken. There is a consumption determined \[See Note \#2\]
by Jehovah upon the whole earth.

Note \#1

They insolently say they have made a covenant with the power of evil, so
that, when the scourge came, it would not come nigh them. Impossible to
conceive a more open defiance of God and His judgments. Historically
they will have done it in uniting with the man of sin, the Antichrist,
whose coming is after the power of Satan; but here it is said in
defiance of God.

Note \#2

This expression is used elsewhere also, as in Daniel, as a kind of
technical formula for the Lord's dealings in the last day-the finishing
of the work and cutting it short in righteousness. He judges completely,
fills it up, but cuts it short for the sparing of the remnant, the
elect.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 29](isa029.md)

</div>
