<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa048)  [Next](isa050) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 49](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001)

The Messiah is brought in, for it is He who delivers. But it is a
question apart, so to say. The subject of Christ, and of the people's
guilt with respect to Him, begins with chapter 49, which, with the
following to the end of chapter 57, forms a whole; and, if one may
venture to say so, Christ takes the place of Israel as the true servant
of God. As He declared. "I am the true vine." \[See Note \#1\] This
makes an apparent difficulty, but gives the true sense of chapter 49.
Israel is the vessel of the glory of God on the earth, and the Spirit of
prophecy in Israel calls on the isles of the Gentiles to hearken, as
being thus chosen of Jehovah. "Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I
will be glorified" ([Isa 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#003)). Then
Christ, by this same prophetic Spirit, says, "then have I laboured in
vain." For we know that Israel rejected Him. Verse 5 ([Isa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005)) is the answer. He shall be
glorious. It would be a light thing to restore the remnant of Israel. He
shall be the salvation of Jehovah unto the ends of the earth. Here we
find a principle that is applicable to the work of Christ, even in the
days of the gospel. But for the fulfilment of the counsels of God the
succeeding Verses carry us on to the millennium. Verse 7 ([Isa
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#007)), Christ is exalted. Verse 8
([Isa 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)), He is given for a
covenant of the people (Israel) to secure the blessing of the land of
Canaan, and the long desolate inheritance, and then the deliverance of
the captives. At length God has comforted His people. Zion, apparently
forsaken, must confess that Jehovah's faithfulness is greater than of a
mother to her sucking child. Her destroyers are gone, her children flock
in crowds to her and replenish her waste places, which regorge with an
unlooked-for multitude before the eyes of the astonished mother, long
time desolate. Kings shall be her nursing fathers, and shall bow down to
her. And although she has been the captive of the mighty, she shall be
delivered, and her oppressors trodden under foot. And all flesh shall
know that Jehovah is her Saviour. This is the result in grace of the
introduction of the true Servant.

Note \#1

So, I doubt not, in Matthew, "I have called my Son out of Egypt." Christ
replaces the first Adam before God, though blessing in that new position
many of his children. He takes the place of Israel also, though blessing
the remnant and making it the nation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 50](isa050)

</div>
