<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa062)  [Next](isa064) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 63](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001)

[Isa 63:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001). We find again here the
terrible judgment of chapter 34 executed by Jehovah (or rather having
been already executed, for He returns from it). The result is the peace
and blessing which we have just seen described in chapter 62.

From Verse 7 of chapter 63 ([Isa 63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007))
we have the reasoning of the Spirit of prophecy in the mouth of the
remnant, or perhaps that of the prophet, putting himself in that
position. And in chapters 65, 66 we find Jehovah's answer. Nothing can
be more affecting than the way in which the Spirit lends Himself to the
expression of all the feelings of a faithful Israelite's heart; or
rather in which He gives a form to the sentiments of an afflicted but
trusting heart, recalling past kindnesses, overwhelmed by the present
distress, acknowledging the hardheartedness and rebellion of which they
had been guilty, but appealing to the unchangeable faithfulness of God's
love against the judicial blinding and hardening which the people are
under. If Abraham acknowledged them not, God was their Father. Where was
His strength, His tenderness. His mercies? Were they restrained? Faith
recognises through all things the link between the people and God; it
acknowledges that God prepares for those that wait on Him things beyond
man's conception \[See Note \#1\] -that He meets those who walk
uprightly; and it confesses that the state of Israel is quite
different-that they are sinners, not even seeking His face. But the
affliction of His people, the disastrous condition into which sin had
brought them, is to faith a plea with God. Whatever had happened, the
people were to faith as the clay, and Jehovah the potter. They were His
people; their cities, the cities of Jehovah. The house in which their
fathers had worshipped was burnt up, and all was laid waste.

Note \#1

The difference between this and gospel knowledge as made by Paul (1
Corinthians 2) is striking, often quoted for just the contrary. These
things, he says, have not entered into man's heart, but God has revealed
them unto us (Christians) by His Spirit; so at the end of the chapter,
"but we have the mind of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 64](isa064)

</div>
