<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa018)  [Next](isa020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 19 through 23.

In chapters 19 and 20 Egypt shall be smitten in that day; but Jehovah
will heal it. Egypt, Assyria, and Israel shall together be blessed of
Jehovah. Chapter 20 teaches us that it will be Assyria that leads Egypt
captive (compare Daniel 11 at the end). It will be observed here, that,
in general, from chapter 13 to 17 there is deliverance. The sceptre of
the wicked is broken ([Isa 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#005)). The
throne of David will be established in mercy ([Isa
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#005)). The Assyrian is destroyed -the
Philistines subdued-Zion founded by Jehovah-Damascus reduced. The latter
event introduces the evils of the last days. Only, as we have remarked,
the gathering of the nations is for their destruction ([Mic
4:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011)). Chapter 18, resuming the
subject of chapter 17, shews us Israel as they are to be in their land
in the last days-oppressed by the Gentiles, but in result brought back
to God.

The chapters following 18 do not, like the previous ones, tell of
Israel's deliverance. but of the invasion and overrunning of the nations
before mentioned-the overflowing scourge. Egypt is overrun as well as
Ethiopia, in which Israel had trusted. Babylon is overcome-Dumah and
Kedar destroyed-Jerusalem is ravaged-Tyre falls. In short it is a
universal overthrow, the central scene of which is the land of Canaan,
but in which the whole world is included ([Isa
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#004)). Even the powers of heaven are
overturned, as well as the kings of the earth upon the earth, giving
place to the establishment of Zion, the mountain of Jehovah, as the
centre of power and blessing, the power of the serpent, the dragon that
is in the sea, being annihilated.

After this outline attention must be given to some details. It will be
observed that Babylon and Jerusalem fall (chaps. 21, 22), one after the
other, Jerusalem the last. Now it is quite evident that this connection
of events is yet future. That which is said of Babylon and Jerusalem may
have found its occasion in the capture of Babylon by Cyrus, and partly
in the condition of Jerusalem when threatened by Sennacherib. But there
was neither the connection nor the order of events noted in this
prophecy. But Babylon is named in a manner that gives no clue whatever
to its condition. The "desert of the sea" is a singular term to describe
a city. But a dreadful invasion is before the prophet's eyes, and
Babylon falls. It comes like a whirlwind of the south, and the power of
Babylon is at an end-we are not told in what manner. Jerusalem, the
valley of vision, is ravaged. The Persians and the Medes, who were the
invaders of the preceding chapter re-appear here as attacking Jerusalem.
There is no fighting outside; but, the city being taken, its inhabitants
are bound or slain within it. Besides the prophetic revelations, this
chapter contains also moral instruction of the deepest importance In the
first place all the wisdom of man is insufficient to ward off evil, if
not accompanied by the power of God. When the city of God is in
question, this wisdom, exercised in forgetfulness of the God who built
and founded the city of His holiness, is an unpardonable sin ([Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011)). Again, that which is related
here was, historically speaking, done by Hezekiah, of whom it is said he
prospered in all his works. Outward blessing attended his labours; but,
at the same time, the condition of the people, even with respect to
these labours, was such that God could not pardon it. This is often the
case: outward faith in doing the work of God, blessed by Him, corruption
as to state of heart in the thing, which God will assuredly judge, and
forgetfulness of God Himself and of their belonging to Him. This is when
the people of God lean upon human means. We see also here one who held a
settled office, according to man, in the government of the house of
David, set aside with shame, and one chosen of God taking his place all
glory being given to him (a remarkable prefiguration of the setting
aside of the false Christ, and the establishment of the true, in the
last days). This prophecy gives room to suppose that the nations will
attack Jerusalem when the Babylon of history is a desert. That which is
Babylon in those days shall fall. Nevertheless Jerusalem, the object of
the prophecies, shall be taken, its government changed; the usurper must
yield his place to the chosen One of God.

The burden of Tyre shews us all the pride of human glory stained, and
all the honourable of the earth brought into contempt. The occasion is
the capture of Tyre by Nebuchadnezzar, but the prophecy goes
farther-even to the days when her merchandise shall be holiness to
Jehovah (chap. 23).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 20](isa020)

</div>
