<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa013)  [Next](isa015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 13 and 14.

With chapter 12 one division of the whole book closes. That which
commences with chapter 13 continues to the end of chapter 27, which
describes the same millennial condition, but in a more extended sphere,
because the world-of which these latter chapters speak-is brought in;
while chapters 5-12 were in especial connection with Israel.

The chapters we are now considering connect events that were then at
hand with the end of the age. It is only by thoroughly apprehending this
that we can understand them. The reason of this is simple: the nations
are looked at in reference to Israel. But time is not reckoned, with
respect to Israel, from the Babylonish captivity until the last days The
introduction of the Messiah as a stone of stumbling, with which the
special epoch of seventy weeks is noticed in Daniel, has been already
considered. But this passage in the prophet of the times of the Gentiles
shews only more distinctly that time is not reckoned afterwards to the
close. Seventy weeks go to the full restoration of Israel. The immense
gap, which has now lasted more than 1800 years, is in no way taken into
account. \[See Note \#1\]

In the eyes of the prophet, Babylon, or more correctly its head, besides
the idolatrous corruption, represents the imperial throne of the world
in contrast with the throne of God at Jerusalem. \[See Note \#2\]
Babylon will be overthrown, and God will again bless Israel. This will
be the judgment of this present age-of the world. It is represented here
in that destruction of Babylon which was at hand. But this judgment will
not be completed until, the times of the Gentiles being ended, Israel
shall be delivered. The character of the king of Babylon is described
here in very remarkable language ([Isa
14:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012).md). It is the spirit of
Babylon, and still more especially in its last representative at the
close, to which this prophecy in its full accomplishment refers. It was
so even in Nebuchadnezzar himself-nay, even when they built the tower of
Babel. The destruction of the Assyrian then takes place in the earth;
\[See Note \#3\] and, although the house of David had had its sceptre
broken, Philistia shall be judged and subdued, and Jehovah will found
Zion, and the poor of His people will trust in Him. This destruction of
Babylon, and of the Assyrian after Babylon, necessary to the
understanding of the whole scene, is a kind of scene apart, complete in
chapters 13, 14. But in Israel's territory, or in connection with this
people, some nations still remain; and God must dispose of these in
order that Israel may enjoy the full blessing and the result of the
promises. Babylon, being an immense system, which takes the place of the
throne of David, is seen as a whole. The nations, whose judgments are
here related (although there is allusion to events nearer the time of
the prophecy), are looked at as in the last days, when God resumes His
throne of judgment in order to re-establish His people. Thus
Nebuchadnezzar had taken Tyre and subdued Egypt. The Assyrian had
overthrown Damascus and led Ephraim captive. And these were events
comparatively near at hand. But, as a whole, the events spoken of here
are owned in the last days. Even in the preceding chapter the
destruction of the Assyrian is placed after the fall of the king of
Babylon. Yet historically the Assyrian had been subdued by Babylon; and
the overthrow of Sennacherib had taken place many years before that
epoch. But prophecy always looks to the accomplishment of God's
purposes. Here there are generally no details with respect to the
instruments employed by God. They are found elsewhere.

Note \#1

The seventy weeks, or 490 years, include the great gap which has already
lasted more than 1800 years-these coming in between the end of the 483rd
and the end of the 490th-only that Christians know that half the 70th
week was really fulfilled in Christ's ministry; therefore we get a half
week in Daniel 7 and in the Revelation.

Note \#2

Besides the fact of the captivity of God's people, Babylon has a very
important position with respect to God's dealings. Until Nebuchadnezzar
received power, the government of God, while centred in Israel (with
respect to whom He had set the bounds of the peoples), took cognizance
of the nations as dispersed at Babel. He allowed them indeed to follow
their own ways; but before Him every nation had an individual existence.
The throne once taken from Jerusalem, from whence God governed the world
with a view to His chosen people, the world is given up to the dominion
of a single throne, which stands therefore before God as holding the
sceptre of it. Three other powers followed in succession, the last of
which was in existence when Christ came, but the tune of its judgment
was not yet come. These four empires form the times of the Gentiles. God
will resume His government, and again judge the nations in view of
Israel; and Babylon, or the one universal empire, will be set aside in
its rebel and apostate condition. But, while it lasts, the empire has
its own peculiar and absolute position before God. Jerusalem, punished
for its idolatry by the Babylonish captivity (subjection to idols) and
the transfer of the throne from Jerusalem to the Gentiles, is so far
owned in the remnant under the Gentiles that God in the prophetic books
takes account of it, though not as then His people, till the second
grand sin was perpetrated, the rejection of Christ But this even was in
the prophet when they were in captivity. Still they were partially
preserved to present Christ the Lord to them, after that set aside till
sovereign grace comes on them in the last week, for faith the latter
half. Time begins to count again when that is come.

Note \#3

A proof that the prophecy relates to the last days, for of old the
Assyrian fell before Babylon, being conquered by it. It is to be
remarked that the Assyrian, not the beast nor Antichrist, is the subject
of this prophecy. Under the Assyrian Judah was not "Lo-ammi," nor is he
in this prophecy. In Babylon Judah was captive, and "Lo-ammi" written on
the people. Hence we must not look for the beast. The Assyrian is the
main enemy here.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 15](isa015.md)

</div>
