<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa005)  [Next](isa007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001.md)

But it was in the counsels of God that His presence should be
established in glory in the midst of His people, and this will be
accomplished in Christ at the end of the age. Hence the testimony of the
progress of the judgments is interrupted after the first general
statement, and in chapter 6 the prophet sees this glory. Yet its first
effect is judicial, and operates to blind and condemn them. The previous
judgment (chap. 5) had been in respect of the breaking of the law and
the despising of the word of the Holy One of Israel. But with enmity
against Christ and His rejection comes judicial blindness and the
separation of a remnant. That it is the glory of Christ is taught us in
chapter 12 of John's Gospel. The prophet feels at once the
incompatibility of the people's condition with the manifestation of this
glory. Unclean lips cannot celebrate it. But a live coal from the altar
cleanses his own lips, and he consecrates himself to Jehovah's message;
and to that which concerns the glory of Christ. The heart of the people
is made fat until there is entire desolation. Nevertheless there shall
be a remnant, a holy seed, which shall be like the sap of a tree that
has lost its leaves. \[See Note \#1\]

We have then in these last chapters the judgment of the people under two
aspects: first, that of God's government (in this point of view the
people, being altogether guilty, are given up to the Gentiles);
secondly, in view of the glory of Jehovah's presence at His coming
according to His purposes of grace (for this the people were unfit). But
here, as the purposes of God were in question, there is a remnant
according to election in whom the glory shall be re-established. This
distinction must be made when the government of God and His outward
dealings are in question. In chapter 5, which speaks of the former
character of judgment, there is no remnant. It is simply the public and
complete judgment of the nation; for as to this all rested on their
responsibility. In the Gospels this is looking for fruit; Christ might
dig about it and dung it, but this was looking for fruit. Hence it is
cursed and never to bear fruit. That is Israel (man) under the first
covenant. In chapter 6 God acts within, in His own relationship with the
people. Hence we find a remnant and the assured re-establishment of the
people; for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Here
also we find Christ. God could not cast off His people for ever, and the
prophetic faith is found which says, How long? as elsewhere it is said,
There is none to say, How long? For when the Son of man cometh, shall He
find faith on earth?

Note \#1

A more exact translation throws much light on this prophecy.
Nevertheless there shall still be in it a tenth, and it shall return and
shall be to be consumed, as the oak and the teil tree, which being cut
down have still the trunk \[or the rooted stump\]; thus the holy seed
shall be their stock" ([Isa 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009).md). That
is, the remnant itself will undergo Judgment and consumption at the time
of their return; but there shall be a holy seed, from which life will
spring as from a tree cut down.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 7](isa007.md)

</div>
