<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa047)  [Next](isa049.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 48](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 46, 47, and 48.

In chapters 46, 47, the application is made to Babylon and to her idols,
but still as pleading for Israel as beloved of God; for governmental
judgment is always the deliverance of the beloved righteous. Babylon
with all her pride and all her idols must come down and sit in the dust.
In chapter 48 Jehovah at length pleads with Israel. He specifies Israel,
the name of relationship with Himself, Jehovah, which those He is
pleading with bear and claim, while noting that they were descended from
Judah-in a word, the Jews, who had the place of Israel and called upon
the name of the God of Israel; but He declares their wickedness and
obstinacy. He had told them many things long before, and had made new
revelations to them, that they might know that Jehovah is God. But they
hearkened not; they did not understand. Nevertheless for the glory of
His name Jehovah would not cut them off; but would refine them as
silver. He reminds them in an affecting manner of the blessing they
would have enjoyed had they kept His commandments. Nevertheless it is
even now declared unto them that Jehovah has redeemed His people. But as
for the wicked, there is no peace unto them. This continual pleading
against idolatry, whilst giving instruction for that day, seems to prove
that, up to the end, the question of Israel's either testifying against
idolatry or being defiled with it themselves will have a principal
place. For the government of the world it is a primary question. The god
of this world governs by means of idols; Jehovah, by His own name.
Israel ought to have been the witness of this. They will be unfaithful
to it in the last days. This is the reason why there is so much
testimony here on the subject.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 49](isa049.md)

</div>
