<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam002)  [Next](jam004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#001)

In Chapter 3 the apostle recurs to the tongue, the most ready index to
the heart, the proof whether the new man is inaction, whether nature and
self-will are under restraint. But there is hardly anything here which
needs remark, although much that demands the hearing ear. Where there is
the divine life, knowledge does not display itself in mere words, but in
the walk and by works in which the meekness of true wisdom will be seen.
Bitterness and contention are not the fruits of a wisdom that comes from
above, but are earthly, of the nature of a man, and of the enemy.

The wisdom that comes from above, having its place in the life, in the
heart, has three characteristics. First of all, the character of purity,
for the heart is in communion with God has intercourse with Him
(therefore there must needs be this purity). Next, it is peaceable,
gentle, ready to yield to the will of another. Then, full of good works,
acting by a principle which, as its origin and motives are from above,
does good without partiality; that is to say, its action is not guided
by the circumstances which influence the flesh and the passions of men.
For the same reason it is sincere and unfeigned. Purity, absence of will
and self, activity in good, such are the characteristics of heavenly
wisdom.

These directions to bridle the tongue, as the first movement and
expression of the will of the natural man, extend to believers. There
are not to be )as to the inward disposition of the man) many teachers.
We all fail; and to teach others and fail ourselves only increases our
condemnation. For vanity can easily be fed in teaching others; and that
is a very different thing from having the life quickened by the power of
truth. The Holy Ghost bestows His gifts as He pleases. The apostle
speaks here of the propensity in any one to teach, not of the gift he
may have received for teaching.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 4](jam004)

</div>
