<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](heb013)  [Next](jam002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

[James 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 1:1</span></span>

The Epistle of James is not addressed to the assembly, and does not take
the ground of apostolic authority over the persons to whom it is sent.
It is a practical exhortation which still recognises the twelve tribes
and the connection of the christian Jews with them, as John addressed
the Gentiles, although the Jewish people had their place before God.
Thus the Spirit of God still acknowledges here the relationship with
Israel, as in the other case the relationship with Gentiles, and the
rights of God which are unchangeable, whatever may be the special
privileges granted to the assembly or to Israel respectively. We know
that historically the christian Jews remained Jews to the end of the New
Testament history, and were even zealous for the law to us a strange
thing, but which God endured for a time.

The doctrine of Christianity is not the subject of this epistle. It
gives God His place in the conscience, and with regard to all that
surrounds us. It thus girds up the loins of the Christina, presenting
also the near coming of the Lord and His present discipline a discipline
with respect to which the assembly of God ought to possess intelligence,
and activity founded thereon. The world also, and all that makes an
appearance in it, is judged from God's point of view.

A few remarks on the position of Christians (that is, on the way in
which this position is viewed with respect to Israel) will help us to
understand this portion of the word.

Israel is still regarded as the people of God. To the faith of James the
nation has still the relationship which God had given it towards
Himself. The Christians in it are addressed as still forming part of a
people whose links with God were not yet judicially broken: but it was
only the Christians among them who possessed the faith which the Spirit
gave in the true Messiah. These only among the people, with the writer,
acknowledged Jesus as the Lord of glory. With the exception of Verses
14, 15, in Chapter 5 ([Jam 5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014)),
this epistle contains no exhortation which, in its spiritual height,
goes beyond that which might be addressed to a godly Jew. It supposes
indeed that the persons to whom it speaks have faith in the Lord Jesus;
but it does not call them to that which is exclusively proper to
Christianity and depends on its privileges. The exhortations flow from
that higher source and breathe the more heavenly atmosphere, but the
effect they aim at producing consists in real proofs of religion here
below; they are such as might be heard in the professing church a vast
body like Israel, in the midst of which some Christians existed.

The epistle is not founded on christian relationships here below. It
acknowledges them; but only as one fact in the midst of others, which
have rights over the conscience of the writer. It supposes those whom it
addresses to be in a relationship with God, which is known,
unquestioned, and of ancient date; in the midst of which Christianity
has been introduced.

It is important to notice the moral measure of the life which this
epistle presents. As soon as we apprehend the position in which it views
believers, the discernment of the truth on this point is not difficult.
It is the same as that which Christ presented when walking in the midst
of Israel and setting before His disciples the light, and the
relationships with God, which resulted to them from His presence. Now
indeed He was absent; but that light and those relationships are
retained as the measure of responsibility. And this the Lord's return
would vindicate by judgment on those who refused to accept and walk in
it. Until that day the faithful were to be patient in the midst of the
oppression they were suffering from on the part of the Jews, who still
blasphemed the holy name by which they were called.

It is the converse of the Epistle to the Hebrews with regard to their
relationship with the Jewish nation; not morally, but because of the
nearness of the judgment when the Epistle to the Hebrews was written.

The fundamental principles of the position that we have been speaking of
are as follows: the law in its spirituality and perfection, as stated
and summed up by Christ; a life imparted, which has the moral principles
of the law, itself a divine life; the revelation of the Father's name.
All this was true when the Lord was on the earth, and was the ground on
which (however poorly they understood it) He then placed His disciples.
He told them that they were to be witnesses of it, as of all He had
said, after His death, distinguishing this testimony form that of the
Holy Ghost.

It is this which James teaches here, with the addition of that which the
Lord had also said that He would come again. It is the doctrine of
Christ with regard to walk in the midst of Israel, according to the
light and the truths which He had introduced; and seeing that He was
still absent an exhortation to perseverance and patience in that walk,
waiting for the moment when, by judgment on those who oppressed them, He
would vindicate the principles on which they walked.

Although the judgment executed on Jerusalem changed the position of the
remnant of Israel in this respect, yet the life of Christ remains ever
our model: and we have to wait with patience until the Lord come. We
have not in this epistle the association of the Christian with Christ
exalted on high, nor consequently the thought of going to meet Him in
the air, as Paul taught. But that which it contains ever remains true;
and he who says that he abides in Him (Christ) ought also to walk even
as He walked. The judgment that was coming makes us understand the way
in which James speaks of the world, of the rich who rejoice in their
portion in the world, and the position of the believing remnant
oppressed and suffering in the midst of the unbelieving nation; why he
begins with the subject of the tribulations and so often recurs to it:
why also he insists on practical evidences of faith. He still sees all
Israel together; but some had received faith in the Lord of glory, and
these were tempted to value the rich and the great in Israel. All being
still Jews, we can easily understand that, while some truly believed and
confessed their belief that Jesus was the Christ, yet, as these
Christians followed the Jewish ordinances, mere professors might do as
much without the least vital change being proved by their works. It is
evident that a faith like this has no value whatever. It is precisely
the faith of those who clamour for works in the present day a mere dead
profession of the truth of Christianity. To be begotten by the word of
truth is as foreign and strange to them as to the Jews of whom James is
speaking.

Believers being thus placed in the midst of Israel with some who merely
professed faith, we can readily understand the apostle's address to the
mass as those who might share in the privileges that existed in their
midst; his address to Christians as having a special place in their own;
and his warning to those who called themselves believers in Christ. Most
easy and perfectly clear is the practical application to all times, and
in particular when a mass of persons assume a right by inheritance to
thee privileges of the people of God. Besides this, the epistle has
peculiar force for the individual conscience; it judges the position one
is in, and the thoughts and intents of the heart.

The epistle then begins with an exhortation to rejoice in trial, as a
means of producing patience. This subject in the main continues to the
end of Verse 20 ([Jam 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#020)), where the
idea turns towards the necessity of curbing everything that opposes
itself to patience, and towards the true character of one who stands in
the presence of God. This address, as a whole, ends with the 1st
Chapter. The connection of the reasoning is not always easy to find; the
key to it is the moral condition with which the apostle's mind is
occupied. I will endeavour to make the connection more apparent.

The subject in the main is, that we ought to walk before God to shew the
reality of our profession in contrast with union with the world
practical religion. Patience then must have its perfect work; thus
self-will is subdued, and the whole of God's will is accepted;
consequently nothing is wanting to the practical life of the soul. The
believer may suffer; but he patiently waits on the Lord. This Christ
did; it was His perfection. He waited for the will of God, and never did
His own will: thus obedience was perfect, man thoroughly tested. But in
fact we often lack wisdom to know what we ought to do. Here it says the
resource is evident: we are to ask wisdom form God. He gives to all
liberally; only we must count upon His faithfulness and upon an answer
to our prayers. Otherwise the heart is double; there is dependence
elsewhere than on God; our desires have another object. If we only seek
that which God wills and that which God does, we depend securely on Him
to accomplish it; and as to the circumstances of this world, which might
make one believe that it was useless to depend on God, they vanish away
as the flower of the field. We ought to have the consciousness that our
place according to God is not that which is of this world. He who is in
a low station should rejoice that Christianity exalts him; the rich,
that it humbles him. It is not in riches that we are to rejoice (they
pass away), but in the exercises of heart of which the apostle had been
speaking; for after having been tried we shall receive the crown of
life.

The life of one who is thus tried, and in whom this life develops itself
in obedience to the entire will of God, is well worth that of a man who
indulges all the desires of his heart in luxury.

Now with regard to temptations of this last character, into which the
lusts of the heart cause men to fall, it must not be said that these
lusts come from God: the heart of man is their source its lusts which
lead through sin to death. Let no one deceive himself on this point.
That which inwardly tempts the heart comes form oneself. All good and
perfect gifts come from God, and He never changes, He does nothing but
good. Accordingly He has given us a new nature, the fruit of His won
will working in us by the word of truth, in order that we should be as
it were firstfruits of His creatures. The Father of lights, that which
is darkness does not come from Him.

By the word of truth He has begotten us to be the first and most
excellent witnesses of that power of good which will shine forth
hereafter in the new creation, of which we are the firstfruits. This is
the opposite of being the source of corrupt desires. The word of truth
is the good seed of life; self-will is the cradle of our lusts its
energy can never produce the fruits of divine nature; nor the wrath of
man the righteousness of God. Therefore we are called to be docile, to
be ready to hear, slow to speak slow to wrath, to lay aside all
filthiness of the flesh, all energy of iniquity, and to receive the word
with meekness a word which, while it is the word of God, identifies
itself with the new nature that is in us (it is planted in us) while
forming and developing it according to its own perfection; because this
nature itself has its origin from God through the word. It is not as a
law which is outside us, and which, being opposed to our sinful nature,
condemns us. This word saves the soul; it is living and quickening, and
it works livingly in a nature that flows from it, and which it forms and
enlightens.

But it is necessary to be doers of the word, not merely to hear it with
the ear, but that it should produce the practical fruits which are the
proof that it works really and vitally in the heart. Otherwise the word
is only as a mirror in which we may perhaps see ourselves for a moment,
and then forget what we have seen. He who looks into the perfect law,
which is that of liberty, and continues in it, doing the work which it
presents, shall be blessed in the real and obedient activity developed
in him. The law is perfect; for the word of God, all that the Spirit of
God has expressed , is the expression of the nature and the character of
God, of that which He is and of that which He wills: for, when fully
revealed (and till then man cannot fully know Him), He wills that which
He is, and this necessarily.

This law is the law of liberty, because the same word which reveals what
God is and what He wills has made us partakers by divine grace of the
divine nature; so that not to walk according to that word would be not
to walk according to our own new nature. Now to walk according to our
own new nature, and that the nature of God, and guided by His word, is
true liberty.

The law given on Sinai was the expression in man, written not on the
heart but outside man, of what man's conduct and heart ought to be
according to the will of God. It represses and condemns all the motions
of the natural man, and cannot allow him to have a will, for he ought to
do the will of God. But he has another will, and therefore the law is
bondage to him, a law of condemnation and death. Now, God having
begotten us by the word of truth, the nature that we have, as thus born
of God, possesses tastes and desires according to that word; it is of
that very word. The word in its own perfection develops this nature,
forms it, enlightens it, as we have said; but the nature itself has its
liberty in following it. Thus it was with Christ; if His liberty could
have been taken away (which was spiritually impossible), it would have
been by preventing Him from doing the will of God the Father.

It is the same with the new man in us (which is Christ as life in us)
which is created in us according to God in righteousness and true
holiness, produced in us by the word, which is the perfect revelation of
God of the whole divine nature in man; of which Christ, the living Word,
the image of the invisible God, is the manifestation and the pattern.
The liberty of the new man is liberty to do the will of God, to imitate
God in character, as being His dear child according as that character
was presented in Christ. The law of liberty is this character, as it is
revealed in the word, in which the new nature finds its joy and
satisfaction; even as it drew its existence from the word which reveals
Him, and from the God who is therein revealed.

Such is the "law of liberty" the character of God Himself in us formed
by the operation of a nature, begotten through the word which reveals
Him, moulding itself upon the word.

The first and most sifting index of the inner man is the tongue. A man
who appears to be in relationship with God and to honour Him, yet who
cannot bridle his tongue, deceives himself , and his religion is vain.

Pure religion before God and the Father is to care for those who,
reached in the tenderest relationships by the wages of sin, are deprived
of their natural supports; and to keep oneself untainted by the world.
Instead of striving to exalt oneself and gain reputation in a world of
vanity, afar from God, our activities turn, as God does, to the
sorrowful, who in their affliction, need succour; and we keep ourselves
from a world in which everything is defiling, and contrary to the new
nature which is our life, and to the character of God as we know it by
the word.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 2](jam002)

</div>
