<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jos024)  [Next](jdg001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Judges

The Book of Judges is the history of the failure of Israel. Joshua sets
before us the energy of God acting in the midst of the people, though
there may be failure. In Judges we see the miserable state of the
nation, now become unfaithful; and, at the same time, the intervention
of the God of mercy in the circumstances into which their unfaithfulness
had brought them. These interventions correspond with what are called
revivals in the history of the church of God.

In this book we no longer see blessing and power marking the
establishment of the people of God. Neither does it contain the
fulfilment of God's purposes, after the people had manifested their
inability to retain the blessing they had received, that indeed is yet
to come for them, and for the assembly; nor the forms and government
which, in spite of the evil and internal unfaithfulness of the people,
could maintain their external unity, until God judged them in their
leaders. God was still the only leader acknowledged in Israel; so that
the people themselves always bore the penalty of their sin.

The misery into which their unfaithfulness brought them moving the
compassion of God, His mighty grace raised up deliverers by His Spirit
in the midst of the fallen and wretched people. "For his soul was
grieved for the misery of Israel." "And Jehovah raised up judges, which
delivered them out of the hand of those that spoiled them." "And when
Jehovah raised them up judges, then Jehovah was with the judge, and
delivered them out of the hands of their enemies, all the days of the
judge; for it repented Jehovah because of their groanings by reason of
them that oppressed them and vexed them." But Israel was unchanged. "And
yet they would not hearken unto their judges." "And it came to pass,
when the judge was dead, that they returned and corrupted themselves
more than their fathers, in following other gods to serve them, and to
bow down unto them; they ceased not from their own doings, nor from
their stubborn ways." This is the sorrowful history of the people of
God; but it is also the history of the grace of God, and of His
compassions towards His people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 1](jdg001)

</div>
