<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg007)  [Next](jdg009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#001)

Nevertheless, they did not all unite with Gideon in pursuit of the
Midianites. But, for the moment, Gideon despises the cowardice which
disowns him through a remaining fear of the oppressor's power. On his
return he chastises, in the righteous indignation of faith, those who at
such a moment had shewn themselves favourable to the enemy, when the
servants of God were "faint yet pursuing" (chap. 8). While the work was
yet to do, they were taken up with the work and passed on: there is time
enough for vengeance when the work is done. Gideon has also the prudence
to set himself aside, in order to allay the jealousy of those who felt
their pride wounded, because Gideon had had more faith than themselves.
They did not boast of their own importance, or request to be called,
when Midian had power over the land of Israel. It would be wrong to
contend with such persons. If you are satisfied with having done the
work of God, they will be satisfied with the spoil they find in pursuing
the enemy; they will make a victory of it to themselves. It must be
allowed them; for in fact they have done something for the cause of God,
although tardy in espousing it. They came when they were called, and
willingly, as it appears; they followed Gideon's directions, and brought
him back the heads of the princes. The secret of faith and of Jehovah
was with Gideon. It was useless to speak of it to them. The people did
not know their own weakness. Gideon must be strong on Jehovah's side for
Israel, since Israel could not be so with him. But for that very reason
they could not understand why they were not called before. It had to be
left unexplained; a proof of the sad state of Israel. But the danger was
removed, and the difficulty set aside, in that Gideon wisely contented
himself with calming their minds, by not insisting upon his own
importance, which arose from a faith of which they did not feel
themselves incapable, and the difficulties of which they could not
appreciate, since they possessed it not. We must be near God in order to
feel what is wanting in His people's condition as to Him: for it is in
Him we find that which enables us to understand both His strength, and
the exigencies of our relationship with Him. During the lifetime of
Gideon, Israel dwelt in peace.

Although the details of this deliverance have an especial interest, it
appears to me to mark a lower condition of the people than at the period
of the preceding ones. It then seemed quite a natural thing that some
servant of Jehovah, trusting to His arm, should deliver the people from
the yoke that oppressed them. Or else the people-awakened by the words
of a prophetess-released themselves, and, by the help of God, obtained
the victory over their enemies. But in this case even the sense of
Jehovah's relationship to His people had to be restored. That is what
God does with Gideon, as we have seen, and that with touching
condescension and tenderness. But it was requisite to do it. Therefore
God alone accomplished the deliverance of His people. The people must
not be employed in it, lest they should attribute it to themselves; for
the farther off we are from God, the more ready we are to ascribe to
ourselves that which is due only to Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 9](jdg009)

</div>
