<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer017)  [Next](jer019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#001)

In chapter 18 this principle is fully demonstrated before the people
([Jer 18:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#001)). But the people in
despair as to God, in the midst of their boldness in evil and in
contempt of His marvellous patience, give themselves up to the iniquity
by which Satan deprives them of their hope in God. God announces His
judgment by the prophet, whose testimony provokes the expression of the
confidence felt by a hardened conscience in the certainty and
immutability of its privileges, and of the blessings attached to the
ordinances with which God had endowed His people, and to which He had
outwardly attached these blessings, which maintained their relationship
with Him. What a dreadful picture of blindness! Ecclesiastical influence
is always greatest at the moment when the conscience is hardened against
the testimony of God; because unbelief, which trembles after all,
shelters itself behind the presumed stability of that which God had set
up, and makes a wall of its apostate forms against the God whom they
hide, attributing to these ordinances the stability of God Himself.
Conscience says too much to allow the unbeliever any hope of standing
well with God, even when God opens His heart to him. "There is no hope,"
he says; "I will continue to do evil; moreover the law shall not perish
from the priest, nor counsel from the wise; nor," he adds (the false
prophets having the ear of the people), "the word from the prophet." The
warning which this chapter contains appears to me very solemn. I can
scarcely imagine a more terrible picture of the professing people's
condition. The prophet asks for judgment upon them. This is in the
spirit of the remnant trodden down by the wickedness of the Lord's
enemies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 19](jer019)

</div>
