<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer011)  [Next](jer013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 11 and 12.

Chapter 11 suggests some observations. God addresses Himself again to
Israel on the ground of their responsibility, reminding them of the call
to obedience, which had been addressed to them ever since their coming
out of Egypt. God was about to bring on the people the evil with which
He had threatened them. Jeremiah is not to intercede for them.
Nevertheless He still calls Israel His "beloved"; but, being corrupted,
what had she to do in His house? Whatever she might have been to Him,
judgment was coming. At the end of the chapter Jeremiah takes the place
of the faithful remnant who have the testimony of God. His position
continually reminds us of the Psalms. We see the working of the Spirit
of Christ often clearly expressed, but sometimes, it appears to me, in
expressions more mingled with Jeremiah's personal position, and thereby
less deep and less akin to the sentiments of Christ, although the same
in principle with the Psalms. Jeremiah, on account of his faithfulness
and his testimony, was exposed to the machinations of the wicked.
Jehovah reveals these things to him; and, according to the righteousness
which characterises the condition of the remnant, he calls for the
vengeance of God. \[See Note \#1\] This will be the means of deliverance
for the remnant. He announces the judgment of these wicked men by the
word of Jehovah. In Psalm 83 the same principles will be found, and the
same wickedness in God's enemies; only there, these enemies are
Gentiles, and the range of thought is wider. Israel and the knowledge of
Jehovah are the object of the prayer in that Psalm. Compare also chapter
9 and Psalm 64. Here there is more intercession on Jeremiah's part; the
psalm speaks of judgment. Compare also [Psa
69:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#006.md), and [Jer
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#015.md). The words of the psalm being
from the mouth of Christ Himself, the request is for others and
infinitely more touching. This comparison of passages will help in
understanding the relationship between the position of Jeremiah and that
of the remnant described in the Psalms. We may also compare Psalm 73
with the beginning of chapter 12. This last chapter forms a part of the
same prophecy as the preceding one. Jeremiah pleads with God on the
subject of these judgments, but in a humble and submissive manner, which
God accepts by making him feel (a painful necessity) the evil of the
people more deeply. At the same time He sustains the prophet's faith by
the personal interest He manifests in him. God makes him understand that
He has forsaken His inheritance: the state of things was therefore no
longer to be wondered at. At the same time He reveals His purposes of
blessing to His people, and even to the nations among whom they will be
dispersed, \[See Note \#2\] if these nations would learn the ways of
Jehovah.

Note \#1

Righteousness characterises the saint as well as love, and has its place
where there are adversaries to that love and to the blessing of the
loved people. It is the Spirit of prophecy, not the gospel, no doubt
because prophecy is connected with the government of God, not with His
present dealings in sovereign grace. Hence in the Revelation vengeance
is called for by the saints.

Note \#2

We see at the same time the unchangeable love of God for His people, and
the bond of His faithfulness which cannot be broken. He calls the
nations, that surround the inheritance He had given to His people, His
neighbours. We see also the setting aside of all that national system of
which He had made Israel the centre, and which falls when Israel, the
keystone of the arch, is taken away ([Jer
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014).md). Afterwards, these nations are
re-established, as well as Israel, and blessed if they acknowledge the
God of Israel. The Lord Christ will re-unite the two things-the
universal headship of man, and the union of nations round Israel as a
centre-in His Person. He will be the one Man to whom the whole dominion
is given; and Israel, as well as the various nations with their kings,
shall be re-established, each in his own land and his own heritage (as
before the time of Nebuchadnezzar), with the exception of Edom,
Damascus, Hazor, and Babylon herself; that is to say, those nations
which occupy Israel's territory, and Babylon which had absorbed and
taken the place of all the others, and which must disappear by the
judgment of God to give them their place again. (Compare chapter 46 and
the following chapters.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 13](jer013.md)

</div>
