<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer029)  [Next](jer031.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001.md)

The day of Jacob's trouble: promised deliverance and sure judgment

Some details of the circumstances that accompany its exercise deserve
our attention, as well as the character which God displays in it, and
the extent of its effects. In chapter 30 God commands Jeremiah to write
in a book all the words of the judgment which he had heard, for God
would restore the people. Now this deliverance found Israel at the
height of the distress. This is the first thing presented to the
prophet. No day could be compared to this day of Jacob's trouble. It is
the day spoken of in Matthew 24 and Mark 13. But in this extremity God
comes to the help of His people, who shall be delivered. And now, God
having executed His judgment and acted according to His own counsels in
grace, this deliverance shall in consequence be full and complete.
Israel shall serve Jehovah their God and David their king. The ruin
([Jer 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012).md) was complete, incurable:
no remedy could heal it. It is God who had smitten His people for the
multitude of their sins. Nevertheless He was with them to save them; and
consequently all the nations who had availed themselves of God's anger
to devour Israel should be themselves devoured. Zion should be rebuilt
on her own foundation, joy and peace should be in her dwellings, the
governors of the people should be of her children. Israel should be the
people of Jehovah, and Jehovah should be their God. Finally a principle
which we have seen clearly explained is here announced, namely, that
judgment should fall upon the wicked; that this judgment went forth to
smite the people of God first, because they were wicked and must bear
the consequence. But wherever the wicked might be, this judgment should
reach them. Wheresoever the carcase might be, there should the eagles be
gathered together.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 31](jer031.md)

</div>
