<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer049)  [Next](jer051) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 50](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 45 through 51.

Chapter 45 gives us the prophecy with respect to Baruch, already
mentioned. Chapter 46 and following chapters contain the prophecies
against the Gentiles around Judea, and against Babylon herself. We shall
find these special elements in the prophecies that refer to the
nations-the judgments are not those of the last days, as in Isaiah, but
(according to the general character of the book) refer to the
destruction of the different nations, in order to make way for the
dominion of one sole empire. It is thus that, in the case of Judea, the
judgment is even now executed.

But there is a difference with respect to the restoration of those
nations in the last days. Egypt, Elam, Moab, Ammon, are restored in the
last days; Edom, Damascus. Philistia, Hazor, are not. The reason of this
is easily seen. Egypt and Elam form no part of the land of Israel. God
in His goodness will have compassion on those countries; they shall be
inhabited and blessed under His government. When the people of Israel
entered Canaan, Ammon and Moab were to be spared. They were not
Canaanites under the curse; and however deplorable their origin might be
yet, being related to the family of Israel, their land was preserved to
them, although to the tenth generation they could not be admitted into
the congregation of Israel ([Deu
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003)). And when God shall put an end
to the dominion given to Nebuchadnezzar, and to the empire of the
Gentiles, these nations shall again enter into the countries that were
allotted them. But, although Edom had been spared, and were even to be
received amongst Israel in their third generation, yet as their hatred
to Israel had been unbounded, they should be totally destroyed in the
judgment of that day. Compare Obadiah throughout, especially in Verse
18. Their land should form a part of Israel's territory, and was, in
fact, a part of it, although they themselves were spared at the
beginning as the brethren of Israel, but only, alas! to abuse this
favour; so that the judgment would be more terrible upon them than upon
the rest. Damascus, Hazor, and Philistia were a part of the land of
Israel, properly so called. These nations disappear as distinct nations,
as to their territory. At the close of the judgment on Egypt, God sends
words of encouragement to Israel. Israel had leant on Pharaoh when
Nebuchadnezzar had attacked Jerusalem. The Egyptian power appeared to be
the only one capable of balancing that of Babylon. But God had ordained
the fall of Egypt, who would willingly have taken the chief place. This
was, however, appointed for Babylon. The country from which they were
brought out (the world, considered as man in his natural independent
character, organising in his own strength) would like to prevail over
idolatrous corruption and Babylonish principles; but these were to be in
force until the time appointed by God, when God will judge them. Now
Israel having leant upon Egypt, would apparently fall with Egypt; but
God watched over them, and they were to return from their captivity and
dwell in peace. The ways of God in government are well worthy of
attention here. God would judge the nations; He would chastise Israel in
measure. His people should not be condemned with the world. Grace abused
brings down the most terrible judgments; thus it was with Edom.

Babylon yet remains. But, in Jeremiah, all the judgments are
contemplated in connection with the setting aside of the independent
nations, and the establishment of the one empire of the Gentiles-the
chief subject of this prophecy; consequently the prophet is specially
occupied with the historical fate of the empire, as established by God
in the prophet's own days. It is Babylon and the land of the Chaldeans
which are the subject of his prophecy. It is the judgment of this
empire, to avenge the oppression of Israel by Nebuchadnezzar, who had
broken his bones ([Jer 50:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#017)).
Nevertheless, the deliverance of Israel, at the time of the destruction
of Babylon, is given as a pledge and foretaste of their complete and
final deliverance ([Jer 50:4-19-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#004);
[Jer 50:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#034); see also [Jer
51:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#019)). For the destruction of
Babylon was the judgment of that which God had Himself established as
the Gentile empire. This is the reason why, even historically, her
judgment was accompanied by the deliverance of Israel and the
destruction of idolatry, by a man raised up to execute the righteousness
of God. It has not been at all the same thing with the other empires,
although, no doubt, they were also set up by the providence of God. But
in their case it was not the immediate establishment of the empire on
God's part, placing man in it under responsibility. Man, thus placed,
had completely failed. He has tyrannised over God's people, established
a compulsory idolatry, and corrupted the world by its means. Looked at
as having the dominion of the world, which had been committed to him, he
has been judged, and Babylon is fallen. It is important thoroughly to
apprehend this truth with respect to this first empire. In principle the
deliverance of Israel results from it, whatever the subsequent dealings
of God may have been. See also the character of this judgment, [Jer
50:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#028); [Jer
50:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#033). The next chapter furnishes
us also with important principles in connection with this destruction of
Babylon.

[Jer 51:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#006) reveals the unchangeable
faithfulness of God to Israel, in spite of the people's sins. It was the
time of the Lord's vengeance. When the time that God indicated should
have arrived-a time to be known only by those whose spiritual
discernment would enable them to apply the prophecy, the elements of
which were given clearly enough in these two chapters (especially in the
assaults of the nations), then those who had ears to hear were to leave
the city. Moreover the fall of Babylon was a judgment pronounced upon
idolatry. The portion of Jacob-Jehovah-might chastise His people, but He
was not like the vanities of the Gentiles. After having chastised them,
He would bring forth His righteousness in contrast with the Gentiles,
who oppressed them, and would, finally, use them as His weapons of war.
From Verse 25 ([Jer 51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025)) we see that
it is the Babylon of those days which is in question. From Verse 29
([Jer 51:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#029)) the historical
circumstances that are related give us a very especial proof of this.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 51](jer051)

</div>
