<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer030)  [Next](jer032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 31 and 32.

But it would not be Judah only, to whom the prophecies of Jeremiah were
addressed, that should be restored-all the families of Israel should
enjoy this blessing. Jehovah should be their God, they should be His
people. A few words will suffice to fix the reader's attention on this
beautiful prophecy. All the tribes are there, but all in renewed
relationship with Zion. It is a deliverance wrought by the Lord, and it
is therefore complete. Its enjoyment is not hindered by weakness. It is
a deliverance that melts the heart and produces tears and supplications,
but which removes all cause for tears, excepting grace. They shall
sorrow no more; their soul shall be as a watered garden; they shall be
satisfied with goodness from Jehovah. Ephraim has repented, and God will
cause him to feel that He has never forgotten him. The Lord has always
remembered His erring child; Judah shall be the habitation of justice
and the mountain of holiness. This shall be through a new covenant-not
that which was made when they came out of Egypt. The law shall be
written in their heart; they shall all know Jehovah; and none of their
sins shall be remembered any more. If God should overthrow the
ordinances of creation, then, saith He, shall Israel be cast off for all
that they have done. Finally the Lord declares in detail the restoration
of Jerusalem. I would add that in [Jer
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022) I see only weakness. Israel,
feeble as a woman, shall possess and overcome all strength-seeing that
strength manifests itself in that which is very weakness.

These two chapters give in general the prophetic testimony to Israel's
restoration. Chapter 32 applies it to the circumstances of the Jews
besieged in Jerusalem; taking occasion, from the ruin that evidently
threatened them by the presence of Nebuchadnezzar, to announce the
infallible counsels of God in grace towards them. Jeremiah had declared
that the city should be taken, and Zedekiah led captive. But Jehovah had
caused him to buy a field, in proof that the people should assuredly
return. He points out the iniquity of the people and of the city from
the beginning; but now that, in despair through sin, their ruin appeared
to them inevitable, Jehovah declares not only a return from captivity,
but the full efficacy of His grace. He would give oneness of heart to
the people, that they may serve Him for ever. Their relationship to God
as His people should be fully established according to the power of an
everlasting covenant. Jehovah will rejoice in doing them good. He would
plant them in the land with His whole heart, and His whole soul. It was
He who had brought all this evil in judgment, and it was He who would
bring all the good which He had promised.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 32](jer032)

</div>
