<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 John Index](jo1)  
  [Previous](jo1002)  [Next](jo1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001)

Now to say that we are born of Him is to say that we are children of
God. \[See Note \#13\] What a love is that which the Father has bestowed
on us, that we should be called children! \[See Note \#14\] Therefore
the world knows us not, because it knew Him not. The apostle returns
here to His appearing and its effect on us. We are children of God: this
is our present sure and known position; we are born of God. That which
we shall be is not yet manifested; but we know that associated with
Jesus as we are in the same relationship with the Father, Himself being
our life we shall be like Him when He appears. For it is to this we are
predestined, to see Him as He now is with the Father, from which the
life came which was manifested in Him and imparted to us, and to appear
in the same glory.

Having then the hope of seeing Him as He is, and knowing that I shall be
perfectly like Him when He appears, I seek to be as like Him now as
possible, since I already possess this life He being in me, my life.

This is the measure of our practical purification. We are not pure as He
is pure; but we take Christ, as He is in heaven, for the pattern and
measure of our purification, we purify ourselves according to His
purity, knowing that we shall be perfectly like Him when He is
manifested. Before marking the contrast between the principles of the
divine life and of the enemy, he sets before us the true measure of
purity (he will give that of love in a moment) for the children,
inasmuch as they are partakers of His nature and have the same
relationship with God.

There are two remarks to be made here. First, "hope in him" does not
mean in the believer; but a hope that has Christ for its object. Second,
it is striking to see the way in which the apostle appears to confound
God and Christ together in this epistle; and uses the word "Him" to
signify Christ, when he had just been speaking of God, and vice versa.
We may see the principle of this at the end of Chapter 5: "We are in him
that is true, \[that is to say\] in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true
God and eternal life." In these few words we have the key to the
epistle: Christ is the life. It is evidently the Son; but it is God
Himself who is manifested, and the perfection of His nature, which is
the source of life to us also, as that life was found in Christ as man.
Thus I can speak of God and say, "Born of him;" but it is in Jesus that
God was manifested, and from Him that I derive life; so that "Jesus
Christ" and "God" are interchanged with each other. Thus "He shall
appear" ([Jo1 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028)) is Christ, He is
righteous; the righteous one "is born of him" But in [Jo1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001) it is " born of God," "children of
God;" but the world did not know Him: here it is Christ on earth; and
"when he shall appear," it is again Christ and we purify ourselves "even
as He is pure." There are many other examples.

It is said of the believer, "he purifies himself:" this shews that he is
not pure, as Christ is. He needed not to purify Himself. Accordingly it
is not said, he is pure as Christ is pure (for in that case there would
be no sin in us); but he purifies himself according to the purity of
Christ as He is in heaven, having the same life as the life of Christ
Himself.

Having set forth the positive aspect of christian purity, he goes on to
speak of it in other points of view, as one of the characteristic proofs
of the life of God in the soul.

He who commits sin (not transgresses the law, \[See Note \#15\] but acts
lawlessly. His conduct is without the restraint, without the rule of
law. He acts without curb; for sin is the acting without the curb of law
or restraint of another's authority, acting from our own will. Christ
came to do His Father's will, not His own. But Christ was manifested
that He might take away our sins, and in Him there is no sin; so that he
who commits sin acts against the object of the manifestation of Christ,
and in opposition to the nature of which, if Christ is our life, we are
partakers. Therefore he who abides in Christ does not practise sin; he
who sins has neither seen Him nor known Him. All depends, we see, on
participation in the life and nature of Christ. Let us not then deceive
ourselves. He who practises righteousness is righteous, as He is
righteous: for, by partaking in the life of Christ, one is before God
according to the perfection of Him who is there, the head and source of
that life. But we are thus as Christ before God, because He Himself is
really our life. Our actual life is not the measure of our acceptance;
it is Christ who is so. But Christ is our life, if we are accepted
according to His excellence; for it is as living of His life that we
participate in this.

But the judgment is more than negative. He who practises sin is of the
devil, has morally the same nature as the devil; for he sinneth from the
beginning: it is his original character as the devil. Now Christ was
manifested that He might destroy the works of the devil; how then can
one who shares the character of this enemy of souls be with Christ?

On the other hand, he who is born of God does not practise sin. The
reason is evident; he is made a partaker of the nature of God; he
derives his life from Him. This principle of divine life is in him. the
seed of God remains in him; he cannot sin, because he is born of God.
This new nature had not in it the principle of sin, so as to commit it.
How could it be that the divine nature should sin?

Having thus designated the two families, the family of God and that of
the devil, the apostle adds the second mark, the absence of which is a
proof that one is not of God. He had already spoken of righteousness; he
adds the love of the brethren. For this is the message that they had
received from Christ Himself, that they should love one another. In
Verse 12 ([Jo1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#012)) he shews the
connection between the two things: that hatred of a brother is fed by
the sense one has that his works are good, and one's own evil. Moreover
we are not to wonder that the world hates us: for we know that we have
passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren. If this love
is an essential proof of being renewed, it is quite natural that it
should not be found in the men of the world.

But, this being the case, he who does not love his brother (solemn
thought!) abides in death. In addition to this, he who does not love his
brother is a murderer, and a murderer has not eternal life. There is the
absence of the divine nature, death; but more, the activity of the old
man in the opposite nature is there, he hates, and is in spirit the
activity of death a murderer.

Further, as in the case of righteousness and of purity, we have Christ
as the measure of this love. We know love by this, that He laid down His
life for us; we ought to lay down ours for the brethren. Now, if our
brother has need, and we possess this world's good, but do not provide
for his necessity, is that the divine love which made Christ lay down
His life for us? It is by this real and practical love that we know we
are in the truth, and that our heart is confirmed and assured before
God. For if there is nothing on the conscience, we have confidence in
His presence; but if our own heart condemns us, God knows yet more.

It is not here the means of being assured of our salvation, but of
having confidence in the presence of God. We cannot have it with a bad
conscience in the practical sense of the word, for God is always light
and always holy.

We also receive all that we ask for, when we walk thus in love before
Him, doing that which is pleasing in His sight; for thus walking in His
presence with confidence, the heart and its desires respond to this
blessed influence, being formed by the enjoyment of communion with Him
in the light of His countenance. It is God who animates the heart; this
life, and this divine nature, of which the epistle speaks, being in full
activity and enlightened and moved by the divine presence in which it
delights. Thus our requests are only for the accomplishment of desires
that arise when this life, when our thoughts, are filled with the
presence of God and with the communication of His nature. And He lends
His power to the fulfillment of these desires, of which He is the
source, and which are formed in the heart by the revelation of Himself.
(Compare [Joh 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#007))

This is indeed the position of Christ Himself when here below: only that
He was perfect in it. (Compare [Joh
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#029); [Joh
11:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#042))

And here it is the commandment of God which He desires us to obey;
namely, to believe on the name of His Son Jesus; and to love one
another, as He gave us commandment.

Now he who keeps His commandments dwells in Him; and He dwells also in
this obedient man. It will be asked whether God or Christ is here meant?
The apostle, as we have seen, confounds them together in his thought.
That is to say, the Holy Ghost unites them in our minds. We are in Him
who is true, that is, in His Son Jesus Christ. It is Christ, who is the
presentation of God to men in life in man; and to the believer He is the
communication of that life, so that God too dwells in him, in the
revelation, in its divine excellence and perfection, of the nature which
the believer shares in the power of the Holy Ghost who dwells in him, so
that love is alike enjoyed and exercised.

But what marvelous grace to have received a life, a nature, by which we
are enabled to enjoy God Himself, who dwells in us, and by which, since
it is in Christ, we are in fact in the enjoyment of this communion, this
relationship with God! He who has the Son has life; but God then dwells
in him as the portion, as well as the source of this life; and he who
has the Son has the Father.

What marvelous links of vital and living enjoyment through the
communication of the divine nature of Him who is its source; and that
according to its perfection in Christ! Such is the Christian according
to grace. Therefore also he is obedient, because this life in the man
Christ (and it is thus that it becomes ours) was obedience itself, the
true relationship of man to God.

Practical righteousness, then, is a proof that we are born of Him who,
in His nature, is its source. In presence also of the world's hatred, we
know that we have passed from death unto life because we love the
brethren. Thus, having a good conscience, we have confidence in God, and
we receive from Him whatsoever we ask, walking in obedience and in a way
that is pleasing to Him. Thus walking, we dwell in Him \[See Note \#16\]
and He in us.

A third proof of our christian privileges arises here. The Spirit whom
He has given us is the proof that He Himself dwells in us, the
manifestation of the presence of God in us. He does not here add that we
abide in Him, because the subject here is the manifestation of the
presence of God. The presence of the Spirit demonstrates it. But in
abiding in Him there is, as we shall see farther on, the enjoyment of
that which He is, and consequently moral communion with His nature. He
who obeys enjoys this also, as we have seen. Here the presence of the
Holy Ghost in us is spoken of as demonstration of one part only of this
truth, namely, that God is in us. But the presence of God in us
according to grace, and according to the power of the Spirit, involves
also communion with that nature; we dwell also in Him from whom we
derive this grace, and all the spiritual forms of that nature, in
communion and practical life. It is in Verses 12 and 16 of Chapter 4
([Jo1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#012); [Jo1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016)). that our apostle speaks of
this.

Practical righteousness or obedience, the love of the brethren, the
manifestation of the Spirit of God, are the proofs of our relationship
to God. He who obeys the Lord's commandments in practical righteousness
dwells in Him, and He in him. The Spirit given is the proof that He
dwells in us.

Note \#13

See previous note.

Note \#14

John uses habitually the word "children," not "sons," as the more
distinctly expressing that we are of the same family. We are as Christ
before God and in the world, and so will be when He appears.

Note \#15

In [Rom 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012), the word is used in
contrast with law breaking, or sinning under law. That is, the Greek
word here used for what is translated "transgression of the law" is that
used for sinning without law, in contrast with sinning under law, and
being judged by it. I do not dissemble that this changing what is a
definition of sin is a very serious thing.

Note \#16

Here dwelling in Him comes first, because it is practical realisation in
an obedient heart. His dwelling in us is then pursued apart as known by
the Spirit given to us, to guard against being misled by evil spirits.
In [Jo1 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007), he resumes; the
indwelling in connection with the love of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 4](jo1004)

</div>
