<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 John Index](jo1.md)  
  [Previous](pe2003)  [Next](jo1002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

[1 John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 1:1</span></span>

The Epistle of John has a peculiar character. It is eternal life
manifested in Jesus, and imparted to us the life which was with the
Father, and which is in the Son. It is in this life that believers enjoy
the communion of the Father, that they are in relationship with the
Father by the Spirit of adoption, and that they have fellowship with the
Father and the Son. God's own character is that which tests it; because
it proceeds from Himself.

The first Chapter establishes these two latter points: namely, communion
with the Father and the Son, and that this communion must be according
to the essential character of God. The name of Father is that which
gives character to the second Chapter. Afterwards it is that which God
is, which tests the reality of imparted life.

The Epistles of Paul, although speaking of this life, are in general
occupied with setting before Christians the truth respecting the means
of standing in the presence of God justified and accepted. The Epistle
of John, that is to say, his First, shews us the life that comes from
God by Jesus Christ. John sets God before us, the Father revealed in the
Son, and eternal life in Him. Paul sets us before God accepted in
Christ. I speak of what characterises them. Each respectively touches on
the other point.

Now, this life is so precious, manifested as it is in the Person of
Jesus, that the epistle now before us has in this respect quite a
peculiar charm. When I, too, turn my eyes to Jesus, when I contemplate
all His obedience, His purity, His grace, His tenderness, His patience,
His devotedness, His holiness, His love, His entire freedom from all
self-seeking, I can say, That is my life.

This is immeasurable grace. It may be that it is obscured in me; but it
is none the less true, that that is my life. Oh how do I enjoy it thus
seen! How I bless God for it! What rest to the soul! What pure joy to
the heart! At the same time Jesus Himself is the object of my
affections; and all my affections are formed on that holy object. \[See
Note \#1\] But we must turn to our epistle. There were many pretensions
to new light, to clearer views. It was said that Christianity was very
good as an elementary thing; but that it was grown old, and that there
was a new light which went far beyond that twilight truth.

The Person of our Lord, the true manifestation of the divine life
itself, dissipated all those proud pretensions, those exaltations of the
human mind under the influence of the enemy, which did but obscure the
truth, and lead the mind of men back into the darkness whence they
themselves proceeded.

That which was from the beginning (of Christianity that is, in the
Person of Christ), that which they heard, had seen with their own eyes,
had contemplated, had touched with their own hands, of the Word of life
that was it which the apostle declared. For the life itself had been
manifested. That life which was with the Father had been manifested to
the disciples. Could there be anything more perfect, more excellent, any
development more admirable in the eyes of God, than Christ Himself, than
that Life which was with the Father, manifested in all its perfection in
the Person of the Son ? As soon as the Person of the Son is the object
of our faith, we feel that perfection must have been at the beginning.

The Person then of the Son, the eternal life manifested in the flesh, is
our subject in this epistle.

Grace is consequently to be remarked here in that which regards life;
while Paul presents it in connection with justification. The law
promised life upon obedience; but life came in the Person of Jesus, in
all its own divine perfection, in its human manifestations. Oh how
precious is the truth that this life, such as it was with the Father,
such as it was in Jesus, is given to us! In what relationships it sets
us, by the power of the Holy Ghost, with the Father and with the Son
Himself! And this is what the Spirit here first sets before us. And
observe, how it is all grace here. Farther on, indeed, He tests all
pretensions to the possession of fellowship with God, by displaying
God's own character; a character from which He can never deviate. But,
before entering on this, He presents the Saviour Himself, and communion
with the Father and the Son by this means, without question and without
modification. This is our position and our eternal joy.

The apostle had seen that life, had touched it with his own hands; and
he wrote to others, proclaiming this, in order that they also should
have communion with Him in the knowledge of the life which had been thus
manifested. \[See Note \#2\] Now, inasmuch as that life was the Son, it
could not be known without knowing the Son, that is, that which He was,
entering into His thoughts, His feelings: otherwise He is not really
known. It was thus they had communion with Him with the Son. Precious
fact! to enter into the thoughts (all the thoughts), and into the
feelings, of the Son of God come down in grace: to do this in fellowship
with Him, that is to say, not only knowing them, but sharing these
thoughts and feelings with Him. In effect, it is the life.

But we cannot have the Son without having the Father. He who had seen
Him had seen the Father; and consequently he who had communion with the
Son had communion with the Father; for their thoughts and feelings were
all one. He is in the Father, and the Father in Him. We have fellowship
therefore with the Father. And this is true also, when we look at it in
another aspect. We know that the Father has entire delight in the Son.
Now He has given us, by revealing the Son, to take our delight in Him
also, feeble as we are. I know, when I am delighting in Jesus in His
obedience, His love to His Father, to us, His single eye and purely
devoted heart I have the same feelings, the same thoughts, as the Father
Himself. In that the Father delights, cannot but delight, in Him in whom
I now delight, I have communion with the Father. So with the Son in the
knowledge of the Father. All this flows, whether in the one or the other
point of view, from the Person of the Son. Herein our joy is full. What
can we have more than the Father and the Son ? What more perfect
happiness than community of thoughts, feelings, joys, and communion,
with the Father and the Son, deriving all our joy from themselves? And
if it seem difficult to believe, let us remember that, in truth, it
cannot be otherwise: for, in the life of Christ, the Holy Ghost is the
source of my thoughts, feelings, communion, and He cannot give thoughts
different from those of the Father and the Son. They must be in their
nature the same. To say that they are adoring thoughts is in the very
nature of things, and only makes them more precious. To say that they
are feeble and often hindered, while the Father and the Son are divine
and perfect, is, if true, to say the Father and the Son are God, are
divine, and we feeble creatures. That surely none will deny. But if the
blessed Spirit be the source, they must be the same as to nature and
fact.

This is our christian position then, here below in time, through the
knowledge of the Son of God; as the apostle says, " These things write
we unto you, that your joy may be full."

But He who was the life which came from the Father, has brought us the
knowledge of God. \[See Note \#3\] The apostle had heard from His lips
that which God was knowledge of priceless value, but which searches the
heart. And this also the apostle, on the Lord's part, announces to
believers. This then is the message which they had heard from Him,
namely, that God is light, and in Him is no darkness. With regard to
Christ, He spoke that which He knew, and bore testimony to that which He
had seen. No one had been in heaven, save He who came down from thence.
No one had seen God. The Only-begotten, who is in the bosom of the
Father, He had declared Him. No one had seen the Father, save He who was
of God; He had seen the Father. Thus He could, of His own and perfect
knowledge, reveal Him. \[See Note \#4\] Now God was light, perfect
purity, which makes manifest at the same time all that is pure, and all
that is not so. To have communion with light, one must oneself be light,
be of its nature, and fit to be seen in the perfect light. It can only
be linked with that which is of itself. If there is anything else that
mingles with it, light is no longer light. It is absolute in its nature,
so as to exclude all that is not itself.

Therefore, if we say that we have fellowship with Him and walk in
darkness, we lie, and do not practise truth: our life is a perpetual
lie.

But if we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we (believers) have
communion with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us
from all sin. These are the great principles, the great features of
christian position. We are in the presence of God without a veil. It is
a real thing, a matter of life and of walk. It is not the same thing as
walking according to the light; but it is in the light. That is to say,
that this walk is before the eyes of God, enlightened by the full
revelation of what He is. It is not that there is no sin in us; but
walking in the light, the will and the conscience being in the light as
God is in it, everything is judged that does not answer to it. We live
and walk morally in the sense that God is present, and as knowing Him.
We walk thus in the light. The moral rule of our will is God Himself,
God known. The thoughts that sway the heart come from Himself and are
formed upon the revelation of Himself. The apostle puts these things
always in an abstract way: thus he says, "he cannot sin, because he is
born of God;" and that maintains the moral rule of this life; it is its
nature; it is the truth, inasmuch as the man is born of God. We cannot
have any other measure of it: any other would be false. It does not
follow, alas! that we are always consistent; but we are inconsistent if
we are not in this state; we are not walking according to the nature
that we possess; we are out of our true condition according to that
nature.

Moreover, walking in the light, as God is in the light, believers have
communion with each other. The world is selfish. The flesh, the
passions, seek their own gratification; but, if I walk in the light,
self has no place there. I can enjoy the light, and all I seek in it,
with another, and there is no jealousy. If another possess a carnal
thing, I am deprived of it. In the light we have fellow-possession of
that which He gives us, and we enjoy it the more by sharing it together.
This is a touchstone to all that is of the flesh. As much as one is in
the light, so much will we have fellow-enjoyment with another who is in
it. The apostle, as we have said, states this in an abstract and
absolute way. This is the truest way to know the thing itself. The rest
is only a question of realisation.

In the third place, the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses us from
all sin.

To walk in the light as God is in it, to have fellowship with one
another, to be cleansed from all sin by the blood; these are the three
parts of christian position. We feel the need there is of the last; for
while walking in the light as God is in the light, with (blessed be God)
a perfect revelation to us of Himself with a nature that knows Him, that
is capable of seeing Him spiritually, as the eye is made to appreciate
light (for we participate in the divine nature), we cannot say that we
have no sin. The light itself would contradict us. But we can say that
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us perfectly from all sin \[See Note
\#5\] Through the Spirit we enjoy the light together: it is the common
joy of our hearts before God, and well pleasing to Him; a testimony to
our common participation in the divine nature, which is love also. And
our conscience is no hindrance, because we know the value of the blood.
We have no conscience of sin upon us before God, though we know it is in
us; but we have the conscience of being clean from it by the blood. But
the same light which shews us this, prevents our saying (if we are in
it) that we have no sin in us; we should deceive ourselves if we said
so; and the truth would not be in us; for if the truth were in us, if
that revelation of the divine nature, which is light, Christ our life,
were in us, the sin that is in us would be judged by the light itself.
If it be not judged, this light the truth which speaks of things as they
are is not in us.

Note \#1

And this is morally very important; while it is in Him, not in myself,
that I rejoice and delight.

Note \#2

The life has been manifested. Therefore we have no longer to seek for
it, to grope after it in the darkness, to explore at random the
indefinite, or the obscurity of our own hearts, in order to find it, to
labour fruitlessly under the law, in order to obtain it. We behold it:
it is revealed, it is here, in Jesus Christ. He who possesses Christ
possesses that life.

Note \#3

It will be found that, when grace to us is spoken of in John's writings,
he speaks of the Father and the Son; when the nature of God or our
responsibility, he says God. John 3 and 1 John 4 may seem exceptions,
but are not. It is what God is as such, not personal action and
relationship in grace.

Note \#4

He who had seen Him had seen the Father; but here the apostle speaks of
a message and the revelation of His nature.

Note \#5

It is not said "has" nor "will." It does not refer to time, but to its
efficacy. As I might say such a medicine cures the ague. It is its
efficacy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 2](jo1002.md)

</div>
