<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 John Index](jo1.md)  
  [Previous](jo1001)  [Next](jo1003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001.md)

If, on the other hand, we have even committed sin and all, being judged
according to the light, is confessed (so that the will no longer takes
part in it, the pride of that will being broken down), He is faithful
and just to forgive us, and to cleanse us from all iniquity. If we say
that we have not sinned \[See Note \#6\] (as a general truth), it shews
not only that the truth is not in us, but we make God a liar; His word
is not in us, for He says that all have sinned. There are the three
things: we lie; the truth is not in us; we make God a liar. It is this
fellowship with God in the light which, in practical daily christian
life, inseparably connects forgiveness, and the present sense of it by
faith, and purity of heart.

Thus we see the christian position ([Jo1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#007).md); and then the things which, in
three different ways, are opposed to the truth to communion with God in
life.

The apostle wrote that which relates to the communion with the Father
and the Son, in order that their joy might be full

That which he wrote according to the revelation of the nature of God,
which he had received from Him who was the life from heaven, was in
order that they should not sin. But to say this is to suppose that they
might sin. Not that it is necessary they should do so; for the presence
of sin in the flesh by no means obliges us to walk after the flesh. But
if it should take place, there is provision made by grace, in order that
grace may act, and that we may be neither condemned, nor brought again
under the law.

We have an Advocate with the Father, One who carries on our cause for us
on high. Now this is not in order to obtain righteousness, nor again to
wash our sins away. All that has been done. Divine righteousness has
placed us in the light, even as God Himself is in the light. But
communion is interrupted, if even levity of thought finds place in our
heart; for it is of the flesh and the flesh has no communion with God.
When communion is interrupted, when we have sinned (not when we have
repented, for it is His intercession that leads to repentance), Christ
intercedes for us. Righteousness is always present our righteousness
"Jesus Christ the Righteous." Therefore, neither the righteousness nor
the value of the propitiation for sin being changed, grace acts (one may
say, acts necessarily) in virtue of that righteousness, and of that
blood which is before God acts, on the intercession of Christ who never
forgets us, in order to bring us back to communion by means of
repentance. Thus, while yet on earth, before Peter had committed the
sin, He prayed for him; at the given moment He looks on him, and Peter
repents and weeps bitterly for his offence. Afterwards the Lord does all
that is necessary to make Peter judge the root itself of the sin; but
all is grace.

It is the same in our case. Divine righteousness abides the immutable
foundation of our relationships with God, established on the blood of
Christ. When communion, which exists only in the light, is interrupted,
the intercession of Christ, available by virtue of His blood (for
propitiation for the sin has also been made), restores the soul that it
may still again enjoy communion with God according to the light, into
which righteousness has introduced it. \[See Note \#7\] This
propitiation is made for the whole world, not for the Jews only, nor to
the exclusion of any one at all; but for the whole world, God in His
moral nature having been fully glorified by the death of Christ.

These three capital points or, if you will, two capital points, and the
third, namely, advocacy, which is supplementary form the introduction,
the doctrine of the epistle. All the rest is an experimental application
of that which this part contains: namely, first (life being given),
communion with the Father and the Son; second, the nature of God, light,
which manifests the falsehood of all pretension to communion with the
light, if the walk be in darkness; and third, seeing that sin is in us
and that we may fail although we are cleansed before God so as to enjoy
the light, the advocacy which Jesus Christ the righteous can always
exercise before God, on the ground of the righteousness which is ever in
His presence, and the blood which is shed for our sins, in order to
restore our communion, when we have lost it by our guilty negligence.

The Spirit now proceeds to develop the characteristics of this divine
life.

Now we are sanctified unto the obedience of Jesus Christ, that is to
say, to obey on the same principles as those on which He obeyed; where
His Father's will was the motive as well as the rule of action. It is
the obedience of a life to which it was meat and drink to do the will of
God: not as under the law, in order to obtain life. The life of Jesus
Christ was a life of obedience, in which He enjoyed the love of His
Father perfectly, tested in all things and so proved perfect. His words,
His commandments, were the expression of that life; they direct that
life in us, and ought to exercise all the authority over us of Him who
pronounced them.

The law promised life to those who obeyed it. Christ is the life. This
life has been imparted to us to believers. Therefore, the words which
were the expression of that life, in its perfection in Jesus, direct and
guide it in us according to that perfection. Besides this, it has
authority over us. His commandments are its expression. We have
therefore to obey, and to walk as He walked the two forms of practical
life. It is not enough to walk well: we must obey, for there is
authority. This is the essential principle of a right walk. On the other
hand, the obedience of the Christian as is evident by that of Christ
Himself is not that which we often think. We call a child obedient, who,
having a will of his own, submits himself at onc e when the authority of
the parent intervenes to prevent his accomplishing it. But Christ never
obeyed in this way. He came to do the will of God. Obedience was His
mode of being. His Father's will was the motive, and, with the love that
was never separate from it, the only motive of His every act and every
impulse. This is obedience properly called christian. It is a new life
which delights in doing the will of Christ, acknowledging His entire
authority over it. We reckon ourselves to be dead to everything else; we
are alive unto God, we are not our own. We only know Christ inasmuch as
we are living by His life; for the flesh does not know Him, and cannot
understand His life.

Now, that life is obedience: therefore he who says, " I know him," and
does not observe His commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in
him. It does not say here, "he deceives himself," for it is very
possible that he is not self-deceived, as in the other case of fancied
communion; for here the will is in action, and a man knows it, if he
will confess it. But the reality is not there; he is a liar, and the
truth in the knowledge of Jesus, which he professes, is not in him.

There are two remarks to be made here. First, that the apostle takes
things always as they are in themselves in an abstract way, without the
modifications that are occasioned by other things, in the midst of
which, or in relation with which, the former are found. Second, that the
chain of consequences which the apostle deduces is not that of outward
reasoning, the force of which is consequently on the surface of the
argument itself. He reasons from a great inward principle, so that one
does not see the force of the argument unless one knows the fact, and
even the scope, of that principle; and, in particular, that which the
life of God is in its nature, in its character, and in its action. But,
without possessing it, we do not and cannot understand anything about
it. There is indeed, the authority of the apostle and of the word to
tell us that the thing is so, and that is sufficient. But the links of
his discourse will not be understood without the possession of the life
which interprets what he says, and which is itself interpreted by that
which he says.

I return to the text. "Whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love
of God perfected." It is in this way that we are conscious that we know
Him. His " word" has rather a wider sense than His "commandments." That
is to say, while it equally implies obedience, the word is less outward.
"Commandments" are here details of the divine life. His "word" contains
its whole expression the spirit of that life. \[See Note \#8\] It is
universal and absolute.

Now this life is the divine life manifested in Jesus, and which is
imparted to us. Have we seen it in Christ ? Do we doubt that this is
love; that the love of God has been manifested in it? If then I keep His
word; if the scope and meaning of the life which that word expresses is
thus understood and realised, the love of God is perfect in me. The
apostle, as we have seen, always speaks abstractedly. If in fact at any
given moment I do not observe the word, in that point I do not realise
His love; happy intercourse with God is interrupted. But so far as I am
moved and governed absolutely by His word, His love is completely
realised in me; for His word expresses what He is, and I am keeping it.
This is the intelligent communion with His nature in its fullness, a
nature in which I participate; so that I know that He is perfect love, I
am filled with it, and this shews itself in my ways: for that word is
the perfect expression of Himself. \[See Note \#9\] Consequently we know
thus that we are in Him, for we realise that which He is in the
communion of His nature. Now if we say that we abide in Him, it is
evident, from what we have now seen in the instruction the apostle gives
us, that we ought to walk as He walked. Our walk is the practical
expression of our life; and this life is Christ known in His word. And
since it is by His word, we who possess this life are under an
intelligent responsibility to follow it; that is to say, to walk as He
walked. For that word is the expression of His life.

Obedience then, as obedience, is thus far the moral characteristic of
the life of Christ in us. But it is proof of that which, in
Christianity, is inseparable from the life of Christ in us: we are in
Him. (Compare [Joh 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#029).md) We know, not
merely that we know Him, but that we are in Him. The enjoyment of the
perfect love of God in the path of obedience, gives us by the Holy Ghost
the consciousness that we are in Him. But if I am in Him, I cannot
indeed be what He was, for He was without sin; but I ought to walk as He
walked. Thus I know I am in Him. But if I make profession to abide in
Him, my heart and spirit to be wholly there, I ought to walk as He
walked. Obedience as a principle, and through keeping His word, and so
the love of God perfected in me knowing that I am in Him, are the
formative principles and character of our life.

In Verses 7 and 8 ([Jo1 2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#007).md) the two
forms of the rule of this life are presented forms which, moreover,
answer to the two principles which we have just announced. It is not a
new commandment which the apostle writes unto them but an old one; it is
the word of Christ from the beginning. Were it not so, were it in this
sense new, so much the worse for him who set it forth, for it would no
longer be the expression of the perfect life of Christ Himself, but some
other thing, or a falsification of that which Christ had set forth This
corresponds with the first principle, that is, obedience to
commandments, to the commandments of Christ. What He said was the
expression of what He was. He could command that they should love one
another as He had loved them. Compare the Beatitudes.

In another sense it was a new commandment: for (by the power of the
Spirit of Christ, being united to Him and drawing our life from Him) the
Spirit of God manifested the effect of this life by revealing a
glorified Christ in a new way. And now it was not only a commandment,
but as the thing itself was true in Christ, it was so in His own as
partakers of His nature and in Him; He also in them.

By this revelation, and by the presence of the Holy Ghost, the darkness
disappeared, \[See Note \#10\] passed away, and in fact the true light
shone. There will be no different light in heaven: only then the light
will be publicly displayed in glory without a cloud.

Verse 9 ([Jo1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009).md). The life as in
[Joh 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md), is now found to be the light
of men, only the brighter for faith that Christ is gone, for it is
through the rent veil it shines most brightly. We have had the
pretension to know Him discussed to be in Him; now that of being in the
light, and this before the Spirit of God applies in detail the qualities
of this life, as a proof of its existence to the heart, in answer to
seducers who sought to terrify them by new notions, as though Christians
were not really in possession of life, and, with life, of the Father and
the Son. The true light now shines. And this light is God; it is the
divine nature; and, as that which was a means of judging the seducers
themselves, he brings out another quality connected with our being in
the light, that is with God fully revealed. Christ was it in the world.
We are set to be it, in that we are born of God. And one who has this
nature loves his brother; for is not God love? Has not Christ loved us,
not being ashamed to call us brethren? Can I have His life and His
nature, if I do not love the brethren? No. I am then walking in
darkness; I have no light on my path. He who loves his brother dwells in
the light; the nature of God acts in him; and he dwells in the bright
spiritual intelligence of that life, in the presence and in the
communion of God. If any one hates, it is evident that he has not divine
light. With feelings according to a nature opposed to God, how can it be
pretended that he is in the light?

Moreover, there is no occasion of stumbling in one who loves, for he
walks according to divine light. There is nothing in him which causes
another to stumble, for the revelation of the nature of God in grace
will assuredly not do so: and it is this which is manifested in him who
loves his brother. \[See Note \#11\] This closes as an introductory
statement the first part of the Epistle. It contains in the former half,
the privileged place of Christians, the message giving us the truth of
our state here, and the provision for failure: that ends with [Jo1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002.md); in the second half, the proofs
the Christian has of the true possession of the privilege according to
the message giving obedience, and love of the brethren, knowing Christ,
being in Christ, enjoying the perfect love of God, abiding in Him, being
in the light, forming the condition which is thus proved.

Having established the two great principles, obedience and love, as
proofs of the possession of the divine nature, of Christ known as life,
and of our abiding in Him, the apostle goes on to address Christians
personally and to shew us the position, on the ground of grace, in three
different degrees of ripeness. This parenthetical but most important
address we will now consider.

He begins by calling all the Christians to whom he was writing,
"children," a term of affection in the loving and aged apostle. And as
he writes to them ([Jo1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001).md) in order
that they should not sin, so he writes also because all their sins were
forgiven for Jesus' name's sake. This was the assured condition of all
Christians: that which God had granted them in giving them faith, that
they might glorify Him He allows no doubt as to the fact of their being
pardoned. He writes to them because they are so.

We next find three classes of Christians: fathers, young men, and babes.
He addresses them each twice, fathers, young men, babes ([Jo1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013).md) fathers, in the first half of
Verse 14 ([Jo1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#014).md); young men, from
the second half, to the end of Verse 17 ([Jo1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#017).md); and babes from Verse 18 to the
end of Verse 27 ([Jo1 2:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018).md). In
Verse 28 ([Jo1 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028).md) he returns to all
Christians under the name of "children".

That which characterises fathers in Christ is that they have known Him
who is from the beginning, that is, Christ. This is all that he has to
say about them. All had resulted in that. He only repeats the same thing
again, when, changing his form of expression, he begins anew with these
three classes. The fathers have known Christ. This is the result of all
christian experience. The flesh is judged, discerned, wherever it has
mixed itself with Christ in our feelings: it is recognised,
experimentally, as having no value; and, as the result of experience,
Christ stands alone, free from all alloy. They have learnt to
distinguish that which has only the appearance of good. They are not
occupied with experience that would be being occupied with self, with
one's own heart. All that has passed away; and Christ alone remains as
our portion, unmingled with aught besides, even as He gave Himself to
us. Moreover He is much better known; they have experienced what He is
in so many details, whether of joy in communion with Him, or in the
consciousness of weakness, or in the realisation of His faithfulness, of
the riches of His grace, of His adaptation to our need, of His love, and
in the revelation of His own fullness; so that they are able now to say,
" I know whom I have believed. " Attachment to Himself characterises
them. Such is the character of "fathers" in Christ.

"Young men" are the second class. They are distinguished by spiritual
strength in conflict: the energy of faith. They have overcome the wicked
one. For he speaks of what their character is as in Christ. Conflict
they have as such, but the strength of Christ manifested in them.

The third class is "babes" These know the Father. We see here that the
Spirit of adoption and of liberty characterises the youngest child in
the faith of Christ, that it is not the result of progress. It is the
commencement. We possess it because we are Christians and it is ever the
distinguishing mark of beginners. The others do not lose it, but other
things distinguish them.

In again addressing these three classes of Christians the apostle, as we
have seen, has only to repeat that which he at first said with regard to
the fathers. It is the result of christian life. In the case of the
young men he develops his idea and adds some exhortations. "Ye are
strong," he says, " and the word of God abideth in you" an important
characteristic. The word is the revelation of God, and the application
of Christ, to the heart, so that we have thus the motives which form and
govern it, and a testimony founded on the state of the heart, and on
convictions which have a divine power in us. It is the sword of the
Spirit in our relations with the world. We have been ourselves formed by
those things to which we bear testimony in our relations with the world,
and those things are in us according to the power of the word of God.
The wicked one is thus overcome; for he has only the world to present to
our lusts: and the word abiding, in us keeps us in an altogether
different sphere of thought in which a different nature is enlightened
and strengthened by divine communications. The tendency of the young man
is toward the world: the ardour of his nature, and the vigour of his
age, tend to draw him away on that side. He has to guard against this by
separating himself entirely from the world and the things that are in
it; because, if any one love the world, the love of the Father is not in
him, for those things do not come from the Father. He has a world of his
own, of which Christ is the centre and glory. The lusts of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life these are the things that
are in the world and that characterise it. There are really no other
motives besides these in the world. Now these things are not of the
Father.

The Father is the source of all that is according to His own heart every
grace, every spiritual gift, the glory, the heavenly holiness of all
that was manifested in Christ Jesus, and that will be all the world of
glory to come, of which Christ is the centre. And all this had only the
cross for its portion here below. But the apostle is speaking here of
the source; and assuredly the Father is not the source of those other
things.

Now the world passes away; but he who does the will of God, he who, in
going through this world, takes for his guide, not the desires of
nature, but the will of God a will which is according to His nature and
which expresses it such a one shall abide for ever according to the
nature and the will that he has followed after.

We shall find that the world, and the Father with all that is of Him,
the flesh and the Spirit, the Son and the devil, are put respectively in
opposition. Things are spoken of in their source and moral nature, the
principles that act in us and that characterise our existence and our
position, and the two agents in good and evil that are opposed to each
other, without (thanks be to God!) any uncertainty as to the issue of
the conflict; for the weakness of Christ, in death, is stronger than the
strength of Satan. He has no power against that which is perfect. Christ
came that He might destroy the works of the devil.

To the babes the apostle speaks principally of the dangers to which they
were exposed from seducers. He warns them with tender affection,
reminding them at the same time that all the sources of intelligence and
strength were open to them and belonged to them. "It is the last time;"
not exactly the last days, but the season which had the final character
that belonged to the dealings of God with this world. The Antichrist was
to come, and already there were many antichrists: by this it might be
known it was the last time. It was not merely sin, nor the transgression
of the law; but, Christ having already been manifested, and being now
absent and hidden from the world, there was a formal opposition to the
especial revelation that had been made. It was not a vague and ignorant
unbelief; it took a definite shape as having a will directed against
Jesus. They might for instance believe all that a Jew believed, as it
was revealed in the word, but as to the testimony of God by Jesus Christ
they opposed it. They would not own Him to be the Christ; they denied
the Father and the Son. This, as to religious profession, is the true
character of the Antichrist. He may indeed believe or pretend to
believe, that there shall be a Christ; yea, set himself up to be it. But
the two aspects of Christianity (that which, on the one hand, regards
the accomplishment in the Person of Jesus of the promises made to the
Jew; and, on the other hand, the heavenly and eternal blessings
presented in the revelation of the Father by the Son), this the
Antichrist does not accept. That which characterises him as Antichrist
is that he denies the Father and the Son. To deny that Jesus is the
Christ is indeed the Jewish disbelief that forms part of his character.
That which gives him the character of Antichrist is that he denies the
foundation of Christianity. He is a liar in that he denies Jesus to be
the Christ; consequently it is the work of the father of lies. But all
the unbelieving Jews had done as much without being Antichrist. To deny
the Father and the Son characterises him.

But there is something more. These antichrists came out from among the
Christians. There was apostacy. Not that they were really Christians,
but they had been among the Christians and had come out from them. (How
instructive for our days also is this Epistle!) It was thus made
manifest that they were not truly of the flock of Christ. All this had a
tendency to shake the faith of babes in Christ. The apostle endeavours
to strengthen them. There were two means of confirming their faith,
which also inspired the apostle with confidence. First, they had the
unction of the Holy One; secondly, that which was from the beginning,
was the touchstone for all new doctrine, and they already possessed that
which was from the beginning.

The indwelling of the Holy Ghost as an unction and spiritual
intelligence in them, and the truth which they had received at the
beginning the perfect revelation of Christ these were the safe guards
against seducers and seductions. All heresy and all error and corruption
will be found to strike at the first and divine revelation of the truth,
if the unction of the Holy One is in us to judge them. Now this unction
is the portion of even the youngest babes in Christ, and they ought to
be encouraged to realise it, however tenderly they may be cared for as
they were here by the apostle.

What important truths we discover here for ourselves! The last time
already manifested, so that we have to be on our guard against seducers
persons moreover issuing from the bosom of Christianity.

The character of this Antichrist is that he denies the Father and the
Son. Unbelief in its Jewish form is also again manifested: owning that
there is a Christ, but denying that Jesus is He. Our security against
these seductions is the unction from the Holy one the Holy Ghost, but in
especial connection with the holiness of God, which enables us to see
clearly into the truth (another characteristic of the Spirit); and,
secondly, that that abide in us which we have heard from the beginning.
It is this evidently which we have in the written word. "Development,''
note it well, is not that which we have from the beginning. By its very
name it sins radically against the safeguard pointed out by the apostle.
That which the church has taught, as development of the truth,
whencesoever she may have received it, is not that which has been heard
from the beginning.

There is another point indicated here by the apostle that ought to be
noticed. People might pretend by giving God in a vague way the name of
Father, that they possessed Him without the true possession of the Son,
Jesus Christ. This cannot be. He who has not the Son has not the Father.
It is by Him that the Father is revealed, in Him that the Father is
known.

If the truth that we have received from the beginning abides in us, we
abide in the Son and in the Father; for this truth is the revelation of
the Son and is revealed by the Son, who is the truth. It is living truth
if it abides in us; thus, by possessing it, we possess the Son, and in
the Son, the Father also. We abide in it, and thereby we have eternal
life. (Compare [Joh 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003).md)

Now the apostle had happy confidence that the unction which they had
received of Him abode in them, so that they needed not to be taught of
others, for this same unction taught them with respect to all things. It
was the truth, for it was the Holy Ghost Himself acting in the word,
which was the revelation of the truth of Jesus Himself, and there was no
lie in it. Thus should they abide in Him according to that which it had
taught them.

Observe also, here, that the effect of this teaching by the unction from
on high is twofold with regard to the discernment of the truth. They
knew that no lie was of the truth; possessing this truth from God, that
which was not it was a lie. They knew that this unction which taught
them of all things was the truth, and that there was no lie in it. The
unction taught them all things, that is to say, all the truth, as truth
of God. Therefore that which was not it was a lie, and there was no lie
in the unction. Thus the sheep hear the voice of the good Shepherd; if
another calls them, it is not His voice, and that is enough. They fear
it and fly from it, because they do not know it.

With Verse 27 ([Jo1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027).md) ends the
second series of exhortations to the three classes. The apostle begins
again with the whole body of Christians ([Jo1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028).md). This Verse appears to me to
correspond with Verse 8 of the Second Epistle ([Jo2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#008).md), and with Chapter 3 of the First
Epistle to the Corinthians.

The apostle, having ended his address to those who were all in the
communion of the Father, applies the essential principles of the divine
life, of the divine nature as manifested in Christ, to test those who
claimed participation in it; not in order to make the believer doubt,
but for the rejection of that which was false. I say, "not to make the
believer doubt;" for the apostle speaks of his position, and of the
position of those to whom he was writing, with the most perfect
assurance. ([Jo1 3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001).md) \[See Note
\#12\] He had spoken, in recommencement at Verse 28 ([Jo1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028).md), of the appearing of Jesus. This
introduces the Lord in the full revelation of His character, and gives
rise to the scrutiny of the pretensions of those who called themselves
by His name. There are two proofs which belong essentially to the divine
life, and a third which is accessory as privilege: righteousness or
obedience, and love, and the presence of the Holy Ghost.

Righteousness is not in the flesh. If therefore it is really found in
any one, he is born of Him, he derives his nature from and in Christ. We
may remark, that it is righteousness as it was manifested in Jesus; for
it is because we know that He is righteous, that we know that "he who
doeth righteousness is born of him." It is the same nature demonstrated
by the same fruits.

Note \#6

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 3](jo1003.md)

</div>
