<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job001)  [Next](job003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 1 and 2.

In Job we have man put to the test; we might say, with our present
knowledge, man renewed by grace, an upright man and righteous in his
ways, in order to shew whether he can stand before God in presence of
the power of evil, whether he can be righteous in his own person before
God. On the other hand we find the dealings of God, by which He searches
the heart and gives it the consciousness of its true state before Him.

All this is so much the more instructive, from its being set before us
independent of all dispensations, of all especial revelation on God's
part. It is the godly man, such as one of Noah's descendants would be,
who had not lost the knowledge of the true God, when sin was again
spreading in the world and idolatry was setting in; but the Judge was
there to punish it. Job was encompassed with blessings and possessed
real piety. Satan, the accuser of the servants of God, goes to and fro
in the earth seeking occasion for evil, and presents himself before
Jehovah among His mighty angels, the "Bene-Elohim": and God states the
case of Job, the subject of His government in blessing, faithful in his
walk.

It is carefully to be remarked here, that the spring and source of all
these dealings is not Satan's accusations, but God Himself. God knew
what His servant Job needed, and Himself brings forward his case and
sets all in movement. If He demands of Satan if he had considered His
servant Job, it is because He Himself had. Satan is but an instrument,
and an ignorant though subtle instrument, to bring about God's purposes
of grace. His accusations result really in nothing as against Job, save
to disprove their truth by what he is allowed to do; but, for Job's
good, he is left to his will up to a certain point, for the purpose of
bringing Job to a knowledge of his own heart, and thus to a deeper
ground of practical relationship with God. How blessed and perfect are
God's ways! How vain in result the efforts of Satan against those that
are His!

Satan attributes the piety of Job to God's manifest favour and to his
prosperity, to the hedge He had put around him. God gives all this into
the hands of Satan, who speedily excites the cupidity of Job's enemies;
and they attack him and carry off all his possessions. His children
perish through the effects of a storm which Satan is allowed to raise.
But Job, dwelling neither on the instruments employed nor on Satan,
receives this bitter cup from the hand of God without murmuring. Satan
suggests again that man will, in fact, give up everything if he can
preserve himself. God leaves everything to Satan except the life of His
servant. Satan smites Job with a dreadful disease; but Job bows under
the hand of God, fully recognising His sovereignty. Satan had exhausted
his means of injuring Job, and we hear nothing more of him; but it is
beautiful to see that God has hereby completely justified Job from the
accusation of Satan. Job was no hypocrite. He had lost all to which
Satan traced his piety, and it shone forth brighter than ever. Satan can
trace the motives which work in flesh, the evil in man's heart which he
excites; but grace in God, His uncaused love, and grace in man which
trusts in and leans on it, he cannot measure, nor know the power of.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 3](job003)

</div>
