<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job041)  [Next](psa000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 38 through 42.

Jehovah then speaks, and addressing Job, carries on the subject. He
makes Job sensible of his nothingness. Job confesses himself to be vile,
and declares that he will be silent before God. The Lord resumes the
discourse, and Job acknowledges that he has darkened counsel by speaking
of that which he understood not. But now, still more submissively, he
declares openly his real condition. Formerly he had heard of God by the
hearing of the ear; now his eye had seen Him, wherefore he abhors
himself and repents in dust and ashes. This is the effect of having seen
God, and of finding himself in His presence. The work of God was
accomplished-the work of His perfect goodness, which would not leave Job
without causing him to know himself, without bringing him into God's own
presence. The object of discipline was attained, and Job is surrounded
with more blessings than before.

We learn two things here; first, that man cannot stand in the presence
of God; and secondly, the ways of God for the instruction of the inner
man. It is also a picture of God's dealings with the Jews on the earth.

The Book of Job plainly sets before us also the teaching of the Spirit,
as to the place which Satan occupies in the dealings of God and His
government, with respect to man on the earth. We may also remark the
perfect and faithful care of God, from whom (whatever may have been the
malice of Satan) all this proceeded, because He saw that Job needed it.
We observe that it is God who sets the case of Job before Satan, and
that the latter disappears from the scene; because here it is a question
of his doings on the earth, and not of his inward temptations. Further,
if God had stopped short in the outward afflictions, Job would have had
fresh cause for self-complacency. Man might have judged that those
afflictions were ample. But the evil of Job's heart consisted in his
resting on the fruits of grace in himself, and this would have only
increased the good opinion he had already entertained of himself: kind
in prosperity, he would have been also patient in adversity. God
therefore carries on His work, that Job may know himself.

Either the sympathy of his friends (for we can bear alone, and from God
in His presence, that which we cannot bear when we have the opportunity
of making our complaint before man), or the pride which is not roused
while we are alone but which is wounded when others witness our misery,
or perhaps the two together, upset the mind of Job; and he curses the
day of his birth. The depths of his heart. are displayed. It was this
that he needed.

We have thus, man standing between Satan, the accuser, and God, the
question being not God's revelation of everlasting righteousness, but
His ways with the soul of man in this world. The godly man comes into
trouble. This has to be accounted for, the friends insisting that this
world is an adequate expression of God's righteous government, and that
consequently as Job had made great profession of piety he was a
hypocrite. This he stoutly denies, but his will unbroken rises up
against God. God has chosen to do it, and he cannot help it. Only he is
sure if he could find Him, He would put words in his mouth. He spoke
well of Him though in rebellion, and thinking of his goodness as his
own. Still he affirms that though there was a government, this world did
not shew it as his friends said; but he is not broken down before God.
Elihu comes in, the interpreter, one among a thousand (and practically
how rare they are!) and he shews God's discipline with man and with the
righteous, and rebukes both sides with intelligence. Then God comes in
and puts Job in his place by the revelation of Himself; but owns Job's
right feeling as to Him, and puts the friends in their true place, and
Job is to intercede for them. Job, humbled, can be fully blessed. This
knowledge of self in God's sight is of all importance; we are never
humble nor distrustful of self till then.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Introduction](psa000.md)

</div>
