<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job002)  [Next](job004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#001)

But the depths of Job's heart were not yet reached, and to do this was
the purpose of God, whatever Satan's thoughts may have been. Job did not
know himself, and up to this time, with all his piety, he had never been
in the presence of God. How often it is the case that even throughout a
long life of piety the conscience has never been really set before God!
Hence peace, such peace as cannot be shaken, and real liberty, are not
known as yet. There is a desire after God, there is the new nature; the
attraction of His grace has been felt: nevertheless God and His love, as
it really is, are not known. If Satan is foiled (the grace of God having
kept Job's heart from murmuring) God has yet His own work to accomplish.
That which the tempest that Satan had raised against Job failed in
doing, is brought about by the sympathy of his friends. Poor heart of
man! The uprightness and even the patience of Job had been manifested,
and Satan had no more to say. But God alone can search out what the
heart really is before Him; and the absence of all self-will, perfect
agreement with the will of God, absolute submission like that of Christ,
these things God alone could test, and thus lay bare the nothingness of
man's heart before Him. God did this with Job; revealing at the same
time that He acts in grace in these cases for the good of the soul which
He loves.

If we compare the language of the Spirit of Christ in the Psalms, we
shall often find the appreciation of circumstances expressed in almost
identical terms; but instead of bitter complaints and reproaches
addressed to God, we find the submission of a heart which acknowledges
that God is perfect in all His ways. Job was upright, but he began to
make this his righteousness; which evidently proves that he had never
been really in the presence of God. The consequence of this was that,
although he reasoned more correctly than his friends, and shewed a heart
that felt really far more than they what God was, he attributed
injustice to God and a desire to harass him without cause (see chap. 19;
[Job 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#003); [Job
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#013); [Job
13:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015); [Job
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#012)). We find also in chapter 29
that his heart had dwelt upon his upright and benevolent walk with
complacency, commending himself, and feeding his self-love with it.
"When the eye saw me it gave witness to me." God was bringing him to
say, "Now mine eye seeth Thee and I abhor myself." It is with these
chapters (29, 30, 31), which express his good opinion of himself, that
Job ends his discourse; he had told his whole heart out. He was
self-satisfied: the grace of God had wrought and in a lovely way in him;
but the present effect through the treacherousness of the human heart,
and not being in God's presence which detects it, was to make him lovely
in his own eyes If (chap. 9) he confesses man's iniquity (for who can
deny it; and especially what converted men?), it is in bitterness of
spirit, because it is useless to attempt being just with such a God.
Chapter 6, as well as the whole of his discourse, proves that, whether
it was the pride of his heart which could not bear to be found in such a
state by those who had known his greatness, a state which pride would
have borne in stubbornness alone, or sympathy which, in weakening that
had left him to the full sense of it, it was the presence and the
language of his friends that was the means of bringing out all that was
in his heart. We see also in chapter 30 that the pride of his heart was
detected.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 4](job004)

</div>
