<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joel Index](joe)  
  [Previous](joe001)  [Next](joe003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joel Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001)

[Joe 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001) sounds the alarm, because the
day is near. The day is then described as the invasion of a people, the
like of whom had never been seen by Israel or the land. It was, in fact,
the army of Jehovah. His power was with it as His rod. The voice of
Jehovah was heard before it; the day of Jehovah announced itself as
there ([Joe 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011)). We find an instance
here of that which is usual in prophetic teaching-some event which
should act on the conscience of the people, taken up by the Spirit of
prophecy, no doubt, to awaken their conscience at the very time of the
event, but far more with the purpose of using it as a picture of some
event in the last days of much greater moment. The judgment of God,
already deserved by the people, and suspended by His longsuffering over
their heads, awaits the hour in which this longsuffering will have no
more effect, will become thenceforward useless, and in which the
counsels of His wisdom shall have arrived at their development. The
Spirit of God warns the people of this judgment: they should have given
heed to it at that very time; but He describes for future days the
instruments of God's vengeance, when He shall actually execute the
judgment. Thus chapter 1 of Joel takes up the ravages of these insects,
which, it seems, had caused a frightful scarcity, to act upon the
conscience of the people at the time of the prophecy; but from the
beginning of chapter 2 the prophecy throws itself into the future, and
introduces a people, who, in their turn, will ravage the land of Israel
in the last days. Yet, at the commencement of the chapter, it is only
the alarm that is sounded; but with the announcement that the day is
nigh at hand.

We are reminded here of the ordinance in Numbers 10, in Verse 9 of which
([Num 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#009)) it is commanded to sound
an alarm, or blow loudly with the trumpets, when the enemy should be in
the land, and Jehovah would remember the people. In Verse 7 ([Joe
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#007)), if the congregation was to be
gathered together, they were to blow the trumpet, but not to sound an
alarm. Thus, in [Joe 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001), an alarm is
sounded in Zion. A great and strong people, who devour the earth, are in
the land. There is but one thing that gives hope (and that one is in
itself the most terrible thing of all)-Jehovah conducts this devouring
people. It is His army. Faith takes hope from this. He who has
recognised the trumpet of God, he who, awakened by the Spirit of
prophecy when it sounded an alarm, and described this terrible evil
beforehand (and it is the Spirit alone who does so) in its true colours,
as Jehovah's doing-he, who has understood that it is God's judgment,
that Jehovah is in it, can come before Jehovah according to His own
ways, and plead with Jehovah according to His love for His people. This
is the true character of faith in all times. It is the especial position
of the remnant in the last days.

The day of Jehovah actually impending, and its true meaning understood,
through the intelligence given by the Spirit of prophecy, is a call to
repentance at the moment when repentance is necessary, at the moment
ordained of God for His immediate intervention on behalf of His people.
These are the ways of God. He to whom the moment is known acts outwardly
to force His people to take heed; and He acts in testimony to direct
their hearts. It was the same thing in the days of Jesus. The testimony
of God was there before the terrible judgment which soon fell upon the
people. He who had ears to hear profited by it, and enjoyed the effect
of God's intervention in a deliverance which He has proffered, yet
better, though of another character, than that which Israel shall enjoy
in the last days. "The Lord added daily to the assembly such as should
be saved." [Joe 2:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012) give us the
prophet's testimony, calling them to repentance, in view of the
chastisements that were hanging over the people. In Verse 15 ([Joe
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015)) the trumpet is sounded on God's
part to gather the people together, according to [Num
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#007), to plead with Him that He would
turn away His wrath, to address themselves to Him, as One whose
judgments were necessarily directed by Himself. Oh! how good it is to
have to do with God, and to see Him in the judgment, although He is a
consuming fire. It was thus David judged when he had numbered the
people.

The humiliation, we perceive, was to be universal and complete, for the
priests themselves are called to stand outside the sanctuary, to cry
with the people unto Jehovah, appealing to His faithfulness, that the
heathen might not say, "Where is their God?" as the Jews said to Jesus.
Jehovah would hear His people thus humbled. He would fill their land
with plenty, and they should no longer be a reproach among the heathen;
the northern army, which had devoured the land like locusts, should be
driven out by the way of the east, judged on account of their pride,
because they magnified themselves to do great things. But it should be
Jehovah who would do great things, delivering them thus from all their
fears. A full and abundant blessing should be poured upon the land of
Israel; the children of Zion should rejoice in Jehovah their God; the
people of Jehovah should never again be ashamed. They should receive the
abundance of all the years which had failed. They should know assuredly
that Jehovah was among them-He, Jehovah, their God, and not another; and
they should never be ashamed. The blessing, and He who bestowed the
blessing, should thus secure them from being a reproach among the
nations.

But this was not all. This was temporal blessing-the re-establishment of
Israel in the blessing of former days, on the ground of grace, which
would prevent their losing it. But there was a new thing to be bestowed
upon them. God would pour out His Spirit upon all flesh. The young men
and the old men of the people should have visions and dreams: even on
the servants and the handmaidens should this rain from heaven descend.
[Joe 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#030) \[See Note \#1\] resumes the
subject in another aspect, and does not follow in direct succession.
Before the great and terrible day of Jehovah there should be signs and
wonders in the heavens, and on earth the terror of Jehovah should be
felt, and whosoever should call on the name of Jehovah should be saved;
for in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem should be deliverance, as Jehovah had
said, and in the remnant whom Jehovah should call.

These, then, are the principal events of the last days, briefly but
clearly set forth: a powerful enemy coming from the north, as the
instrument of Jehovah's judgment, ravaging the whole land; judgment upon
the people as an earthly people, according to their former position of
temporal blessing in relationship with God; the people being called to
repentance, by the Spirit of prophecy, in order that God might turn away
this scourge. On their repentance God would restore temporal blessing,
and drive away the northern army and destroy it. The reproach that
rested on the people because of their sins should cease for ever. A
double order of events is then announced, giving a precise statement
with regard to the immediate relationship between God and the people;
and that in two respects. First, the temporal blessing, granted to the
people now restored to the favour of God, should be accompanied by a
gift yet more excellent, and more expressive of His love. The Holy
Spirit should be abundantly poured out; the most simple and the most
humble should partake of it. But, in the second place, \[See Note \#2\]
before the coming of the great day of Jehovah He would send marvellous
signs, and whosoever should call on His name should be saved. It would
be the returning in heart to Jehovah which He would own; for in that
dreadful day of the wrath of God there should be deliverance in Zion,
and in Jerusalem His chosen city. It is He who intervenes in judgment;
He would remember mercy: there should be a remnant called by His grace.
The accomplishment of all this is evidently in the last days, when the
mystery of God shall be finished, and He will manifest His government in
righteousness and in goodness on the earth, though the repentant remnant
get the spiritual blessing in a christian way, as in like manner that of
the new covenant. The whole tenor of the prophecy, I think, makes it
plain that Joel does not speak of the beast and Antichrist, but of the
powers of the heathen from outside the apostate system. It will be
remembered that it is said in Daniel 9 that because of the protection of
idols there will be a desolator. Joel thus speaks, not of him who makes
a covenant with Israel, but of this desolator. Hence Jehovah roars out
of Zion and utters His voice from Jerusalem. The judgment is not from
heaven against the beast and his armies, but from Jerusalem against the
enemies and desolators of Israel.

But there is still something to be pointed out here. The Spirit of God
has taken care entirely to finish His subject. In [Joe
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#027) the deliverance from the northern
army is complete, and temporal blessing is so bestowed that Israel may
enjoy it permanently, under grace. Jehovah is there, and His people
shall never be ashamed. From Verse 28 to 32 ([Joe
2:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)) is quite apart, and this for
every important reasons. On the repentance of the people the Holy Spirit
should be bestowed; and, before the execution of the judgment, whosoever
called on the name of Jehovah should be saved. Now the rejection of the
Messiah necessarily brought in judgment on the Jew (although other
counsels of God were to be accomplished with respect to the assembly,
outside the Jewish system); their temple has been given up to the power
of the enemy, who, as the army of Jehovah was to destroy these
murderers, and to burn up their city. The last days therefore are come,
the end of the age, with respect to the Jews, although it is all to
resume its course for a little season for the definitive judgment, when
the counsels of God with regard to the assembly are fulfilled. But if
judgment thus hasted, mercy could not delay in coming and anticipating
it. The Holy Ghost was given, according to this promise, to the remnant
who in those days hearkened to the call of Jehovah, and it was poured
out upon all flesh. Deliverance was found in Zion, although the redeemed
(those who were to be saved) were translated into the assembly, the time
for resuming the government of God not being yet come-the time when He
to whom it was given should associate those with Himself who should have
learnt to suffer with Him, that they might also be glorified together.
Then the final accomplishment of all this mystery should take place-the
great and terrible day of Jehovah: Christ should take His great power,
and should reign. What we have been saying will explain the true
importance of the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, and the place
which that destruction holds in the development of God's dealings; and
the connection, with respect to His dealings on earth, between this
destruction and that which took place on the day of Pentecost.

There is yet one thing to be remarked here, namely, that in view of the
counsels of grace towards the Gentiles, the Spirit of God makes use of
language that leaves the door open to them. The Spirit is poured out "on
all flesh," and "whosoever shall call on the name of Jehovah shall be
saved." The apostle Paul frequently employs this last expression in this
sense.

It is interesting to recall here the different occasions on which the
expression "all flesh" is used. It implies, as to its full
accomplishment, the important fact that will take place at the end of
this age, namely, that God will come out of the narrow circle of Jewish
ordinances to act with regard to all mankind upon the earth. This is
already true morally by means of the gospel. But it will be true as to
the government of God at the end. Christ, in coming down to the earth,
came into the narrow fold (although His work, as well as His personal
presence, had a much wider extent), and He led His sheep out of it; and
called other sheep also to form them into one flock, saved, set free,
and finding pasture. The gospel afterwards was sent out into the whole
world, in connection with Jerusalem or Galilee (I refer to its
administration by means of the twelve), \[See Note \#3\] and in
connection with heaven by means of Paul. God will, in fact, deal at
length with all flesh in His governmental power. [Isa
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#005). "The glory of Jehovah shall be
revealed, and all flesh shall see it together." Here the mind of the
Spirit goes forward to the last days when Christ shall be revealed. But
Jehovah, who was to bless, is come, and the divine testimony in the
wilderness has been borne, even as the blood of the new covenant has
been shed, although Israel, as yet, has not acknowledged it. [Isa
40:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006). "All flesh"-even the
people-"is as grass." Israel has not yet learned this, but the remnant
have been blessed. In [Isa 66:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#016), God
pleads "by fire and by his sword with all flesh." It is the judgment
that extends to all. Here, in Joel, it is the Spirit poured out upon all
flesh, to manifest the presence of God, and the blessing that rests upon
all men, and is no longer confined to the Jews. We may compare the
warning in [Zac 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013); the millennial
song of Christ, [Psa 145:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#021); "Let all
flesh bless his holy name for ever and ever"; the judgment of the
apostates, [Isa 66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024); "They shall be
an abhorring unto all flesh." See also [Gen
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012)

Note \#1

Verses 28, 29 ([Joe 2:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)) are a
short independent prophecy, and so are the Verses from 30 to the end of
the chapter [Joe 2:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#030)), and still
more so. Verses 28, 29 ([Joe 2:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028))
promise the outpouring of the Holy Spirit consequent on the repentance
of the nation, which was also accompanied by temporal blessings. The
repentance is the point of departure for both. So the partial fulfilment
of Acts 2 was on those who repented, though the temporal blessings could
not come on the nation. Thus, though there was that which was analogous
in the destruction of Jerusalem already accomplished, signs and wonders
will come before the great and notable day of Jehovah yet to come. The
blood of the new covenant was shed and all things ready; but the nation
would not repent and could not get the blessing. The remnant got the
spiritual part of it with all flesh; the Jews will, all, when they say,
"Blessed be he that cometh in the name of Jehovah." The Holy Spirit, who
foresaw all this, has ordered accordingly the structure of the prophecy.

Note \#2

This is an entirely distinct prophecy, which goes by itself, preceding
the day of Jehovah, as indeed is clearly stated, which day ushers in the
blessing previously spoken of. The order in the last days will be
repentance, deliverance by the day of Jehovah, temporal blessing, the
Holy Ghost. Before the day of Jehovah signs will take place. This last
stands therefore necessarily apart, as the calling on the name of
Jehovah of course precedes the deliverance.

Note \#3

As to this mission we have only the general statement of Mark, that they
went everywhere ([Mar 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020)). In Verse
15 ([Joe 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015)) they are told to go
into all the world. In Matthew 28 they are told in Galilee to disciple
all nations-all the Gentiles-but this is another mission. As regards the
passage in Mark, the reader will remark that the questioned passage,
from Verse 9 ([Mat 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#009)), begins with
Jerusalem and the ascension, as in Luke; in Verse 7 ([Mat
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#007)), they are told to go into
Galilee, as in Matthew. These are distinct missions. In point of fact,
wherever they went, the mission to the Gentiles (Gal. 2) was given up to
Paul and Barnabas, who had already been on it. So far, the Matthew
commission dropped. Mark's is individual, and a question of salvation;
Matthew's is not. Luke's is carried out by the apostles, as the speeches
shew throughout the Acts, only the Gentile part was given up to Paul.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel Chapter 3](joe003)

</div>
