<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh007)  [Next](joh009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001.md)

In chapter 8, as we have said, the word of Jesus is rejected; and, in
chapter 9, His works. But there is much more than that. The personal
glories of chapter 1 are reproduced and developed in all these chapters
separately (leaving out for the moment from Verse 36 to 51 of chapter 1;
[Joh 1:36-51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#036).md): we have found again the
[Joh 1:14-34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md) in chapters 5, 6, and 7.
The Holy Ghost now returns to the subject of the first Verses in the
chapter. Christ is the Word; He is the life, and the life which is the
light of men. The three chapters that I have now pointed out speak of
what He is in grace for men, while still declaring His right to judge.
The Spirit here (in chapter 8) sets before us that which He is in
Himself, and that which He is to men (thus putting them to the test, so
that in rejecting Him they reject themselves, and shew themselves to be
reprobate).

Let us now consider our chapter. The contrast with Judaism is evident.
They bring a woman whose guilt is undeniable. The Jews, in their
wickedness, bring her forward in the hope of confounding the Lord. If He
condemned her, He was not a Saviour the law could do as much. If He let
her go, He despised and disallowed the law. This was clever; but what
avails cleverness in the presence of God who searches the heart? The
Lord allows them to commit themselves thoroughly by not answering them
for awhile. Probably they thought He was entangled. At last He says, "He
that is without sin among you, let him first cast the stone." Convicted
by their conscience, without honesty and without faith, they quit the
scene of their confusion, separating from each other, each caring for
himself, caring for character not conscience, and departing from Him who
had convicted them; he who had the most reputation to save going out
first. What a sorrowful picture! What a mighty word! Jesus and the woman
are left together alone. Who can stand unconvicted in His presence? With
regard to the woman, whose guilt was known, He does not go beyond the
Jewish position, except to preserve the rights of His own Person in
grace.

This is not the same thing as in Luke 7, plenary pardon and salvation.
The others could not condemn her He would not. Let her go, and let her
sin no more. It is not the grace of salvation that the Lord exhibits
here. He does not judge, He was not come for this; but the efficacy of
the pardon is not the subject of these chapters it is the glory here of
His Person, in contrast with all that is of the law. He is the light,
and by the power of His word He entered as light into the conscience of
those who had brought the woman.

For the Word was light; but that was not all. Coming into the world, He
was ([Joh 1:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004).md) the light. Now it
was the life that was the light of men. It was not a law that made
demands, and condemned; or that promised life on obedience to its
precepts. It was the Life itself which was there in His Person, and that
life was the light of men, convincing them, and, perhaps, judging them;
but it was as light. Thus Jesus says here in contrast with the law,
brought by those who could not stand before the light "I am the light of
the world" (not merely of the Jews). For in this Gospel we have what
Christ is essentially in His Person, whether as God, the Son come from
the Father, or Son of man not what God was in special dealings with the
Jews. Hence He was the object of faith in His Person, not in
dispensational dealings. Whoso followed Him should have the light of
life. But it was in Him, in His Person, that it was found. And He could
bear record of Himself, because, although He was a man there, in this
world, He knew whence He came and whither He was going. It was the Son,
who came from the Father and was returning to Him again. He knew it, and
was conscious of it. His testimony, therefore, was not that of an
interested person which one might hesitate to believe. There was, in
proof that this man was the One whom He represented Himself to be, the
testimony of the Son (His own), and the testimony of the Father. If they
had known Him, they would have known the Father.

At that time in spite of such testimony as this no one laid hands on
Him: His hour was not yet come. That only was wanting; for their
opposition to God was certain, and known to Him. This opposition was
plainly declared ([Joh 8:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#019).md);
consequently, if they believed not, they would die in their sins.
Nevertheless He tells them that they shall know who He is, when He shall
have been rejected and lifted up on the cross, having taken a very
different position as the Saviour, rejected by the people and unknown of
the world; when no longer presented to them as such, they should know
that He was indeed the Messiah, and that He was the Son who spoke to
them from the Father. As He spake these words, many believed on Him. He
declares to them the effect of faith, which gives occasion to the true
position of the Jews being manifested with terrible precision. He
declares that the truth would set them free, and that if the Son (who is
the truth) should set them free, they would be free indeed. The truth
sets free morally before God. The Son, by virtue of the rights that were
necessarily His, and by inheritance in the house, would place them in it
according to those rights, and that in the power of divine life come
down from heaven the Son of God with power as resurrection declared it.
In this was the true setting free.

Piqued at the idea of bondage, which their pride could not bear, they
declare themselves to be free, and never to have been in bondage to any
one. In reply, the Lord shews that those who commit sin are the servants
(slaves) of sin. Now, as being under the law, as being Jews, they were
servants in the house: they should be sent away. But the Son had
inalienable rights; He was of the house and would abide in it for ever.
Under sin, and under the law, was the same thing for a child of Adam; he
was a servant. The apostle shews this in Romans 6 (compare chapters 7
and 8) and in Galatians 4 and 5. Moreover, they were neither really, nor
morally, the children of Abraham before God, although they were so
according to the flesh; for they sought to kill Jesus. They were not
children of God; had they been, they would have loved Jesus who came
from God. They were the children of the devil and would do his works.

Observe here, that to understand the meaning of the word is the way to
apprehend the force of the words. One does not learn the definition of
words and then the things; one learns the things, and then the meaning
of the words is evident.

They begin to resist the testimony, conscious that He was making Himself
greater than all those whom they had leant upon. They rail upon Him
because of His words; and by their opposition the Lord is induced to
explain Himself more clearly; until, having declared that Abraham
rejoiced to see His day, and the Jews applying this to His age as man,
He announces positively that He is the One who calls Himself I am the
supreme name of God, that He is God Himself He whom they pretended to
know as having revealed Himself in the bush.

Wondrous revelation! A despised, rejected man, despised and rejected by
men, contradicted, ill-treated, yet it was God Himself who was there.
What a fact! What a total change! What a revelation to those who
acknowledged Him, or who know Him! What a condition is theirs who have
rejected Him, and that because their hearts were opposed to all that He
was, for He did not fail to manifest Himself! What a thought, that God
Himself has been here! Goodness itself! How everything vanishes before
Him! the law, man, his reasonings. Everything necessarily depends on
this great fact. And, blessed be His name! this God is a Saviour. We are
indebted to the sufferings of Christ for knowing it. And note here, how
the setting aside formal dispensations from God, if true, is by the
revelation of Himself, and so introduces infinitely greater blessing.

But here He presents Himself as the Witness, the Word, the Word made
flesh, the Son of God, but still the Word, God Himself. In the narrative
at the beginning of the chapter He is a testimony to the conscience, the
Word that searches and convicts. [Joh
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#018.md), He bears testimony with the
Father. [Joh 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#026.md), He declares in the
world that which He has received of the Father, and as taught of God He
has spoken. Moreover the Father was with Him. [Joh
8:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032.md), the truth was known by His
word, and the truth made them free. [Joh
8:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#047.md), He spoke the words of God. [Joh
8:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#051.md), His word, being kept, preserved
from death. [Joh 8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058.md), it was God
Himself, the Jehovah whom the fathers knew, that spoke.

Opposition arose from its being the word of truth ([Joh
8:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#045).md). Opposers were of the adversary.
He was a murderer from the beginning, and they would follow him; but as
the truth was the source of life, so that which characterised the
adversary was, that he abode not in the truth: there is no truth in him.
He is the father and the source of lies, so that,if falsehood speaks, it
is one belonging to him that speaks. Sin was bondage, and they were in
bondage by the law. (Truth, the Son Himself, made free.) But, more than
that, the Jews were enemies, children of the enemy, and they would do
his works, not believing the words of Christ because He spoke the truth.
There is no miracle here; it is the power of the word, and the living
word is God Himself: rejected by men, He is, as it were, compelled to
speak the truth, to reveal Himself, hidden at once and manifested, as He
was in the flesh hidden as to His glory, manifested as to all that He is
in His Person and in His grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 9](joh009.md)

</div>
