<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh001)  [Next](joh003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)

The third day we find in chapter 2. A marriage takes place in Galilee.
Jesus is there; and the water of purification is changed into the wine
of joy for the marriage-feast. Afterwards at Jerusalem He cleanses the
temple of God with authority, executing judgment on all those who
profaned it. In principle these are the two things that characterise His
millennial position. Doubtless these things took place historically;
but, as introduced here and in this manner, they have evidently a wider
meaning. Besides, why the third day? After what? Two days of testimony
had taken place that of John, and that of Jesus; and now blessing and
judgment are accomplished. In Galilee the remnant had their place; and
it is the scene of blessing, according to Isaiah 9 Jerusalem is that of
judgment. At the feast He would not know His mother: this was the link
of His natural relation with Israel, which, looking at Him as born under
the law, was His mother. He separates Himself from her to accomplish
blessing. It is only in testimony therefore in Galilee, for the moment.
It is when He returns that the good wine will be for Israel true
blessing and joy at the end. Nevertheless He still abides with His
mother, whom, as to His work, He did not acknowledge. And this also was
the case with regard to His connection with Israel.

Afterwards, in judging the Jews and judicially cleansing the temple, He
presents Himself as the Son of God. It is His Father's house. The proof
of this which He gives is His resurrection, when the Jews should have
rejected and crucified Him. Moreover He was not only the Son: it was God
who was there not in the temple. It was empty that house built by Herod.
The body of Jesus was now the true temple. Sealed by His resurrection,
the scriptures and the word of Jesus were of divine authority to the
disciples, as speaking of Him according to the intention of the Spirit
of God.

This subdivision of the book ends here. It closes the earthly revelation
of Christ including His death; but even so it is the sin of the world.
Chapter 2 gives the millennium; chapter 3 is the work in and for us
which qualifies for the kingdom on earth or heaven; and the work for us,
closing Messiah's connection with the Jews, opens the heavenly things by
the lifting up of the Son of man divine love and eternal life.

The miracles that He wrought convinced many as to their natural
understanding. No doubt it was sincerely; but a just human conclusion.
But another truth now opens. Man, in his natural state, \[See Note
\#16\] was really incapable of receiving the things of God; not that the
testimony was insufficient to convince him, nor that he was never
convinced: many were so at this time; but Jesus did not commit Himself
to them. He knew what man was. When convinced, his will, his nature, was
not altered. Let the time of trial come, and he would shew himself as he
was, alienated from God, and even His enemy. Sad but too true testimony!
The life, the death, of Jesus proves it. He knew it when He began His
work. This did not make His love grow cold; for the strength of that
love was in itself.

Note \#16

Observe, that the state of man is here manifested fully and thoroughly.
Supposing him to be outwardly righteous according to the law, and to
believe in Jesus according to sincere natural convictions, he clothes
himself with this, in order to hide from himself what he really is. He
does not know himself at all. What he is remains untouched. And he is a
sinner. But this leads us to another observation. There are two great
principles from Paradise itself responsibility and life. Man can never
disentangle them, till he learns that he is lost, and that no good
exists in him. Then he is glad to know that there is a source of life
and pardon outside himself. It is this which is shewn us here. There
must be a new life; Jesus does not instruct a nature which is only sin.
These two principles run through scripture in a remarkable way: first,
as stated, in Paradise, responsibility and life in power. Man took of
one tree, failing in responsibility, and forfeited life. The law gave
the measure of responsibility when good and evil were known, and
promised life on the ground of doing what it required, satisfying
responsibility. Christ comes, meets the need of man's failure in
responsibility, and is, and gives, eternal life. Thus, and thus only,
can the question be met, and the two principles reconciled. Moreover two
things are presented in Him to reveal God. He knows man, and all men.
What a knowledge in this world! A prophet knows that which is revealed
to him; he has, in that case, divine knowledge. But Jesus knows all men
in an absolute way. He is God. But when once He has introduced life in
grace, He speaks of another thing; He speaks that which He knows, and
testifies that which He has seen. Now He knows God His Father in heaven.
He is the Son of man who is in heaven. He knows man divinely; but He
knows God and all His glory divinely also. What a magnificent picture,
or, rather should I say, revelation, of that which He is for us! For it
is here as man that He tells us this; and also, in order that we may
enter into it and enjoy it, He becomes the sacrifice for sin according
to the eternal love of God His Father.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 3](joh003)

</div>
