<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh019)  [Next](joh021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001)

In chapter 20, we have, in a summary of several of the leading facts
among those which took place after the resurrection of Jesus, a picture
of all the consequences of that great event, in immediate connection
with the grace that produced them, and with the affections that ought to
be seen in the faithful when again brought into relationship with the
Lord; and at the same time, a picture of all God's ways up to the
revelation of Christ to the remnant before the millennium. In chapter
21, the millennium is pictured to us.

Mary Magdalene, out of whom He had cast seven demons, appears first in
the scene a touching expression of the ways of God. She represents, I
doubt not, the Jewish remnant of that day, personally attached to the
Lord, but not knowing the power of resurrection. She is alone in her
love: the very strength of her affection isolates her. She was not the
only one saved, but she comes alone to seek wrongly to seek, if you
will, but to seek Jesus, before the testimony of His glory shines forth
in a world of darkness, because she loved Himself. She comes before the
other women, while it was yet dark. It is a loving heart (we have
already seen it in the believing women) occupied with Jesus, when the
public testimony of man is still entirely wanting. And it is to this
that Jesus first manifests Himself when He is risen. Nevertheless her
heart knew where it would find a response. She goes away to Peter and to
the other disciple whom Jesus loved, when she does not find the body of
Christ. Peter and the other disciple go, and find the proofs of a
resurrection accomplished (as to Jesus Himself) with all the composure
that became the power of God, great as the alarm might be that it
created in the mind of man. There had been no haste; everything was in
order: and Jesus was not there.

The two disciples, however, are not moved by the same attachment as that
which filled her heart, who had been the object of so mighty a
deliverance \[See Note \#68\] on the Lord's part. They see, and, on
these visible proofs, they believe. It was not a spiritual understanding
of the thoughts of God by means of His word; they saw and believed.
There is nothing in this which gathers the disciples together. Jesus was
away; He had risen. They had satisfied themselves on this point, and
they go away to their home. But Mary, led by affection rather than by
intelligence, is not satisfied with coldly recognising that Jesus was
again risen. \[See Note \#69\] She thought Him still dead, because she
did not possess Him. His death, the fact of her not finding Him again,
added to the intensity of her affection, because He Himself was its
object. All the tokens of this affection are produced here in the most
touching manner. She supposes that the gardener must know who was in
question without her telling him, for she only thought of one (as if I
inquired of a beloved object in a family, "How is he?"). Bending over
the sepulchre, she turns her head when He approaches; but then the Good
Shepherd, risen from the dead, calls His sheep by her name; and the
known and loved voice mighty according to the grace which thus called
her instantly reveals Him to her who heard it. She turns to Him, and
replies, "Rabboni my Master."

But while thus revealing Himself to the beloved remnant, whom He had
delivered, all is changed in their position and in His relationship with
them. He was not going now to dwell bodily in the midst of His people on
earth. He did not come back to re-establish the kingdom in Israel.
"Touch me not," says He to Mary. But by redemption He had wrought a far
more important thing. He had placed them in the same position as Himself
with His Father and His God; and He calls them which He never had, and
never could have done before His brethren. Until His death the corn of
wheat remained alone. Pure and perfect, the Son of God, He could not
stand in the same relationship to God as the sinner; but, in the
glorious position which He was going to resume as man, He could, through
redemption, associate with Himself His redeemed ones, cleansed,
regenerated, and adopted in Him.

He sends them word of the new position they were to have in common with
Himself. He says to Mary, "Touch me not; but go to my brethren, and tell
them that I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your
God." The will of the Father accomplished by means of the glorious work
of the Son, who, as man, has taken His place, apart from sin, with His
God and Father and the work of the Son, the source of eternal life to
them, have brought the disciples into the same position as Himself
before the Father.

The testimony borne to this truth gathers the disciples together. They
meet with closed doors, unprotected now by the care and power of Jesus,
the Messiah, Jehovah on earth. But if they had no longer the shelter of
the Messiah's presence, they have Jesus in their midst, bringing them
that which they could not have before His death "Peace."

But He did not bring them this blessing merely as their own portion.
Having given them proofs of His resurrection, and that in His body He
was the same Jesus, He sets them in this perfect peace as the starting
point of their mission. The Father, eternal and infinite fountain of
love, had sent the Son, who abode in it, who was the witness of that
love, and of the peace which He, the Father, shed around Himself, where
sin had no existence. Rejected in His mission, Jesus had on behalf of a
world where sin existed made peace for all who should receive the
testimony of the grace which had made it; and He now sends His disciples
from the bosom of that peace into which He had brought them, by the
remission of sins through His death, to bear testimony to it in the
world.

He says again, "Peace be unto you," to send them forth into the world
clothed and filled with that peace, their feet shod with it, even as the
Father had sent Him. He gives them the Holy Ghost for this end, that
according to His power they might bear the remission of sins to a world
that was bowed down under the yoke of sin.

I do not doubt that, speaking historically, the Spirit here is
distinguished from Acts 2, inasmuch as here it is a breath of inward
life, as God breathed into the nostrils of Adam a breath of life. It is
not the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. Thus Christ, who is a
quickening Spirit, imparts spiritual life to them according to the power
of resurrection. \[See Note \#70\] As to the general picture
figuratively presented in the passage, it is the Spirit bestowed on the
saints gathered by the testimony of His being risen and His going to the
Father, as the whole scene represents the assembly in its present
privileges. Thus we have the remnant attached to Christ by love;
believers individually recognised as children of God, and in the same
position before Him as Christ; and then the assembly founded on this
testimony, gathered together with Jesus in the midst, in the enjoyment
of peace; and its members, individually constituted, in connection with
the peace which Christ has made, a witness to the world of the remission
of sins its administration being committed to them.

Thomas represents the Jews in the last days, who will believe when they
see. Blessed are they who have believed without seeing. But the faith of
Thomas is not concerned with the position of sonship. He acknowledges,
as the remnant will do, that Jesus is his Lord and his God. He was not
with them in their first church gathering.

The Lord here, by His actions, consecrates the first day of the week for
His meeting together with His own, in spirit here below.

The evangelist is far from exhausting all that there was to relate of
that which Jesus did. The object of that which he has related is linked
with the communication of eternal life in Christ; first, that Jesus is
the Christ, the Son of God; and, second, that in believing we have life
through His name. To this the Gospel is consecrated.

Note \#68

"Seven demons." This represents the complete possession of this poor
woman by the unclean spirits to whom she was a prey. It is the
expression of the real state of the Jewish people.

Note \#69

It is impossible to me, in giving great principles for the help of those
who seek to understand the word, to develop all that is so deeply
touching and interesting in this twentieth chapter, on which I have
often pondered with (through grace) an ever-growing interest. This
revelation of the Lord to the poor woman who could not do without her
Saviour, has a touching beauty, which every detail enhances. But there
is one point of view to which I cannot but call the reader's attention.
There are four conditions of soul presented here which, taken together,
are very instructive, and each in the case of a believer: 1st. John and
Peter, who see and believe, are really believers; but they do not see in
Christ the only centre of all the thoughts of God, for His glory, for
the world, for souls. Neither is He so for their affections, although
they are believers. Having found that He was risen, they do without Him.
Mary, who did not know this, who was even culpably ignorant, could
nevertheless not do without Jesus. She must possess Himself. Peter and
John go to their home; this is the centre of their interests. They
believe indeed, but self and home suffice them. 2nd. Thomas believes,
and acknowledges with true orthodox faith, on incontestable proofs, that
Jesus is his Lord and his God. He truly believes for himself. He has not
the communications of the efficacy of the Lord's work, and of the
relationship with His Father into which Jesus brings His own, the
assembly. He has peace perhaps, but he has missed all the revelation of
the assembly's position. How many souls saved souls even are there in
these two conditions! 3rd. Mary Magdalene is ignorant in the extreme.
She does not know that Christ is risen. She has so little right sense of
His being Lord and God, that she thinks some one might have taken away
His body. But Christ is her all, the need of her soul, the only desire
of her heart. Without Him she has no home, no Lord, no anything. Now to
this need Jesus answers; it indicates the work of the Holy Ghost. He
calls His sheep by her name, shews Himself to her first of all, teaches
her that His presence was not now to be a Jewish bodily return to earth,
that He must ascend to His Father, that the disciples were now His
brethren, and that they were placed in the same position as Himself with
His God and His Father as Himself, the risen Man, ascended to His God
and Father. All the glory of the new individual position is opened to
her. 4th. This gathers the disciples together. Jesus then brings them
the peace which He has made, and they have the full joy of a present
Saviour who brings it them. He makes this peace (possessed by them in
virtue of His work and His victory) their starting-point, sends them as
the Father had sent Him, and imparts to them the Holy Ghost as the
breath and power of life, that they may be able to bear that peace to
others. These are the communications of the efficacy of His work, as He
had given to Mary that of the relationship to the Father which resulted
from it. The whole is the answer to Mary's attachment to Christ, or what
resulted from it. If through grace there is affection, the answer will
assuredly be granted. It is the truth which flows from the work of
Christ. No other state than that which Christ here presents is in
accordance with what He has done, and with the Father's love. He cannot,
by His work, place us in any other.

Note \#70

Compare Romans 4-8 and Colossians 2 and 3. Resurrection was the power of
life which brought them out of the dominion of sin, that had its end in
death, and that was condemned in the death of Jesus, and they dead to
it, but not condemned by it, sin having been condemned in His death.
This is a question, not of guilt, but of state. Our guilt, blessed be
God, was put away too. But here we die with Christ, and resurrection
presents us (Romans, as quoted, unfolds the side of death; Colossians
adds resurrection. Romans is death to sin, Colossians to the world)
living before God in a life in which Jesus and we by Him appeared in His
presence according to the perfection of divine righteousness. But this
supposed His work also.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 21](joh021)

</div>
