<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh005)  [Next](joh007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#001)

In chapter 6, then, it is the Lord come down from heaven, humbled and
put to death, not now as the Son of God, one with the Father, the source
of life; but as He who, although He was Jehovah and at the same time the
Prophet and the King, would take the place of Victim, and that of Priest
in heaven: in His incarnation, the bread of life; dead, the true
nourishment of believers; ascended again to heaven, the living object of
their faith. But He only glances at this last feature: the doctrine of
the chapter is that which goes before. It is not the divine power that
quickens, but the Son of man come in flesh, the object of faith, and so
the means of life; and, though, as plainly declared by the calling of
grace, yet it is not the divine side, quickening whom He will, but faith
in us laying hold of Him. In both He acts independently of the limits of
Judaism. He quickens whom He will, and comes to give life to the world.

It was on the occasion of the Passover, a type which the Lord was to
fulfil by the death of which He spoke. Observe, here, that all these
chapters present the Lord, and the truth that reveals Him, in contrast
with Judaism, which He forsook and set aside. Chapter 5 was the
impotence of the law and its ordinances; here it is the blessings
promised by the Lord to the Jews on earth ([Psa
132:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#015)), and the characters of Prophet
and King fulfilled by the Messiah on earth in connection with the Jews,
that are seen in contrast with the new position and the doctrine of
Jesus. That of which I here speak characterises every distinct subject
in this Gospel.

First, Jesus blesses the people, according to the promise of that which
Jehovah should do, given them in Psalm 132, for He was Jehovah. On this,
the people acknowledge Him to be "that Prophet," and desire by force to
make Him their King. But this He declines now could not take it in this
carnal way. Jesus leaves them, and goes up by Himself into a mountain.
This was, figuratively, His position as Priest on high. These are the
three characters of the Messiah in respect of Israel; but the last has
full and special application to the saints now also, as walking on the
earth, who continue as to this the position of the remnant. The
disciples enter a ship, and, without Him, are tossed upon the waves.
Darkness comes on (this will happen to the remnant down here), and Jesus
is away. Nevertheless He rejoins them, and they receive Him joyfully.
Immediately the ship is at the place to which they were going. A
striking picture of the remnant journeying on earth during the absence
of Christ, and their every wish fully and immediately satisfied full
blessing and rest when He rejoins them. \[See Note \#28\]

This part of the chapter, having shewn us the Lord as already the
Prophet here below, and refusing to be made King, and also that which
will yet take place when He returns to the remnant on earth the
historical framework of what He was and will be the remainder of the
chapter gives us that which He is meanwhile to faith, His true
character, the purpose of God in sending Him, outside Israel, and in
connection with sovereign grace. The people seek Him. The true work,
which God owns, is to believe in Him whom He has sent. This is that meat
which endures unto everlasting life, which is given by the Son of man
(it is in this character we find Jesus here, as in chapter 5 it was the
Son of God), for He it is whom God the Father has sealed. Jesus had
taken this place of Son of man in humiliation here below. He went to be
baptised of John the Baptist; and there, in this character, the Father
sealed Him, the Holy Ghost coming down upon Him.

The multitude ask Him for a proof like the manna. He was Himself the
proof the true manna. Moses did not give the heavenly bread of life.
Their fathers died in the very wilderness in which they had eaten the
manna. The Father now gave them the true bread from heaven. Here,
observe, it is not the Son of God who gives, and who is the sovereign
Giver of life to whom He will. He is the object set before faith; He is
to be fed upon. Life is found in Him; he that eats Him shall live by
Him, and shall never hunger. But the multitude did not believe in Him;
in fact, the mass of Israel, as such, were not in question. Those that
the Father gave Him should come unto Him. He was there the passive
object, so to say, of faith. It is no longer to whom He will, but to
receive those whom the Father brought Him. Therefore, be it who it
might, He would in no wise cast them out: enemy, scoffer, Gentile, they
would not come if the Father had not sent them. The Messiah was there to
do His Father's will, and whomsoever the Father brought Him He would
receive for life eternal (compare [Joh
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)). The Father's will had these two
characters. Of all whom the Father should give Him, He would lose none.
Precious assurance! The Lord saves assuredly to the end those whom the
Father has given Him; and then every one that should see the Son and
believe on Him should have everlasting life. This is the gospel for
every soul, as the other is that which infallibly assures the salvation
of every believer. But this is not all. The subject of hope was not now
the fulfilment on earth of the promises made to the Jew, but being
raised from the dead, having part in everlasting life in resurrection at
the last day (that is, of the age of the law in which they were). He did
not crown the dispensation of the law; He was to bring in a new
dispensation, and with it resurrection. The Jews \[See Note \#29\]
murmur at His saying that He came down from heaven. Jesus replies by the
testimony that their difficulty was easy to be understood: no one could
come unto Him except the Father brought him. It was grace that produced
this effect; whether they were Jews or not made no difference. It was a
question of eternal life, of being raised from the dead by Him; not of
performing the promises as Messiah, but of bringing in the life of a
widely different world to be enjoyed by faith the Father's grace having
led the soul to find it in Jesus. Moreover, the prophets had said they
should all be taught of God. Every one, therefore, who had learned of
the Father came unto Him. No man, doubtless, had seen the Father
excepting Him who was of God Jesus; He had seen the Father. He that
believed in Him was already in possession of eternal life, for He was
the bread come down from heaven, that a man might eat thereof and not
die.

But this was not only by the incarnation, but by the death of Him who
came down from heaven. He would give His life; His blood should be taken
from the body which He had assumed. They should eat His flesh; they
should drink His blood. Death should be the believer's life. And, in
fact, it is in a dead Saviour that we see the sin taken away which He
bore for us, and death for us is death to the sinful nature in which
evil and our separation from God lay. There He made an end of sin He who
knew no sin. Death, which sin brought in, puts away the sin that
attached to the life, which there comes to its end. Not that Christ had
any sin in His own Person; but He took sin, He was made sin, on the
cross, for us. And he who is dead is justified from sin. I feed,
therefore, on the death of Christ. Death is mine; it is become life. It
separates me from sin, from death, from the life in which I was
separated from God. In it sin and death have finished their course. They
were attached to my life. Christ, in grace, has borne them, and He has
given His flesh for the life of the world; and I am freed from them; and
I feed on the infinite grace that is in Him, who has accomplished this.
The expiation is complete, and I live, being happily dead to all that
separated me from God. It is death as fulfilled in Him that I feed upon,
first for me, and entering withal into it by faith. He needed to live as
man in order to die, and He has given His life. Thus His death is
efficacious; His love infinite; the expiation total, absolute, perfect.
That which was between me and God exists no longer, for Christ died, and
it all passed away with His life here on earth life as He had it before
expiring on the cross. Death could not hold Him. To perform this work,
He needed to possess a power of divine life which death could not touch;
but this is not the truth expressly taught in the chapter before us,
although it is implied.

In speaking to the multitude, the Lord, while rebuking them for their
unbelief, presents Himself, come in the flesh, as the object of their
faith at that moment ([Joh 6:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#032)).
To the Jews, in laying open the doctrine, He repeats that He is the
living bread come down from heaven, of which if any man eat he should
live for ever. But He makes them understand that they could not stop
there they must receive His death. He does not say here, "he that eateth
me," but it was to eat His flesh and drink His blood, to enter fully
into the thought the reality of His death; to receive a dead (not a
living) Messiah, dead for men, dead before God. He does not exist now as
a dead Christ; but we must acknowledge, realise, feed upon, His death
identify ourselves with it before God, participating in it by faith, or
we have no life in us. \[See Note \#30\] Thus it was for the world. Thus
they should live, not of their own life, but by Christ, through feeding
on Him. Here He returns to His own Person, faith in His death being
established. Moreover, they should dwell in Him ([Joh
6:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#056)) should be in Him before God,
according to all His acceptance before God, all the efficacy of His work
in dying. \[See Note \#31\] And Christ should dwell in them according to
the power and grace of that life in which He had gained the victory over
death, and in which, having gained it, He now lives. As the living
Father had sent Him, and He lived, not by an independent life which had
not the Father for its object or source, but by reason of the Father, so
he that thus ate Him should live because of Him. \[See Note \#32\]

Afterwards, in reply to those who murmured at this fundamental truth,
the Lord appeals to His ascension. He had come down from heaven this was
His doctrine; He would ascend thither again. Material flesh profited
nothing. It was the Spirit who gave life, by realising in the soul the
mighty truth of that which Christ was, and of His death. But He returns
to that which He had told them before; in order to come to Him thus
revealed in truth, they must be led of the Father. There is such a thing
as faith that is ignorant perhaps, although through grace real. Such was
that of the disciples. They knew that He, and He only, had the words of
eternal life. It was not only that He was the Messiah, which they indeed
believed, but His words had laid hold of their hearts with the power of
the divine life which they revealed, and through grace communicated.
Thus they acknowledged Him as the Son of God, not only officially, so to
speak, but according to the power of divine life. He was the Son of the
living God. Nevertheless there was one among them who was of the devil.

Jesus therefore, come down to earth, put to death, ascending again to
heaven, is the doctrine of this chapter. As come down and put to death,
He is the food of faith during His absence on high. For it is on His
death we must feed, in order to dwell spiritually in Him and He in us.

Note \#28

The direct application of this is to the remnant; but then, as hinted in
the text, we, as to our path on earth, are, so to speak, the
continuation of that remnant, and Christ is on high for us, while we are
on the waves below. The subsequent part of the chapter, of the bread of
life, is properly for us. The world, not Israel, is in question. Indeed
though Christ is Aaron within the veil for Israel, while He is there the
saints have properly their heavenly character.

Note \#29

In John, the Jews are always distinguished from the multitude. They are
the inhabitants of Jerusalem and Judea. It would, perhaps, be easier to
understand this Gospel, if the words were rendered "those of Judea,"
which is the true sense.

Note \#30

This truth is of vast importance as regards the sacramental question.
Sacraments are declared by the Puseyite school to bethe continuation of
the incarnation. This is in every respect error, and, in truth, a denial
of the faith. Both sacraments signify death. We are baptised to Christ's
death; and the Lord's supper is confessedly emblematic of His death. I
say "denial of the faith"; because, as the Lord shews, if they do not
eat His flesh and blood, they have no life in them. As incarnate Christ
is alone. His presence in flesh on earth shewed that God and sinful men
could not be united. His presence as man in the world resulted in His
rejection proved the impossibility of union or fruit on that ground.
Redemption must come in, His blood be shed, Himself lifted up from the
earth, and so draw men to Him: death must come in, or He abode alone.
They could not eat the bread unless they ate the flesh and drank the
blood. A meat-offering without a bloody offering was null, or rather a
Cain offering. Further, the Lord's supper presents a dead Christ, and a
dead Christ only the blood apart from the body. No such Christ exists;
and therefore transubstantiation and consubstantiation and all such
thoughts are a blundering fable. We are united to a glorified Christ by
the Holy Ghost; and we celebrate that most precious death upon which all
our blessing is founded, through which we got there. We do it in
remembrance of Him, and in our hearts feed on Him, so given, and
shedding His blood.

Note \#31

Abiding imports constancy of dependence, confidence, and living by the
life in which Christ lives. "Dwelling" and "abiding," though the word be
changed in English, are the same in the original: so in chapter 15 and
elsewhere.

Note \#32

It may be well to note that in the Greek in this passage, in Verses [Joh
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051) and [Joh
6:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053), eating is in the aorist tense
whosoever has done so. In Verses [Joh
6:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#054), [Joh
6:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#056) and [Joh
6:57](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#057), it is the present tense a
present continuous action.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 7](joh007)

</div>
