<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh003)  [Next](joh005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001.md)

And now Jesus, being driven away by the jealousy of the Jews, begins His
ministry outside that people, while still acknowledging their true
position in the dealings of God. He goes away into Galilee; but His road
led Him by Samaria, in which dwelt a mingled race of strangers and of
Israel a race who had forsaken the idolatry of the strangers, but who,
while following the law of Moses and calling themselves by the name of
Jacob, had set up a worship of their own at Gerizim. Jesus does not
enter the town. Being weary He sits down outside the town on the brink
of the well for He must needs go that way; but this necessity was an
occasion for the acting of that divine grace which was in the fulness of
His Person, and which overflowed the narrow limits of Judaism.

There are some preliminary details to remark before entering on the
subject of this chapter. Jesus did not Himself baptise, for He knew the
whole extent of the counsels of God in grace, the true object of His
coming. He could not bind souls by baptism to a living Christ. The
disciples were right in so doing. They had so to receive Christ. It was
faith on their part.

When rejected by the Jews, the Lord does not contend. He leaves them;
and, coming to Sychar, He found Himself in the most interesting
associations as regards the history of Israel, but in Samaria: sad
testimony of Israel's ruin. Jacob's well was in the hands of people who
called themselves of Israel, but the greater part of whom were not so,
and who worshipped they knew not what, although pretending to be of the
stock of Israel. Those who were really Jews had driven away the Messiah
by their jealousy. He a man despised by the people had gone away from
among them. We see Him sharing the sufferings of humanity, and, weary
with His journey, finding only the side of a well on which to rest at
noon. He contents Himself with it. He seeks nothing but the will of His
God: it brought Him thither. The disciples were away; and God brought
thither at that unusual hour a woman by herself. It was not the hour at
which women went out to draw water; but, in the ordering of God, a poor
sinful woman and the Judge of quick and dead thus met together.

The Lord, weary and thirsty, had no means even to quench His thirst. He
is dependent as man, on this poor woman to have a little water for His
thirst. He asks it of her. The woman, seeing that He is a Jew, is
surprised; and now the divine scene unfolds itself, in which the heart
of the Saviour, rejected by men and oppressed by the unbelief of His
people, opens to let that fulness of grace flow out which finds its
occasion in the necessities and not in the righteousness of men. Now
this grace did not limit itself to the rights of Israel, nor lend itself
to national jealousy. It was a question of the gift of God, of God
Himself who was there in grace, and of God come down so low, that, being
born among His people, He was dependent, as to His human position, on a
Samaritan woman for a drop of water to quench His thirst. "If thou
knewest the gift of God, and \[not, who I am, but\] who it is that saith
unto thee, Give me to drink"; that is to say, If thou hadst known that
God gives freely, and the glory of His Person who was there, and how
deeply He had humbled Himself, His love would have been revealed to thy
heart, and would have filled it with perfect confidence, in regard even
to the wants which a grace like this would have awakened in thy heart.
"Thou wouldest have asked," said the divine Saviour, "and he would have
given thee" the living water that springeth up into everlasting life.
Such is the heavenly fruit of the mission of Christ, wherever He is
received. \[See Note \#22\]

His heart lays it open (it was revealing Himself), pours it out into the
heart of one who was its object; consoling itself for the unbelief of
the Jews (rejecting the end of promise) by presenting the true
consolation of grace to the misery that needed it. This is the true
comfort of love, which is pained when unable to act. The floodgates of
grace are lifted up by the misery which that grace waters. He makes
manifest that which God is in grace; and the God of grace was there.
Alas! the heart of man, withered up and selfish, and pre-occupied with
its own miseries (the fruits of sin), cannot at all understand this. The
woman sees something extraordinary in Jesus; she is curious to know what
it means is struck with His manner, so that she has a measure of faith
in His words; but her desires are limited to the relief of the toils of
her sorrowful life, in which an ardent heart found no answer to the
misery it had acquired for its portion through sin.

A few words on the character of this woman. I believe the Lord would
shew that there is need, that the fields were ready for the harvest; and
that if the wretched self-righteousness of the Jews rejected Him, the
stream of grace would find its channel elsewhere, God having prepared
hearts to hail it with joy and thanksgiving, because it answered their
misery and need not the righteous. The channel of grace was dug by the
need and the misery which the grace itself caused to be felt.

The life of this woman was shameful; but she was ashamed of it; at the
least her position had isolated her, by separating her from the crowd
that forgets itself in the tumult of social life. And there is no inward
grief like an isolated heart; but Christ and grace more than meets it.
Its isolati on more than ceases. He was more isolated than she. She came
alone to the well; she was not with the other women. Alone, she met with
the Lord, by the wonderful guidance of God who brought her there. The
disciples even must go away to make room for her. They knew nothing of
this grace. They baptised indeed in the name of a Messiah in whom they
believed. It was well. But God was there in grace He who would judge the
quick and the dead and with Him a sinner in her sins. What a meeting!
And God who had stooped so low as to be dependent on her for a little
water to quench His thirst!

She had an ardent nature. She had sought for happiness; she had found
misery. She lived in sin, and was weary of life. She was indeed in the
lowest depths of misery. The ardour of her nature found sin no obstacle.
She went on, alas! to the uttermost. The will, engaged in evil, feeds on
sinful desires, and wastes itself without fruit. Nevertheless her soul
was not without a sense of need. She thought of Jerusalem, she thought
of Gerizim. She waited for the Messiah, who would tell them all things.
Did this change her life? In no wise. Her life was shocking. When the
Lord speaks of spiritual things, in language well suited to awaken the
heart, directing her attention to heavenly things in a way that one
would have thought it impossible to misunderstand, she cannot comprehend
it. The natural man cannot understand the things of the Spirit: they are
spiritually discerned.

The novelty of the Lord's address excited her attention, but did not
lead her thoughts beyond her waterpot, the symbol of her daily toil;
although she saw that Jesus took the place of one greater than Jacob.
What was to be done? God wrought He wrought in grace, and in this poor
woman. Whatever the occasion might be as regards herself, it was He who
had brought her thither. But she was unable to comprehend spiritual
things though expressed in the plainest manner; for the Lord spoke of
the water that springs up in the soul unto everlasting life. But as the
human heart is ever revolving in its own circumstances and cares, her
religious need was limited practically to the traditions by which her
life, as regarded its religious thoughts and habits, was formed, leaving
still a void that nothing could fill. What then was to be done? In what
way can this grace act, when the heart does not understand the spiritual
grace which the Lord brings? This is the second part of the marvellous
instruction here. The Lord deals with her conscience. A word spoken by
Him who searches the heart, searches her conscience: she is in the
presence of a man who tells her all that ever she did. For, her
conscience awakened by the word, and finding itself laid open to the eye
of God, her whole life is before her.

And who is He that thus searches the heart? She feels that His word is
the word of God. "Thou art a prophet." Intelligence in divine things
comes by the conscience, not by the intellect. The soul and God are
together, if we may so speak, whatever instrument is employed. She has
everything to learn, no doubt; but she is in the presence of Him who
teaches everything. What a step! What a change! What a new position!
This soul, which saw no farther than her waterpot and felt her toil more
than her sin, is there alone with the Judge of quick and dead with God
Himself. And in what manner? She knows not. She only felt that it was
Himself in the power of His own word. But at least He did not despise
her, as others did. Although she was alone, she was alone with Him. He
had spoken to her of life of the gift of God; He had told her that she
had only to ask and have. She had understood nothing of His meaning; but
it was not condemnation, it was grace grace that stooped to her, that
knew her sin and was not repelled by it, that asked her for water, that
was above Jewish prejudice with regard to her, as well as the contempt
of the humanly righteous grace which did not conceal her sin from her,
which made her feel that God knew it nevertheless, He who knew it was
there without alarming her. Her sin was before God, but not in judgment.

Marvellous meeting of a soul with God, which the grace of God
accomplishes by Christ! Not that she reasoned about all these things;
but she was under the effect of their truth without accounting for it to
herself; for the word of God had reached her conscience, and she was in
the presence of Him who had accomplished it, and He was meek and lowly,
and glad to receive a little water at her hands. Her defilement did not
defile Him. She could, in fact, trust in Him, without knowing why. It is
thus that God acts. Grace inspires confidence brings back the soul to
God in peace, before it has any intelligent knowledge, or can explain it
to itself. In this way, full of trust, she begins (it was the natural
consequence) with the questions that filled her own heart; thus giving
the Lord an opportunity of fully explaining the ways of God in grace.
God had so ordered it; for the question was far from the sentiments
which grace afterwards led her to. The Lord replies according to her
condition: salvation was of the Jews. They were the people of God. Truth
was with them, and not with the Samaritans who worshipped they knew not
what. But God put all that aside. It was now neither at Gerizim nor at
Jerusalem, that they should worship the Father who manifested Himself in
the Son. God was a spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and in
truth. Moreover the Father sought such worshippers. That is to say, the
worship of their hearts must answer to the nature of God, to the grace
of the Father who had sought them. \[See Note \#23\] Thus true
worshippers should worship the Father in spirit and in truth. Jerusalem
and Samaria disappear entirely have no place before such a revelation of
the Father in grace. God no longer hid Himself; He was revealed
perfectly in light. The perfect grace of the Father wrought, in order to
make Him known, by the grace that brought souls to Him.

Now the woman was not yet brought to Him; but, as we have seen in the
case of the disciples and of John the Baptist, a glorious revelation of
Christ acts upon the soul where it is, and brings the Person of Jesus
into connection with the need already felt. "The woman saith unto him, I
know that Messias cometh; and when he is come, he will tell us all
things." Small as her intelligence might be, and unable as she was to
understand what Jesus had told her, His love meets her where she can
receive blessing and life; and He replies, "I, that speak unto thee, am
he." The work was done: the Lord was received. A poor Samaritan sinner
receives the Messiah of Israel, whom the priests and the Pharisees had
rejected from among the people. The moral effect upon the woman is
evident. She forgets her waterpot, her toil, her circumstances. She is
engrossed by this new object that is revealed to her soul by Christ; so
engrossed that, without thinking, she becomes a preacher; that is, she
proclaims the Lord in the fulness of her heart and with perfect
simplicity. He had told her all that she had ever done. She does not
think at that moment of what it was. Jesus had told it her; and the
thought of Jesus takes away the bitterness of the sin. The sense of His
goodness removes the guile of heart that seeks to conceal its sin. In a
word, her heart is entirely filled with Christ Himself. Many believed in
Him through her declaration "He has told me all that ever I did"; many
more, when they had heard Him. His own word carried with it a stronger
conviction, as more immediately connected with His Person.

Meanwhile the disciples come, and naturally marvel at His talking with
the woman. Their Master, the Messiah they understood this; but the grace
of God manifested in the flesh was still beyond their thoughts. The work
of this grace was the meat of Jesus, and that in the lowliness of
obedience as sent of God. He was taken up with it, and, in the perfect
humility of obedience, it was His joy and His food to do His Father's
will, and to finish His work. And the case of this poor woman had a
voice that filled His heart with deep joy, wounded as it was in this
world, because He was love. If the Jews rejected Him, still the fields
in which grace sought its fruits for the everlasting granary were white
already to harvest. He, therefore, who laboured should not fail of his
wages, nor of the joy of having such fruit unto life eternal.
Nevertheless, even the apostles were but reapers where others had sown.
The poor woman was a proof of this. Christ, present and revealed, met
the need which the testimony of the prophet had awakened. Thus (while
exhibiting a grace which revealed the love of the Father, of God the
Saviour, and coming out, consequently, from the pale of the Jewish
system) He fully recognised the faithful service of His labourers in
former days, the prophets who, by the Spirit of Christ from the
beginning of the world, had spoken of the Redeemer, of the sufferings of
Christ and the glories that should follow. The sowers and the reapers
should rejoice together in the fruit of their labours.

But what a picture is all this of the purpose of grace, and of its
mighty and living fulness in the Person of Christ, of the free gift of
God, and of the incapability of the spirit of man to apprehend it,
preoccupied and blinded as he is by present things, seeing nothing
beyond the life of nature, although suffering from the consequences of
his sin! At the same time, we see that it is in the humiliation, the
deep abasement, of the Messiah, of Jesus, that God Himself is manifested
in this grace. It is this that breaks down the barriers, and gives free
course to the torrent of grace from on high. We see, also, that
conscience is the doorway of understanding in the things of God. We are
brought truly into relationship with God when He searches the heart.
This is always the case. We are then in the truth. Moreover God thus
manifests Himself, and the grace and love of the Father. He seeks
worshippers, and that, according to this double revelation of Himself,
however great His patience may be with those who do not see farther than
the first step of the promises of God. If Jesus is received, there is a
thorough change; the work of conversion is wrought; there is faith. At
the same time what a divine picture of our Jesus humbled, indeed, but
even thereby the manifestation of God in love, the Son of the Father, He
who knows the Father, and accomplishes His work! What a glorious and
boundless scene opens before the soul that is admitted to see and to
know Him!

The whole range of grace is open to us here in His work and its divine
extent, in that which regards its application to the individual, and the
personal intelligence we may have respecting it. It is not precisely
pardon, nor redemption, nor the assembly. It is grace flowing in the
Person of Christ; and the conversion of the sinner, in order that he may
enjoy it in himself, and be capable of knowing God and of worshipping
the Father of grace. But how entirely have we broken out in principle
from the narrow limits of Judaism!

Nevertheless in His personal ministry, the Lord, always faithful,
putting Himself aside in order to glorify His Father by obeying Him,
repairs to the sphere of labour appointed Him of God. He leaves the
Jews, for no prophet is received in his own country, and goes into
Galilee, among the despised of His people, the poor of the flock, where
obedience, grace, and the counsels of God alike placed Him. In that
sense, He did not forsake His people, perverse as they were. There He
works a miracle which expresses the effect of His grace in connection
with the believing remnant of Israel, feeble as their faith might be. He
comes again to the place where He had turned the water of purification
into the wine of joy ("which cheereth God and man"). By that miracle He
had, in figure, displayed the power which should deliver the people, and
by which, being received, He would establish the fulness of joy in
Israel, creating by that power the good wine of the nuptials of Israel
with their God. Israel rejected it all. The Messiah was not received. He
retired among the poor of the flock in Galilee, after having shewn to
Samaria (in passing) the grace of the Father, which went beyond all
promises to, and dealings with, the Jew, and in the Person and the
humiliation of Christ led converted souls to worship the Father (outside
all Jewish system, true or false) in spirit and in truth; and there, in
Galilee, He works a second miracle in the midst of Israel, where He
still labours, according to His Father's will, that is to say, wherever
there is faith; not yet, perhaps, in His power to raise the dead, but to
heal and save the life of that which was ready to perish. He fulfilled
the desire of that faith, and restored the life of one who was at the
point of death. It was this, in fact, which He was doing in Israel while
here below. These two great truths were set forth that which He was
going to do according to the purposes of God the Father, as being
rejected; and that which He was doing at the time for Israel, according
to the faith He found among them.

In the chapters that follow we shall find the rights and the glory shewn
forth that attach to His Person; the rejection of His word and of His
work; the sure salvation of the remnant, and of all His sheep wherever
they may be. Afterwards acknowledged by God, as manifested on earth, the
Son of God, of David, and of man that which He will do when gone away,
and the gift of the Holy Ghost, are unfolded; also the position in which
He placed the disciples before the Father, and with regard to Himself.
And then after the history of Gethsemane, the giving of His own life,
His death as giving His life for us the whole result, in the ways of
God, until His return, is briefly given in the chapter that closes the
book.

We may go more rapidly through the chapters till the tenth, not as of
little importance far from it but as containing some great principles
which may be pointed out, each in its place, without requiring much
explanation.

Note \#22

Note, too, here, that it is not as with Israel in the wilderness that
there was water from the smitten rock to drink. Here the promise is of a
well of water springing up unto everlasting life in ourselves..

Note \#23

It will be found in John's writings that, when responsibility is spoken
of, God is the word used; when grace to us, the Father and the Son. When
indeed it is goodness (God's character in Christ) towards the world,
then God is spoken of.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 5](joh005.md)

</div>
