<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh009)  [Next](joh011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001.md)

In chapter 10 He contrasts Himself with all those who pretended, or had
pretended, to be shepherds of Israel. He develops these three points; He
comes in by the door; He is the door; and He is the Shepherd of the
sheep the good Shepherd.

He comes in by the door. That is to say, He submits to all the
conditions established by Him who built the house. Christ answers to all
that is written of the Messiah, and takes the path of God's will in
presenting Himself to the people. It is not human energy and power
awakening and attracting the passions of men; but the obedient man who
bowed to Jehovah's will, kept the lowly place of a servant, and lived by
every word that proceeded out of the mouth of God, bowed in lowliness to
the place in which Jehovah's judgment had placed and viewed Israel. All
the Lord's quotations in His conflict with Satan are from Deuteronomy.
Consequently He who watches over the sheep, Jehovah, acting in Israel by
His Spirit and providence, and arranging all things, gives Him access to
the sheep in spite of the Pharisees and priests and so many others. The
elect of Israel hear His voice. Now Israel was under condemnation: He
therefore brings the sheep out, but He goes before them. He leaves that
ancient fold, under reproach doubtless, but going before His sheep, in
obedience according to the power of God a security to every one who
believed in Him that it was the right road, a warrant for their
following Him, come what might, meeting every danger and shewing them
the way.

The sheep follow Him, for they know His voice. There are many other
voices, but the sheep do not know them. Their safety consists, not in
knowing them all, but in knowing that they are not the one voice which
is life to them the voice of Jesus. All the rest are the voices of
strangers.

He is the door for the sheep. He is their authority for going out, their
means of entering in. By entering in, they are saved. They go in and
out. It is no longer the yoke of ordinances, which, in guarding them
from those without, put them in prison. The sheep of Christ are free:
their safety is in the personal care of the Shepherd; and in this
liberty they feed in the good and fat pastures which His love supplies.
In a word, it is no longer Judaism; it is salvation, and liberty, and
food. The thief comes to make his profit on the sheep by killing them.
Christ is come that they might have life, and that abundantly; that is,
according to the power of this life in Jesus, the Son of God, who would
soon have this life (whose power was in His Person) in resurrection
beyond death.

The true Shepherd of Israel at least of the remnant of the sheep the
door to authorise their coming out of the Jewish fold, and to admit them
into the privileges of God by giving them life according to the
abundance in which He was able to bestow it He was also in special
connection with the sheep thus set apart, the good Shepherd who thus
gave His life for the sheep. Others would think of themselves, He of His
sheep. He knew them, and they knew Him, even as the Father knew Him, and
He knew the Father. Precious principle! They could have understood an
earthly knowledge and interest on the part of the Messiah on earth with
regard to His sheep. But the Son, although He had given His life and was
in heaven, knows His own, even as the Father knew Him when He was on the
earth.

Thus He laid down His life for the sheep; and He had other sheep who
were not of this fold, and His death intervened for the salvation of
these poor Gentiles. He would call them. Doubtless He had given His life
for the Jews also for all the sheep in general, as such ([Joh
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011).md). But He does not speak
distinctly of the Gentiles until after He has spoken of His death. He
would bring them also, and there should be but one flock (not "one
fold," there is no fold now) and one Shepherd .

Now this doctrine teaches the rejection of Israel, and the calling out
of the elect among that people, presents the death of Jesus as being the
effect of His love for His own, tells of His divine knowledge of His
sheep when He shall be away from them, and of the call of the Gentiles.
The importance of such instruction at that moment is obvious. Its
importance, thank God! is not lost by the lapse of time, and is not
limited to the fact of a change of dispensation. It introduces us into
the substantial realities of the grace connected with the Person of
Christ. But the death of Christ was more than love for His sheep. It had
an intrinsic value in the Father's eyes. "Therefore doth the Father love
me, because I lay down my life that I might take it again." He does not
say here for His sheep it is the thing itself that is well-pleasing to
the Father. We love because God has first loved us, but Jesus, the
divine Son, can furnish motives for the Father's love. In laying down
His life, He glorified the Father. Death was owned to be the just
penalty for sin (being at the same time annulled and he who had the
power of it, [Ti2 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010.md); [Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014).md), and eternal life brought in as
the fruit of redemption life from God. Here also the rights of the
Person of Christ are set forth. No man takes His life from Him: He lays
it down Himself. He had this power (possessed by no other, true only of
Him who had divine right) to lay it down, and power to take it again.
Nevertheless, even in this, He did not depart from the path of
obedience. He had received this commandment from His Father. But who
would have been able to perform it save He who could say, "Destroy this
temple, and in three days I will raise it again"? \[See Note \#38\] They
discuss what He had been saying. There were some who only saw in Him a
man beside himself, and who insulted Him. Others, moved by the power of
the miracle He had performed, felt that His words had a different
character from that of madness. To a certain point their consciences
were reached. The Jews surround Him, and ask how long He would keep them
in suspense. Jesus answers that He had already told them; and that His
works bore Him testimony. He appeals to the two testimonies which we
have seen brought forward in the previous chapter (8 and 9); namely, His
word and His works. But He adds, they were not of His sheep. He then
takes occasion, without noticing their prejudices, to add some precious
truths respecting His sheep. They hear His voice; He knows them; they
follow Him; He gives them eternal life; they shall never perish. On the
one hand, there shall be no perishing of life as within; on the other,
no one shall pluck them out of the Saviour's hand force from without
shall not overcome the power of Him who keeps them. But there is another
and an infinitely precious truth which the Lord in His love reveals to
us. The Father had given us to Jesus, and He is greater than all who
would seek to pluck us out of His hand. And Jesus and the Father are
one. Precious teaching! in which the glory of the Person of the Son of
God is identified with the safety of His sheep, with the height and
depth of the love of which they are the objects. Here it is not a
testimony which, as altogether divine, sets forth what man is. It is the
work and the efficacious love of the Son, and at the same time that of
the Father. It is not "I am"; but "I and the Father are one." If the Son
has accomplished the work, and takes care of the sheep, it was the
Father who gave them to Him. The Christ may perform a divine work, and
furnish a motive for the Father's love, but it was the Father who gave
it Him to do. Their love to the sheep is one, as those who bear that
love are one.

chapter 8, therefore, is the manifestation of God in testimony, and as
light; chapters 9 and 10, the efficacious grace which gathers the sheep
under the care of the Son, and of the Father's love. John speaks of God
when he speaks of a holy nature, and man's responsibility of the Father
and the Son, when he speaks of grace in connection with the people of
God.

Observe, that the wolf may come and catch \[See Note \#39\] the sheep,
if the shepherds are hirelings; but he cannot catch \[See Note \#39\]
them out of the Savior's hands. At the end of the chapter, the Jews
having taken up stones to stone Him, because He made Himself equal with
God, the Lord does not seek to prove to them the truth of what He is,
but shows that, according to their own principles and the testimony of
the scriptures, they were wrong in this case. He appeals again to His
own words and works, as proving that He was in the Father and the Father
in Him. Again they take up stones, and Jesus definitely leaves them. It
was all over with Israel.

Note \#38

Love and obedience are the governing principles of divine life. This is
unfolded in the First Epistle of John as to ourselves. Another mark of
it in the creature is dependence, and this was fully manifested in Jesus
as man.

Note \#39

The words catcheth and pluck in Verses 12, 28 and 29 ([Joh
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012.md); [Joh
10:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028).md) are the same in the
original.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 11](joh011.md)

</div>
