<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh014)  [Next](joh016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)

The beginning of this chapter, and that which relates to the vine,
belongs to the earthly portion to that which Jesus was on earth to His
relationship with His disciples as on the earth, and does not go beyond
that position.

"I am the true vine." Jehovah had planted a vine brought out of Egypt
([Psa 80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008)). This is Israel after the
flesh; but it was not the true Vine. The true Vine was His Son, whom He
brought up out of Egypt Jesus. \[See Note \#55\] He presents Himself
thus to His disciples. Here it is not that which He will be after His
departure; He was this upon earth, and distinctively upon earth. We do
not speak of planting vines in heaven, nor of pruning branches there.

The disciples would have considered Him as the most excellent branch of
the Vine; but thus He would have been only a member of Israel, whereas
He was Himself the vessel, the source of blessing, according to the
promises of God. The true Vine, therefore, is not Israel; quite the
contrary, it is Christ in contrast with Israel, but Christ planted on
earth, taking Israel's place, as the true Vine. The Father cultivates
this plant, evidently on the earth. There is no need of a husbandman in
heaven. Those who are attached to Christ, as the remnant of Israel, the
disciples, need this culture. It is on the earth that fruit-bearing is
looked for. The Lord therefore says to them, "Ye are clean already,
through the word which I have spoken unto you"; "Ye are the branches."
Judas, perhaps it may be said, was taken away, so the disciples who
walked no more with Him. The others should be proved and cleansed, that
they might bear more fruit.

I do not doubt that this relationship, in principle and in a general
analogy, still subsists. Those who make a profession, who attach
themselves to Christ in order to follow Him, will, if there is life, be
cleansed; if not, that which they have will be taken away. Observe
therefore here, that the Lord speaks only of His word that of the true
prophet and of judgment, whether in discipline or in cutting off.
Consequently He speaks not of the power of God, but of the
responsibility of man a responsibility which man will certainly not be
able to meet without grace; but which has nevertheless that character of
personal responsibility here.

Jesus was the source of all their strength. They were to abide in Him;
thus for this is the order He would abide in them. We have seen this in
chapter 14. He does not speak here of the sovereign exercise of love in
salvation, but of the government of children by their Father; so that
blessing depends on walk ([Joh 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#021);
[Joh 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#023)). Here the husbandman seeks
for fruit; but the instruction given presents entire dependence on the
Vine as the means of producing it. And He shews the disciples that,
walking on earth, they should be pruned by the Father, and a man (for in
Verse 6 ([Joh 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#006)) He carefully
changes the expression, for He knew the disciples and had pronounced
them already clean) a man, any one who bore no fruit, would be cut off.
For the subject here is not that relationship with Christ in heaven by
the Holy Ghost, which cannot be broken, but of that link which even then
was formed here below, which might be vital and eternal, or which might
not. Fruit should be the proof.

In the former vine this was not necessary; they were Jews by birth, they
were circumcised, they kept the ordinances, and abode in the vine as
good branches, without bearing any fruit at all. They were only cut off
from Israel for wilful violation of the law. Here it is not a
relationship with Jehovah founded on the circumstance of being born of a
certain family. That which is looked for is the glorifying the Father by
fruit-bearing. It is this which will shew that they are the disciples of
Him who has borne so much.

Christ, then, was the true Vine; the Father, the Husbandman; the eleven
were the branches. They were to abide in Him, which is realised by not
thinking to produce any fruit except as in Him, looking to Him first.
Christ precedes fruit. It is dependence, practical habitual nearness of
heart to Him, and trust in Him, being attached to Him through dependence
on Him. In this way Christ in them would be a constant source of
strength and of fruit. He would be in them. Out of Him they could do
nothing. If, by abiding in Him, they had the strength of His presence,
they should bear much fruit. Moreover, "if a man" (He does not say
"they"; He knew them as true branches and clean) did not abide in Him,
he should be cast forth to be burnt. Again, if they abode in Him (that
is, if there was the constant dependence that draws from the source),
and if the words of Christ abode in them, directing their hearts and
thoughts, they should command the resources of divine power; they should
ask what they would, and it should be done. But, further, the Father had
loved the Son divinely while He dwelt on earth. Jesus did the same with
regard to them. They were to abide in His love. In the former Verses it
was in Him, here it is in His love. \[See Note \#56\] By keeping His
Father's commandments, He had abode in His love; by keeping the
commandments of Jesus, they should abide in His. Dependence (which
implies confidence, and reference to Him on whom we depend for strength,
as unable to do anything without Him, and so clinging close to Him) and
obedience, are the two great principles of practical life here below.
Thus Jesus walked as man: He knew by experience the true path for His
disciples. The commandments of His Father were the expression of what
the Father was; by keeping them in the spirit of obedience, Jesus had
ever walked in the communion of His love; had maintained communion with
Himself. The commandments of Jesus when on earth were the expression of
what He was, divinely perfect in the path of man. By walking in them,
His disciples should be in the communion of His love. The Lord spoke
these things to His disciples, in order that His joy \[See Note \#57\]
should abide in them, and that their joy should be full.

We see that it is not the salvation of a sinner that is the subject
treated of here, but the path of a disciple, in order that he may fully
enjoy the love of Christ, and that his heart may be unclouded in the
place where joy is found.

Neither is the question entered on here, whether a real believer can be
separated from God, because the Lord makes obedience the means of
abiding in His love. Assuredly He could not lose the favour of His
Father, or cease to be the object of His love. That was out of the
question; and yet He says, "I have kept my Father's commandments, and
abide in his love." But this was the divine path in which He enjoyed it.
It is the walk and the strength of a disciple that is spoken of, and not
the means of salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 16](joh016)

</div>
