<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jonah Index](jon.md)  
  [Previous](jon001)  [Next](jon003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001.md)

We have seen that the judgments which fall upon the unfaithful witness,
being at length acknowledged by himself, are the means through which the
name of Jehovah becomes known and worshipped among the Gentiles. Here
begins the second picture of the testimony-the complete and entire
rejection of the witness considered as the depositary of the first
message. He undergoes the judgment of God, and is cast out of His
presence into the depths of hades.

This is the just lot of Israel, unfaithful to the testimony of God, and
incapable of rendering it. Christ, in His infinite grace, came down into
this place, being rejected because He was faithful. We most distinctly
see the spirit of the remnant of Israel in Jonah's prayer. Verses 7-9 of
chapter 2 ([Jon 2:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#007).md) prove it most
clearly. In fact the remnant of Israel, although upright by grace, are
but flesh; the testimony is committed to them, and they fail. The flesh
being without strength, sentence of death must pass on all that is of
man. He is but vanity; and if he goes down into death, who can raise him
up? Who can make a dead man the witness of God?

But, blessed be God! Christ went down into death; and, as Jonah was
three days and three nights in the belly of the fish, so also the Son of
man went down into the heart of the earth for the same period of time.
But who could prevent His rising again? It was death here that was
without strength, and not man. Death combated with One who had the power
of life; and whether we consider the power of God, from whom Christ had
merited resurrection, or the Person of the faithful witness Himself, it
was not possible that He could be holden in the bands of Sheol. He is
not only the faithful witness, but the firstborn from the dead.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 3](jon003.md)

</div>
