<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos008)  [Next](jos010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#001)

But, if such a position as this proclaims the rights of God and
manifests the confidence of the people, it soon leads to conflict. The
enemy will not consent to the invasion and the taking possession of all
the territory he has usurped. But the wiles of the enemy are more to be
feared than his strength; indeed it is only these that are to be feared:
for in his strength he meets the Lord: in his wiles he deceives, or
seeks to deceive, the sons of men. If we resist the devil, he flees; but
to stand against his wiles, we. need the whole armour of God. Christ met
his wiles with Scripture, in the path of simple obedience, and, when he
manifested himself, the Lord said, "Get thee hence, Satan."

The inhabitants of Gibeon pretended to have come from far. The princes
of Israel use their own wisdom instead of asking counsel of Jehovah.
This time it is confidence, not in the strength, but in the wisdom of
man. The princes of the congregation, accustomed to reflect and to
guide, are more likely to fall into this snare. Bad as they are in their
unbelief, the people, eager for the result, are often nearer the mind of
God to whom the result is sure. The princes had some misgivings, so that
they are inexcusable. Apparently there was much advantage in gaining
allies in a place where they had so many enemies. The Gibeonites
flattered them too, as the servants of Jehovah. Everything was
calculated to set their minds at rest. Satan can talk religiously as
well as another; but he deceives only when we take the management into
our own hands, instead of consulting the Lord. Communion with Him was
needed to discern that these were people of the country, enemies who
dared not to be enemies; but to make peace with such is to deprive
oneself of a victory, and of one's right to make good the judgment and
the glory of God, in the unmingled possession of the land of blessing.
Allies can only set aside that single-eyed dependence upon God, and that
purity of moral relationship which exist between God and His people,
when it is His power alone that sustains them. For allies were not
Israel. Israel spares the enemy; and the name of Jehovah, which had been
brought in, obliges His people to retain a perpetual snare in their
midst.

Four centuries later, in the days of Saul, this produced its sorrowful
fruits. To a spiritual mind the presence of the Gibeonites would always
be an evil. Besides, what had Israel to do with allies? Was not Jehovah
sufficient? May He give us always to trust in Him, to seek counsel of
Him, to own none but Him, and to be always subject to Him! This will
ensure victory over every enemy, and the land will be all our own.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 10](jos010)

</div>
