<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos010)  [Next](jos012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001.md)

Israel's victories bring fresh war upon them; but the confederation of
their enemies only serves to deliver them all together into their hands.
If God will not have peace, it is because He will have victory. A new
principle is now set before us. God will in nowise allow the world's
seat of power to become that of His people; for His people depend
exclusively on Him. The natural consequence of taking Hazor would have
been to make it the seat of government, and a centre of influence in the
government of God, so that this city should be that for God which it had
before been for the world; "for Hazor beforetime was the head of all
those kingdoms." But it was just the contrary. Hazor is totally
destroyed. God will not leave a vestige of former power; He will make
all things new. The centre and the source of power must be His, entirely
and exclusively His: a very important lesson for His children, if they
would preserve their spiritual integrity.

In a certain sense the conquest of the land seemed complete; that is to
say, there was no outward strength left, either to stand before them or
to form a kingdom. But Israel had still many enemies in this land,
enemies who did not, indeed, molest them while they continued faithful,
but who taught the people many things that afterwards helped on their
ruin. They had divided the conquered land; they had rest from war. When
all is finished, we may reckon up our victories, but not before; till
then we ought rather to be occupied in gaining more.

We may remark here that, in the result of God's dealings, the fault
committed previously to the attack upon Ai seems blotted out, and had
even contributed to the development of His purposes. At the time it had
kept them back, and was punished. But God applied Himself to Israel's
moral restoration to the confidence of faith, and the grand object of
His dealings was in nowise hindered. This is no excuse; but it is a
sweet and strong consolation which leads so much the more into worship.
The fault committed in the matter of the Gibeonites appears to me more
serious. It did not delay their progress; but, being the act of Joshua
and the princes, it set them for ever in a false position with respect
to those whom they spared. Chapter 11 closes the first division of the
book, that is to say, the history of Joshua's victories (typically that
of the Lord's power by the Spirit, giving His people possession of the
promises).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 12](jos012.md)

</div>
