<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos001)  [Next](jos003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001)

The second chapter contains the interesting history of Rahab. How
beautiful. it is to see the grace of God setting up its way-marks from
the beginning, that the eye of faith may know where to rest, when God
was obliged to narrow His dealings with respect to man, and to limit
Himself in His relationship to man, until the precious blood of Christ
gave that grace its full scope and liberty! Seed of the woman, seed of
Abraham, seed of David-it narrows more and more. The promises even, as
to the government of God, give place to the law, until a small remnant
of Israel, proud in proportion to its poverty, becomes the vessel which
contains the yet smaller remnant of faithful ones who were waiting for
the redemption of Israel. And what shallow thoughts, though true ones,
were found in the hearts of these precious saints, in comparison with
the hopes of an Abraham and the solemn declarations of an Enoch! The
Lord, ever perfect, ever precious, might well say (one understands it,
although the depths of His heart are infinitely beyond our reach), "I
have a baptism to be baptised with, and how am I straitened till it be
accomplished!" But there have always been these signals for faith. If
God acts, He goes beyond the limits of the existing dispensation, and
oversteps His established relationships with man.

It is thus that the divine nature of Jesus, and the divine rights of His
Person, manifested themselves. He was only sent to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. This was the limit of His formal relationship with men.
But if faith lays hold of the goodness of God, can this goodness deny
itself, or limit itself to those who, for the time being, were the alone
subjects of His dispensation? No, Christ could not say, God is not good,
I am not good, to the degree you have imagined. How could God deny
Himself? The Syrophenician woman obtains what she asks for. Precious
prerogative of faith, which knows and owns God through everything; which
honours Him as He is, and ever finds Him what He is!

Wherein was manifested that faith in Rahab which the apostle cites as a
pattern?-admirable proof that the way in which God acts in grace is
before and above law; that grace overleaps the boundary which law
prescribes to man, even while maintaining its authority-an authority
however which can only manifest itself in condemnation! What then was
Rahab's faith? It was the faith which recognises that God is with His
people, all weak and few as they may be and not yet possessed of their
inheritance, wandering on the earth without a country, but beloved of
God.

If Abraham believed God when there was not a people, Rahab identified
herself with this people when they had nothing but God. She well knew
that the inheritance was theirs, and that, however strong their enemies
might be, in spite of their walled cities and their chariots of iron,
their heart was melted. This is always the case with the instruments of
the enemy, whatever appearances may be, when the people of God are under
the guidance of the Spirit of God in the path of obedience which God has
marked out for them. Thus, in the midst of heathens, this poor simple
woman, a bad and despised member of an accursed race doomed to
destruction, is saved, and her name is a testimony to the glory of God.
Her house, recognised by the sure mark, the line of scarlet thread,
becomes the refuge and the security of all who take shelter in it,
trusting to the promise given.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 3](jos003)

</div>
