<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg1022)  [Next](kg2001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001.md)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to 2 Kings

The Books of Kings shew us the kingly power established in all its
glory; its fall, and God's testimony in the midst of the ruin; with
details concerning Judah after the rejection of Israel, until Lo-ammi
had been pronounced upon the whole nation. In a word, it is the trial of
kingly power placed in the hands of men, not absolute, as in
Nebuchadnezzar, but kingly power having the law for its rule; as there
had been a trial of the people set in relationship with God by means of
priesthood. Out of Christ nothing stands.

Although the kingly power had been placed under the responsibility of
its faithfulness to Jehovah; and although it had to be smitten and
punished whenever it failed in this, it was yet at this time established
by the counsels and the will of God. It was neither a David, type of
Christ in his patience, who, through difficulties, obstacles, and
sufferings, made himself a way to the throne; nor a king who, although
exalted to the throne and always victorious, had to be a man of war to
the end of his life; a type in this, I doubt not, of what Christ will be
in the midst of the Jews at His return, when He will commence the coming
age by subjecting the Gentiles to Himself, having been already delivered
from the strivings of the people ([Psa
18:43-44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043).md). It was the king according
to the promises and the counsels of God, the king established in peace,
head over God's people to rule them in righteousness, son of David
according to the promise, and type of that true Son of David, who shall
be a priest upon His throne, who shall build the temple of Jehovah, and
between whom and Jehovah there shall be the counsel of peace ([Zac
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013).md).

Let us examine a little the position of this kingly power according to
the word; for responsibility and election met in it, as well as the
foreshadowing of the kingdom of Christ.

In chapter 7 of the Second Book of Samuel we have seen the promise of a
son whom God would raise up to David, and who should reign after him, to
whom God would be a father, and who should be His son, who should build
the temple of Jehovah, and the throne of whose kingdom God would
establish for ever. This was the promise: a promise which, as David
himself understood, will be fully accomplished only in the Person of
Christ ([Ch1 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#017).md). Here is the
responsibility: "If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod
of men and with the stripes of the children of men" ([Sa2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014).md); which David well understood
also ([Ch1 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#009).md).

The book which we are considering shews us that this responsibility was
fully declared to Solomon (),

[Psa 89:28-37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#028.md) sets the two things also
before us very plainly, namely, the certainty of God's counsels, His
fixed purpose, and the exercise of His government in view of man's
responsibility.

In the Book of Chronicles we have only what relates to the promises
([Ch1 17:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#011).md), for reasons of which
we will speak when we examine that book.

From all these passages, we perceive that the royalty of David's family
was established according to the counsels of God and the election of
grace; that the perpetuity of this royalty, dependent on the
faithfulness of God, was consequently infallible; but that at the same
time the family of David, in the person of Solomon, was in fact placed
upon the throne at that time under the condition of obedience and
faithfulness to Jehovah \[See Note \#1\]. If himself or his posterity
were to fail in faithfulness, God's judgment would be executed; a
judgment which nevertheless would not prevent God's fulfilling that
which His grace had assured to David.

The Books of Kings contain the history of the establishment of the
kingdom in Israel under this responsibility, that of its fall, of the
longsuffering of God, of God's testimony amid the ruin which flowed from
the unfaithfulness of the first king, and finally that of the execution
of the judgment, a longer delay of which would but have falsified God's
own character, and the testimony that should be given to the holiness of
that character. Such delay would have borne a false testimony with
respect to that which God is.

We shall see that, after Solomon's reign, the greater part of the
narrative refers to the testimony given by the prophets Elijah and
Elisha in the midst of Israel, and in general to that kingdom which had
entirely departed from God. Little is said of Judah before the complete
ruin of Israel. After this the ruin of Judah, brought on by the iniquity
of their kings, is not long delayed, although there were moments of
restoration.

Note \#1:

This is the universal order of God's ways: to set up blessing first
under the responsibility of man, to be accomplished afterwards according
to His counsels by His power and grace. And it is to be noted that the
first thing man has always done is to fail. Thus Adam, thus Noah, thus
under law, thus the priesthood, thus as here the royalty under law, so
Nebuchadnezzar where it was absolute, so, I add, the church. Already in
the apostles' days all sought their own, not the things of Jesus Christ.
God continues His own dealings in grace in spite of this, all through,
besides His government according to responsibility in the public body in
this world, but a government full of patience and grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 1](kg2001.md)

</div>
