<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2024)  [Next](ch1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 24 and 25.

The kings of Israel had been the fatal examples of a course which had
led Judah and all Israel to their ruin (see [Kg2
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#003)). The pious Jehoshaphat's
alliance with Ahab was the origin of all this, for evil bears fruit
which continues long to reproduce itself. Alas! alas! what is man when
he turns aside from Jehovah's ways, from the narrow and straight path of
God's word and will, from the path of faith-the true path of an obedient
spirit?

The history which we have been going over has given us an account of the
Assyrian's connection with the people of God. He was a cedar of Lebanon;
but he is cut down. Pharaoh thought, for a moment, of making the empire
his own; he sought to exalt himself that he might rule over the trees of
the forest. Judah, brought out in former days with a high hand by the
power of God from Pharaoh's country, is subject to him. But, whatever
Pharaoh's pretensions may be, this is not the purpose of God. If God
writes "Lo-ammi "on His people, it is Babylon which is to begin the
times of the Gentiles \[See Note \#1\]. Pharaoh returns into his own
country, and Jehoiakim, powerless and without God, comes under the
dominion of Nebuchadnezzar \[See Note \#2\]. We need not go into the
details. His son, as wicked as himself, rebels against Nebuchadnezzar;
for Judah, the son of the Most High, was little used to bondage; but
this heifer also must bend its neck to the yoke ([Hos
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#011)), and Jehoiachin is carried
captive to Babylon. The kingdom and the temple still exist; but
Zedekiah, having broken the oath which he had made in the name of
Jehovah \[See Note \#3\], and, allowing himself to be governed by the
princes, persists in his rebellion and is taken prisoner. His sons
having been slain before his eyes, and himself deprived of sight, he is
carried away to Babylon. The temple is burnt; the walls of Jerusalem are
broken down; the seat of Jehovah's throne is trodden under foot of the
Gentiles. Sorrowful result of His having entrusted His glory to men
among whom He had placed His throne! Sorrowful, thrice sorrowful,
conduct of man-of that generation whom God had so honoured! On the other
hand, God will take occasion from it to manifest that infinite goodness,
which, in sovereign grace, will re-establish the very thing that man has
cast under foot to the profane.

The prophets Jeremiah and Ezekiel must be read to have the complete
history, and the internal history of the spirit of the people, and that
of the king; the history at once of the condition which drew down the
judgment, and of the patience of God, who, even until the very taking of
the city, continued to. send them most affecting calls to
repentance-alas! in vain; and the times of the Gentiles began. The
reader who would thoroughly understand the events of all this history,
the marvellous patience of God, and the way in which He raised up
faithful kings, in order that He might bless, should read the prophets
Hosea, Amos, Jeremiah, and certain chapters of Isaiah, which speak to
the people in the name of Jehovah and tell them of their true condition.

Note \#1

As a figure, this is an important principle; for Egypt is the state of
nature, out of which the assembly is brought; Babylon is the corruption
and worldliness into which she falls.

Note \#2

How sorrowful is this part of the history, in which the only question
is, whether Egypt or Babylon is to possess the land of God's people, the
land of promise! It being no longer a doubtful point whether Israel
shall continue to possess it, it must become a prey to one or the other
of these hostile and unbelieving powers. Alas! Israel was unbelieving
with more light than the others, who did but take advantage of the
position and the strength which the unbelief of Israel gave them, and
acknowledged in them.

Note \#3

This filled up the measure of sin. We shall draw the reader's attention
to this when considering the prophecy of Ezekiel, who dwells upon it. By
making use of an oath in Jehovah's name in the hope of preventing
revolt, Nebuchadnezzar shewed more respect for that name than Zedekiah
did, who despised such an oath. God permitted thus final evidence of
iniquity. Zedekiah might have remained a spreading vine of low stature.
One who was above all, alone knew how to render to Caesar the things
which are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Introduction](ch1000)

</div>
