<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Lamentations Index](lam)  
  [Previous](lam004)  [Next](eze000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#001)

The prophet can now present the whole affliction of the people to God,
as an object of compassion and mercy. This is an onward step in the path
of these deep exercises of heart. He is at peace with God; he is in His
presence; it is no longer a heart struggling with inward misery. All is
confessed before Jehovah who is faithful to His people, so that he can
call on God to consider the affliction in order that He may remember His
suffering people according to the greatness of His compassions. For
Jehovah changes not ([Lam 5:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#019)).
The sense of the affliction remains in full, but God is brought in, and
everything having been recalled and judged before Him, all that had
happened being cleared up to the heart, Jeremiah can rest in the proper
and eternal relations between God and His beloved people; and, shutting
himself into his direct relations with his God, he avails himself of His
goodness, as being in those relations, to find in the affliction of the
beloved people an opportunity for calling His attention to them. This is
the true position of faith-that which it attains as the result of its
exercises before God at the sight of the affliction of His people (an
affliction so much the deeper from its being caused by sin).

Summary to Lamentations

This Book of Lamentations is remarkable because we see in it the
expression of the thoughts of the Spirit of God, that is, those produced
in persons under His influence, the vessels of His testimony, when God
was forced to set aside that which He had established in the world as
His own. There is nothing similar in the whole circle of the revelations
and of the affections of God. He says Himself, How could He treat them
as Admah and Zeboim? Christ went through it in its fullest extent. But
He went through it in His own perfection with God. He acted thus with
regard to Jerusalem, and wept over it. But here man is found to have
lost the hope of God's interposing on His people's behalf. God would not
abandon a man who was one of this people, who loved them, who understood
that God loved them, that they were the object of His affection. He was
one of them. How could he bear the idea that God had cast them off? No
doubt God would re-establish them. But in the place where God had set
them, all hope was lost for ever. In the Lord's own presence it is never
lost. It is in view of this that all these exercises of heart are gone
through, until the heart can fully enter into the mind and affections of
God Himself. Indeed this is always true.

The Spirit gives us here a picture of all these exercises. How gracious!
To see the Spirit of God enter into all these details, not only of the
ways of God, but of that also which passes through a heart in which the
judgment of God is felt by grace, until all is set right in the presence
of God Himself. Inspiration gives us, not only the perfect thoughts of
God, and Christ the perfection of man before God, but also all the
exercises produced in our poor hearts, when the perfect Spirit acts in
them, so far as these thoughts, all mingled as they are, refer in the
main to God, or are produced by Him. So truly cares He for us! He
hearkens to our sighs, although much of imperfection and of that which
belongs to our own heart is mixed with them. It is this that we see in
the Book of Lamentations, in the Psalms, and elsewhere, and abundantly,
though in another manner, in the New Testament.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Introduction](eze000)

</div>
