<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev002)  [Next](lev004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001)

The peace-offering now presents itself to our notice. It is the offering
which typifies to us the communion of saints, according to the efficacy
of the sacrifice, with God, with the priest who has offered it in our
behalf, with one another, and with the whole body of the saints as
priests to God. It comes after those which presented to us the Lord
Jesus Himself in His devoting Himself to death, and His devotedness and
grace in His life, but even unto death, and the testing of fire, that we
may understand that all communion is based on the acceptability and
sweet odour of this sacrifice; not only because the sacrifice was
needed, but because therein God had all His delight. I have already
remarked that, when a sinner, that is a guilty person, approached, the
sin-offering came first; for the sin must be borne and put away that he
might approach as qualified to do so. But, being cleansed and clean, he
approaches; and so here, according to the sweet savour of the offering
of God, the perfect acceptability of Christ, who knew no sin, but
consecrated Himself in a world of sin to God, that God might be
perfectly glorified-and His life also, that all that God was in judgment
might be also glorified-glorified by man in His Person; and hence
infinite favour flow forth on them that were received and that came by
Him. "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life that
I might take it again." He does not say here, because I have laid it
down for the sheep; that was rather the sin-offering. He speaks of the
positive excellence and value of His act; for in this Man wrought all
perfectness. In this all the majesty and truth, the righteousness
against sin, and love of God were infinitely glorified in man, though
much more than a man, and, where poor estranged man had got by sin, in
Him who was made sin for us. "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God
is glorified in him." "By man came death, by man came also the
resurrection from the dead." The evil which Satan had wrought was
infinitely more than remedied, in the scene where the ruin was brought
in; yea, by the means through which the ruin was effected. If God was
dishonoured in and by man, He is a debtor in a certain sense to man in
Jesus for the full display of His best and most blessed glory: though
even this be all His gift to us, yet Christ making Himself man has
wrought it out. But all that Christ was and did was infinitely
acceptable to God; and in this we have our communion-not in the
sin-offering \[See Note \#1\]. Hence the peace-offerings follow here at
once, though, as I have remarked, the sin-offering came first of all
where the case of application arose.

The first act in the case of the peace-offering was the presenting and
killing it at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation and
sprinkling the blood, which formed the basis of every animal offering,
the offerer being identified with the victim by laying his hands on his
head \[See Note \#2\].

Next, all the fat, especially of the inwards, was taken and burnt on the
altar of burnt-offering to the Lord. Fat and blood were alike forbidden
to be eaten. The blood was the life, and necessarily belonged
essentially to God; life was from Him in an especial manner; but fat
also was never to be eaten but burnt, and so offered to God. The use of
this symbol, fat, is sufficiently familiar in the word. "Their heart is
fat as grease." "Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked." "They are enclosed in
their own fat, with their mouth they speak proudly." It is the energy
and force of the inward will, the inwards of a man's heart. Hence, where
Christ expresses His entire mortification, He declares "They could tell
all His bones; and, in Psalm 102, "By reason of the voice of my groaning
my bones cleave to my skin."

But here, in Jesus, all that in nature was of energy and force, all His
inward parts, were a burnt-offering to God, entirely sacrificed and
offered to Him for such a sweet savour. This was God's food of the
offering, "the food of the offering made by fire unto Jehovah." In this
Jehovah Himself found His delight; His soul reposed in it, for surely it
was very good-good in the midst of evil-good in the energy of offering
to Him-good in perfect obedience. If the eye of God passed, as the dove
of Noah, over this earth, swept by the deluge of sin, nowhere, till
Jesus was seen in it, could His eye have rested in complacency and
peace; there on Him it could. Heaven, as to the expression of its
satisfaction, whatever its counsels, was closed till Jesus (the second
and perfect Man, the Holy One, He who offered Himself to God, coming to
do His will) was on earth. The moment He presented Himself in public
service, heaven opened, the Holy Ghost descended to dwell in this His
one resting-place here, and the Father's voice, impossible now to be
withheld, declares from heaven, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased." Was this object (too great, too excellent, for the
silence of heaven and the Father's love) to lose its excellence and its
savour in the midst of a world of sin? Far otherwise. It was there its
excellency was proved. If He learned obedience by the things which He
suffered, the movement of every spring of His heart was consecrated to
God. He walked in communion, honouring His Father in all-in His life and
in His death. Jehovah found continual delight in Him; and above all, in
Him in His death: the food of the offering was there. Such was the great
principle, but the communion of our souls with this is further given to
us. The fat being burnt as a burnt-offering, the consecration to God is
pursued to its full point of acceptance and grace.

If we turn to the law of the offerings, we shall find that the rest was
eaten. The breast was for Aaron and his sons, type of the whole church;
the right shoulder for the priest that sprinkled the blood, more
especially type of Christ, as the offering priest; the rest of the
animal was eaten by him who presented it, and those invited by him. Thus
there was identity and communion with the glory and good pleasure-with
the delight-of Him to whom it was offered, with the priesthood and the
altar, which were the instruments and means of the offering, with all
God's priests, and among those immediately taking part. The same
practice existed among the heathen; hence the reasoning of the apostle
as to eating things offered to idols. So, alluding to the sacrament of
the Lord's supper, the purport of which is strongly associated with this
type, "Behold Israel after the flesh: are not they which eat of the
sacrifices partakers of the altar?" And this was so much the case, that
in the desert, when it was practicable (and the analogous order needful
to maintain the principle was established in the land), no one could eat
of the flesh of any animal unless he first brought it to the tabernacle
as an offering \[See Note \#3\]. We indeed should eat in the name of the
Lord Jesus, offering our sacrifices of thanksgivings, the calves of our
lips, and so consecrate all we partake of, and ourselves in it, in
communion with the Giver, and Him who secures us in it; but here it was
a proper sacrifice.

Thus then the offering of Christ, as a burnt-offering, is God's delight:
His soul delights and takes pleasure in it; it is of sweet savour with
Him. Before the Lord, at His table so to speak, the worshippers, also
coming by this perfect sacrifice, feed on it also, have perfect
communion with God in the same delight in the perfect sacrifice of
Jesus, in Jesus Himself thus offered, thus offering \[See Note \#4\]
Himself-have the same subject of delight as God, a common blessed joy in
the excellency of the work of redemption of Jesus. As parents have a
common joy in their offspring, enhanced by their communion in it, so, as
filled with the Spirit, and themselves redeemed by Him, the worshippers
have one mind with the Father in their delight in the excellency of an
offered Christ. And is the Priest, who has ministered all this, the only
one excluded from the joy of it? No; He has His share also. He who has
offered it has part in the joy of redemption. Further, the whole church
of God must be embraced in it.

Jesus then, as priest, finds a delight in the joy of communion between
God and the people, the worshippers, wrought and brought about by His
means-yea, of which He is the object. For what is the joy of a Redeemer
but the joy and communion, the happiness, of His redeemed? Such then is
all true worship of the saints. It is joying in God through the means of
the redemption and offering of Jesus; yea, one mind with God; joying
with Him in the perfect excellency of this pure and selfdevoted victim
\[See Note \#5\], who has redeemed and reconciled them, and given them
this communion, with the assurance that this their joy is the joy of
Jesus Himself, who has wrought it and given it to them. In heaven He
shall gird Himself, and make them sit down to meat, and come forth and
serve them.

This joy of worship necessarily associates itself also with the whole
body of the redeemed, viewed as in the heavenly places. Aaron and his
sons were to have their part also. Aaron and his sons were ever the type
of the church, not as Christ's body (that was wholly hidden in the Old
Testament) but viewed as the whole body of its members, having title to
enter into the heavenly places, and offer incense-made priests to God.
For these were the patterns of things in the heavens, and those who
compose the church are the body of heavenly priests to God. Hence
worship to God, true worship, cannot separate itself from the whole body
of true believers. I cannot really come with my sacrifice unto the
tabernacle of God, without finding necessarily there the priests of the
tabernacle. Without the one Priest all is vain; for what without Jesus?
But I cannot find Him without His whole body of manifested people. The
interest of His heart takes them all in. God withal has His priests, and
I cannot approach Him but in the way which He has ordained, and in
association with, and in recognition of, those whom He has placed around
His house, the whole body of those that are sanctified in Christ. He who
walks not in this spirit is in conflict with the ordinance of God, and
has no true peace-offering according to God's institution.

But there were other circumstances we must remark. First, none but those
that were clean could partake among the guests. We know that moral
cleansing has taken the place of the ceremonial. "Ye are clean through
the word which I have spoken unto you." God has put no difference
between us and them, having purified their hearts by faith. Israelites
then partook of the peace-offerings; and if an Israelite was unclean,
through anything that defiled according to the law of God, he could not
eat while his defilement continued. Christians then, whose hearts are
purified by faith, having received the word with joy, alone can worship
really before God, having part in the communion of saints; and if the
heart is defiled, that communion is interrupted. No person apparently
defiled has title to share in the worship and communion of the church of
God. It was a different thing, remark, to be not an Israelite, and not
clean. He who was not an Israelite had never any part in the
peace-offerings; he could not come nigh the tabernacle. Uncleanness did
not prove he was no Israelite (on the contrary, this discipline was
exercised on Israelites only); but the uncleanness incapacitated him
from partaking, with those that were clean, in the privileges of this
communion; for these peace-offerings, though enjoyed by the worshippers,
belonged to the Lord ([Lev 7:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#020)).
The unclean had no title there. True worshippers must worship the Father
in spirit and in truth, for the Father seeketh such to worship Him. If
worship and communion be by the Spirit, it is evident that those only
who have the Spirit of Christ, and also have not grieved the Spirit (and
thus rendered the communion, which is by the Spirit, impossible by the
defilements of sin) can participate.

Yet there was another part of this type which seemed to contradict this,
but which indeed throws additional light on it. With the offerings which
accompanied this sacrifice, it was ordered ([Lev
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#013)) that leavened cakes should be
offered. For though that which is unclean is to be excluded (that which
can be recognised as unclean), there is always a mixture of evil in us,
and so far in our worship itself. The leaven is there (man cannot be
without it); it may be a very small part of the matter, not come in to
the mind, as it will be when the Spirit is not grieved, but it is there
where man is. Unleavened bread was there also, for Christ is there, and
the Spirit of Christ in us who are leavened, for man is there.

There was another very important direction in this worship \[See Note
\#6\]. In the case of a vow, it might be eaten the second day after the
burning of the fat-Jehovah's food of the offering; in the case of
thanksgiving-offering, it was to be eaten the same day This identified
the purity of the service of the worshippers with the offering of the
fat to God. So is it impossible to separate true spiritual worship and
communion from the perfect offering of Christ to God. The moment our
worship separates itself from this, from its efficacy and the
consciousness of that infinite acceptability of the offering of Christ
to God-not the putting away of sins, without that we could not approach
at all, but its intrinsic excellency as a burnt-offering, all burnt to
God as a sweet savour \[See Note \#7\] -it becomes carnal, and either a
form, or the delight of the flesh. If the peace-offering was eaten
separately from this offering of the fat, it was a mere carnal
festivity, or a form of worship, which had no real communion with the
delight and good pleasure of God, and was worse than unacceptable-it was
really iniquity. When the Holy Spirit leads us into real spiritual
worship, it leads us into communion with God, into the presence of God;
and then, necessarily, all the infinite acceptability to Him of the
offering of Christ is present to our spirit. We are associated with it:
it forms an integral and necessary part of our communion and worship. We
cannot be in the presence of God in communion without finding it there.
It is indeed the ground of our acceptance, as of our communion.

Apart from this then our worship falls back into the flesh; our prayers
(or praying well) form what is sometimes called a gift of prayer, than
which nothing often is more sorrowful (a fluent rehearsal of known
truths and principles, instead of communion and the expression of praise
and thanksgiving in the joy of communion, and even of our wants and
desires in the unction of the Spirit); our singing, pleasure of the ear,
taste in music, and expressions in which we sympathise-all a form in the
flesh, and not communion in the Spirit. All this is evil; the Spirit of
God owns it not; it is not in spirit and in truth; it is really
iniquity.

There was a difference in the value of the various kinds of this
offering: in the case of a vow it might be eaten the second day; in the
case of thanksgiving only the first. This typified a different degree of
spiritual energy. When our worship is the fruit of unfeigned and
single-eyed devotedness, it can sustain itself longer, through our being
filled with the Spirit, in the reality of communion, and our worship be
acceptable-the savour of that sacrifice being thus longer maintained
before God, who has fellowship with the joy of His people. For the
energy of the Spirit maintains His joy in His people in communion
acceptable to God. When, on the other hand, it is the natural
consequence of blessing already conferred, it is surely acceptable as
due to God, but there is not the same energy of communion.-The thanks
are rendered thus in communion with the Lord, but the communion passes
away with the thanksgiving really offered. Note we also, that we may
begin in the Spirit and pass into the flesh in worship. Thus, for
example, if I continue to sing beyond the real operation of the Spirit,
which happens too often, my singing, which at the beginning was real
melody in the heart to the Lord, will terminate in pleasant ideas and
music, and so end in the flesh. The spiritual mind, the spiritual
worshipper, will discover this at once when it happens. When it does
happen, it always weakens the soul, and soon accustoms to formal worship
and spiritual weakness; and then evil, through the power of the
adversary, soon makes its appearance among the worshippers. The Lord
keep us nigh to Himself to judge all things in His presence, for out of
it we can judge nothing!

It is good to bear strongly in mind this expression, "which pertain to
Jehovah" ([Lev 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#020)); the worship,
what passes in our hearts in it, is not ours-it is God's. God has put it
there for our joy, that we may participate in the offering of Christ,
His joy in Christ; but the moment we make it ours, we desecrate it.
Hence what remained was burnt in the fire; hence what was unclean must
have nothing to do with it; hence the necessity of associating it with
the fat burnt to Jehovah, that it may be really Christ in us, and so
true communion, the giving forth of Christ, on whom our souls feed,
towards God. Let us remember that all our worship pertains to God, that
it is the expression of the excellency of Christ in us, and so our joy,
as by one Spirit, with God. He in the Father, we in Him, and He in us,
is the marvellous chain of union which exists in grace as well as in
glory: our worship is the outgoings and joy of heart founded on this,
towards God, by Christ. So, as Himself ministering in this, the Lord
says, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the
church will I sing praise unto thee." He surely is in joy and knows
redemption is accomplished. May we be in tune with our heavenly Guide!
He shall well conduct our praises, and agreeably to the Father. His ear
shall be attentive when He hears this voice lead us. What perfect and
deep experience of what is acceptable before God must He have, who, in
redemption, has presented all according to God's mind! His mind is the
expression of all that is agreeable to the Father, and He leads us,
taught by Himself, though imperfect and feeble in it, in the same
acceptableness. We have the mind of Christ.

The "calves of our lips" is the expression of the same Spirit in which
we offer our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God,
proving what is His good and perfect and acceptable will: such our
worship, such our service, for our service should be in a certain sense
our worship.

There is added to the directions of this sacrifice a commandment to eat
neither fat nor blood. This evidently finds its place here, inasmuch as
the peace-offerings were the sacrifices where the worshippers ate a
great part. But from what we have said, the signification is evident;
the life and inward energies of the heart belonged wholly to God. Life
belonged to God and was to be consecrated to God; to Him alone it
belonged or could belong. Life spent or taken by another was high
treason against the title of God. So as to fat-that which characterised
no ordinary functions, as the movements of a limb, or the like, but the
energy of the nature itself expressing itself-belonged exclusively to
God. Christ alone rendered it to God, because He alone offered to God
what was due; and hence the burning of the fat in these and other
offerings represented His offering Himself a sweet savour to God. But it
was not less true that all belonged to God and belongs to God: man could
not appropriate it to his use. Use might be made of it in the case of a
beast dying or torn; but whenever man of his will took the life of a
beast, he must recognise the title of God, and submit his will, and own
the will of God as alone having claim.

Note \#1

Though the perfect offering for sin is the basis of all; we should not
without it have the thing to have communion in, and this point was
carefully guarded in the type of the peace-offering-it could not be
acceptably eaten but in connection with what was offered to God (see
chap. 7). Only it is communion in the joy of the common salvation, not
special priestly delight in what Christ was for God.

Note \#2

The exceptions to this rule are sin-offerings of the day of atonement,
and the red heifer, which confirm the great principle, or fortify a
peculiar portion of it. The sprinkling of the blood was always the
priest's work.

Note \#3

Life belonged to God. He only could give it. Hence, when allowed to be
taken in Noah's time, the blood was reserved. There was, of course, no
eating connected with death before the fall (unless the warning not to
bring it in), nor allowedly before Noah. Hence, as life belonged to God,
death had come in by sin, and there could be no eating of what involved
death, no nourishment by it, unless the life (the blood) was offered to
God. This being done, man could have his living nourishment through it.
It was indeed his salvation through faith.

Note \#4

Offering has a double character distinguished in Greek by prosphero and
anaphero, in Hebrew by Hikrib and Hiktir. Christ offered Himself without
spot through the eternal Spirit to God; but, having done so, God laid
the iniquity on Him, made Him to be sin for us, and He was offered up on
the cross as an actual sacrifice.

Note \#5

This expression, in a measure, brings in the meat-offering.

Note \#6

It may be well to remark that the peace-offering supposes fellowship in
worship, though many principles are individually applicable.

Note \#7

We may add of Jesus with the Father, and that in connection even with
His laying down His life, but this is not our direct subject here (see
[Joh 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017)). But there, note, it is
not done as for sinners, but for God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 4](lev004)

</div>
