<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev000)  [Next](lev002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

[Leviticus 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 1:1</span></span>

God speaks not from Sinai, but out of the tabernacle, where He is
sought; where, according to the pattern of His glory, but according also
to the need of those who seek His presence, He is in relationship with
the people by mediation and sacrifice. In Sinai, in terrible glory, He
demanded, and proposed terms of, obedience, and thereupon promised His
favour. In this the communication was direct, but the people could not
bear it. Here He is accessible to the sinner and to the saint, but by a
provided mediation and priesthood. But then the centre and ground of our
access to God thus is Christ's obedience and offering. This therefore is
first presented to us when God speaks in the tabernacle.

The order of these sacrifices is first to be remarked. The order of
their application is uniformly opposed to the order of their
institution. There are four great classes of offerings: 1, The
burnt-offering; 2, The meat-offering; 3, The peace-offering; and 4, The
sin-offering. I name them in the order of their institution, but, in
their application, when offered together, the sin-offerings always come
first, for there it is restoration to God \[See Note \#1\]; and, in
approaching God by sacrifice, man must approach by the efficacy of that
which takes away his sins, in that they have been borne by another. But
in presenting the Lord Jesus Himself as the great sacrifice, His being
made sin is a consequence of His offering Himself in perfectness to God,
and though as made sin for us, still in His own perfectness, and for the
divine glory, we say, His Father's glory; this is a great but blessed
mystery. He gives Himself up, coming to do His Father's will, and is
made for us sin, Him who knew no sin, and undergoes death.

Furthermore, our sins being put away, the source of communion is thus in
the excellency of Christ Himself, and in His offering, who offers
Himself to God, without spot; glorifying God by death inasmuch as sin
was there before Him and death by sin; and He gives Himself wholly up to
God's glory in respect of this state \[See Note \#2\], and then our
presentation according to the preciousness of this on high, though the
actual bearing of our sins be of absolute necessity to introduce us into
this communion. In this is the difference of the great day of atonement.
Then the blood was put on the mercy-seat in the holiest; but this, while
giving access there on the ground of perfect cleansing through an
offering of infinite value, was in respect of actual sins and
defilement, not the pure sweet savour of the offering in itself to God.
Yet it supposed sin. The offering would not have had its own character
nor value if it had not. Hence, as presenting Christ, and our approach
to God when sin has been fully dealt with and holiness tested, the
burnt-offering, meat-offering, and peace-offering (in which latter our
communion with God is presented to us), come first, and then the
sin-offerings apart; needful, primarily needful to us, but not the
expression of the personal perfectness of Christ, but of His
sin-bearing, though perfectness were needed for that. It is evident,
from what I have said, that it is Christ we are to consider in the
sacrifices which are about to engage our attention: the various forms of
value and efficacy which attach to that one all-perfect sacrifice. It is
true, we may consider the Christian in a subordinate point of view as
presented to us here, for he should present his body a living sacrifice.
He, by the fruits of charity, should present sacrifices of sweet savour,
acceptable to our God by Jesus Christ; but our object now is to consider
Christ in them.

I have said that there are four great classes presented to
us-burnt-offerings, meat-offerings, peace-offerings, and offerings for
sin. These may be seen thus classed in chapter 10 of the Epistle to the
Hebrews. But then there is a very essential distinction which divides
these four into two separate classes-the sin-offerings, and all the
others. The sin-offerings, as such, were not characterised as offerings
made by fire, of a sweet savour unto Jehovah (although the fat was in
most of them burnt on the altar, and in this respect the sweet savour
was there, and so it is once said, [Lev
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#031.md); for indeed the perfection of
Christ was there though bearing our sins), the others were distinctly so
characterised. Positive sins were seen in the sin-offerings: they were
charged with sins. He that touched those of them which fully bore this
character, as being for the whole people \[See Note \#3\] (Leviticus 16,
Numbers 19), was defiled. But in the case of the burnt-offering, though
not brought for positive sins, sin is supposed; there blood was shed,
and it was for propitiation, but burnt on the altar, and all was a sweet
savour to God. It was Christ's whole sacrifice of Himself to God, and
perfect as an offering in every respect, though sin, as such, was the
occasion of it. By this sacrifice, in result, sin will be put away out
of God's sight for ever-what joy! see [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029.md) and [Heb
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026.md). But then we brought to the
consciousness of our state of sin say, He was made sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in Him. This is a consequence,
but the basis is that, besides bearing our sins, He glorified God
perfectly there where He was made sin. It was as in the place of sin
that His obedience was perfect and God perfectly glorified in all He is
(John 13 and 17). Indeed there is but one word for sin and sin-offering
in the original. They were burnt, but not on the altar; the fat, save in
one case, of which we may speak hereafter, was (chap. 4). The other
offerings were offerings made by fire of a sweet savour unto
Jehovah-they present Christ's perfect offering of Himself to God, not
the imposition of sins on the substitute by the Holy One, the Judge.
These two points in the sacrifice of Christ are very distinct and very
precious. God has made Him to be sin for us, Him who knew no sin: but
also is it true, that through the eternal Spirit He offered Himself
without spot to God. Let us consider this latter, as first in the order
presented in Leviticus, and naturally so.

The first sort of sacrifice, the most complete and characteristic of
those characterised by being offerings made by fire of a sweet savour,
was the burnt-offering. The offerer was to bring his offering \[See Note
\#4\], in order to his acceptance with God, to the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and to kill it before Jehovah.

First, of the place, the whole scene of the tabernacle ritual consisted
of three parts: first, the holiest of all, the innermost part of the
boarded space covered with tents, separated from the rest by a veil
which hung before it, and within which was the ark of the covenant and
the cherubim overshadowing the mercy-seat, and NOTHING ELSE. This was
the throne of God, the type also of Christ, in whom God is revealed, the
true ark of the covenant with the mercy-seat over it.

The veil, the apostle tells us, signified that the way into the holiest
was not yet made manifest while the old economy subsisted \[See Note
\#5\]. Immediately outside the veil-its efficacy, however entering
within, and whence, indeed, on certain occasions, incense was taken in a
censer and offered within-stood the golden altar of incense. In the
same, or outer chamber of the tabernacle, called the holy, as
distinguished from the most holy place, or holy of holies, stood, on
either side, the shewbread and the candlestick-types, the former of
Christ incarnate, the true bread in union with and head of the twelve
tribes, on the one hand; and the latter, of the perfection \[See Note
\#6\] (still, I have no doubt, in connection with Israel in the latter
day) of the Spirit, as giving light, on the other. The church owns
Christ thus, and the Holy Ghost dwells in it, but what characterises it,
as such, is the knowledge of a heavenly and glorified Christ, and the
Holy Ghost, as in divine communications, present in unity in it. These
figures, on the other hand, give us Christ in His earthly relation, and
the Holy Ghost in His various displays of power, when God's earthly
system is established. Compare Zechariah 4, and Revelation 11 where
there is the testimony to, but not the actual perfection of, the
candlestick; God's testimony on the earth. The Epistle to the Hebrews
affords us all needed light as to how far and with what changes, these
figures can be applied now. But that epistle never speaks of the proper
relationships and privileges of the church and Christians. These are
viewed as pilgrims on earth, an earthly people. There is no union with
Christ. He is in heaven and we in need on earth; no mention of the
Father's name, but only so much the more precious as to our access to
God, and needed supplies of grace for our path down here. It is properly
Christian; we are partakers of the heavenly calling; but it may reach
out and give what is available for the remnant, slain after the church
is gone. Into the holy place the body of the priests, and not merely the
high priest, entered continually, but they only. We know who, and who
alone, can now thus enter, even those who are made kings and priests,
the true saints of God: only, we can add, that the veil that hid the
holiest and barred the entrance is rent from top to bottom, not to be
renewed again between us and God. We have boldness to enter into the
holiest. The veil has been rent in His flesh. He is not merely bread
from heaven or incarnate, but put to death, denoted by flesh and blood,
and the door fully opened for us to enter in spirit where Christ is. Our
ordinary privilege and title is in the holy place-type of the created
heaven, as the most holy is of the heaven of heavens, as it is called.
In a certain sense, as to spiritual approach and intercourse, the veil
being rent, there is no separation between the two, though in the light
which no man can approach unto God dwells inaccessible. In the heavenly
places we now are as priests, though only in spirit.

In approaching to this was the outside court, the court of the
tabernacle of the congregation \[See Note \#7\]. In entering this part,
the first thing met with was the altar of burnt-offering, and between
that and the tabernacle the laver, where the priests washed \[See Note
\#8\] when they entered into the tabernacle, or were occupied at the
altar, to perform their service. It is evident that we approach solely
by the sacrifice of Christ, and that we must be washed with water by the
word before we can serve in the sanctuary. We have need also, as
priests, of having our feet, at least, washed by our Advocate on high
for our continual service there. (See John 13.) \[See Note \#9\] Christ
also thus approached, but it was in the perfect offering of Himself, not
by the offering of another. Nothing can be more touching, or more worthy
of profound attention, than the manner in which Jesus thus voluntarily
presents Himself, that God may be fully, completely, glorified in Him.
Silent in His sufferings, we see that His silence was the result of a
profound and perfect determination to give Himself up, in obedience, to
this glory-a service, blessed be His name, perfectly accomplished, so
that the Father rests in His love towards us.

This devotedness to the Father's glory could, and indeed did, shew
itself in two ways: it might be in service, and of every faculty of a
living man here, in absolute devotedness to God, tested by fire even
unto death; or in the giving up of life itself, giving up Himself-His
life unto death, for the divine glory, sin being there. Of this latter
the burnt-offering speaks; of the former, I judge, the meat-offering:
while both are the same in principle as entire devotedness of human
existence to God-one of the living acting man, the other the giving up
of life unto death.

So in the burnt-offering; he who offered, offered the victim up wholly
to God at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. Thus Christ
presented Himself for the accomplishment of the purpose and glory of God
where sin was. In the type the victim and the offerer were necessarily
distinct, but Christ was both, and the hands of the offerer were laud on
the head of the victim in sign of identity. Let us cite some of the
passages which thus present Christ to us. First, in general, whether for
life or for death, thus to glorify God; but exactly as taking the place
of these sacrifices, the Spirit thus speaks of the Lord, in Hebrews 10,
citing Psalm 40: "Then said I, Lo I come, in the volume of the book it
is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O God; yea, thy law is
within my heart." Christ, then, giving Himself up entirely to the will
of God is what replaces these sacrifices, the antitype of the shadows of
good things to come. But of His life itself He thus speaks ([Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018).md): "I lay it down of myself, no
one taketh it from me. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to
take it again: this commandment have I received of my Father." It was
obedience, but obedience in the sacrifice of Himself; and so, speaking
of His death, He says, "The prince of this world \[Satan\] cometh, and
hath nothing in me; but that the world may know that I love the Father,
and as the Father hath given me commandment, so I do." So we read in
[Heb 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014).md).

How perfect and full of grace is this way of the Lord! as constant and
devoted to draw near when God should be thus glorified, and submit to
the consequences of His devotedness-consequences imposed by the
circumstances in which we are placed-as man was to depart from God for
his pleasure. He humbles Himself to death that the majesty and the love
of God, His truth and righteousness, may have their full accomplishment
through the exercise of His self-devoting love. Thus man, in His person,
and through His work, is reconciled to God; takes the true and due
relationship to Him; God being perfectly glorified in Him as to, and
(wondrous to say) in the place of, sin, and that according to all the
value of what Christ has done to glorify God. It was in the place of
sin, as made it for us, for there it was God had to be glorified, and
there all He is came out as nowhere else, and there perfectly, in love,
light, righteousness, truth, majesty, as by man's sin He had been
dishonoured; only that now it was infinite in value, God Himself, not
merely human defacing of God's glory. I do not here say men, but man.
And the blessed result was, not merely forgiveness, but introduction
into the glory of God.

The sacrifice was to be without blemish; the application of this to
Christ is too obvious to need comment. He was the Lamb "without blemish
and without spot." The offerer \[See Note \#10\] was to kill the bullock
before Jehovah. This completed the likeness to Christ, for, though
evidently He could not kill Himself, He laid down His life: no one took
it from Him. He did it before Jehovah. This, in the ritual of the
offering, was the offerer's part, the individual's, and so Christ's as
man. Man saw, in Christ's death, man's judgment-the power of Caiaphas,
or the power of the world. But as offered, He offered Himself before
Jehovah.

And now comes Jehovah's and the priest's part. The offering was to be
made the subject of the fire of the altar of God; it was cut in pieces
and washed, given up, according to the purification of the sanctuary, to
the trial of the judgment of God; for fire, as a symbol, signifies
always the trial of the judgment of God. As to the washing with water,
it made the sacrifice typically what Christ was essentially-pure. But it
has this importance, that the sanctification of it and ours is on the
same principle and on the same standard. He is in this sense our
sanctification. We are sanctified unto obedience. He came to do the will
of His Father, and so, perfect from the beginning, learns obedience by
the things which He suffered; perfectly obedient always, but His
obedience put ever more thoroughly to the test, so that His obedience
was continually deeper and more complete, though always perfect. He
learned obedience, what it was to obey, and that by growing sufferings
and the sense of what was around Him, and finally by the cross \[See
Note \#11\]. It was new to Him as a divine Person-to us as rebels to
God-and He learned it in all its extent.

Furthermore, this washing of water, in our case, is by the word, and
Christ testifies of Himself that man should live by every word that
proceedeth out of the mouth of God. This difference evidently and
necessarily exists, that as Christ had life in Himself, and was the life
(see [Joh 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md); [Jo1
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001),.md) we, on the other hand, receive
this life from Him; and while ever obedient to the written word Himself,
the words which flowed from His lips were the expression of His life-the
direction of ours. We may pursue the use of this water of cleansing yet
farther. It is the power of the Spirit also, exercised as by the word
and will of God \[See Note \#12\]; so even the commencement of this life
in us. "Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth, that we might
be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures" ([Jam
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018).md). And so in [Pe1
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023.md), we are born of the incorruptible
seed of the word. But then this finds us walking in sins and living in
them, or, in another aspect, dead in them. These are really the same
thing, for being alive in sins is being spiritually dead towards God;
only the latter sets out with our whole state discovered; the former
deals with our responsibility. In Ephesians we are viewed as dead in
sins; in Romans alive in them; in Colossians chiefly the latter, but the
former is touched on. The cleansing must be, therefore, by the death and
resurrection of Christ; death to sin and life to God in Him. Hence, on
His death, was shed forth out of His side water and blood, cleansing as
well as expiating power. Death then is the only cleanser of sin as well
as its expiation. "He that is dead is freed \[See Note \#13\] from sin,"
and water thus became the sign of death, for this alone cleansed. This
truth of real sanctification was necessarily hidden under the law, save
in figures: for the law applied itself to man, alive, and claimed his
obedience. Christ's death revealed it. In us-that is, in our flesh-good
does not dwell. Hence, in the symbolical use of water in baptism, we are
told that as many of us as are baptised unto Christ, are baptised unto
His death. But it is evident that we cannot stop at death in itself. In
us it would be the herald and witness of condemnation, but, having life
in Christ, death in Him is death to the life of sin and guilt. It is the
communication of the life of Christ which enables us thus to treat the
old man as dead, and ourselves as having been dead in trespasses and
sins. The body is dead because of sin, and the Spirit is life because of
righteousness, if Christ be in you. So we are told as to the truth of
our natural state (it is not here what faith holds the old man to be if
Christ be in us): "You, being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision
of your flesh, hath he quickened together with him." When we were dead
in sin, He hath quickened us together with Him; and, as baptised unto
His death, it is added, "that like as Christ was raised up from the dead
by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life." It is only in the power of a new life that we can hold ourselves
to be dead to sin. And, indeed, it is only by known redemption we can
say so. It is when we have apprehended the power of Christ's death and
resurrection, and know that we are in Him through the Holy Ghost, that
we can say, I am crucified with Him; I am not in the flesh. We know
then, that this cleansing, which was apprehended as a mere moral effect
in Judaism, is, by the communication of the life of Christ to us, that
by which we are sanctified, according to the power of His death and
resurrection, and sin as a law in our members is judged. The first Adam,
as a living soul, corrupted himself; the last, as a quickening Spirit,
imparts to us a new life.

But, if it is the communication of the life of Christ which, through
redemption, is the starting-point of this judgment of sin, it is evident
that that life in Him was essentially and actually pure; in us, the
flesh lusts against the Spirit. He, even according to the flesh, was
born of God. But He was to undergo a baptism, not merely to fulfil all
righteousness as living-though perfectly pure-in a baptism of water, but
a trial of all that was in Him by the baptism of fire. "I have," says
He, "a baptism to be baptised with, and how am I straitened till it be
accomplished!" Here, then, Christ, completely offered up to God for the
full expression of His glory, undergoes the full trial of judgment. The
fire tries what He is. He is salted with fire. The perfect holiness of
God, in the power of His judgment, tries to the uttermost all that is in
Him. The bloody sweat, and affecting supplication in the garden, the
deep sorrow of the cross, in the touching consciousness of
righteousness, "Why hast thou forsaken me?"-as to any lightening of the
trial, an unheeded cry-all mark the full trial of the Son of God. Deep
answered unto deep,-all Jehovah's waves and billows passed over Him. But
as He had offered Himself perfectly to the thorough trial, this
consuming fire and trying of His inmost thoughts did, could, produce
nought but a sweet savour to God. It is remarkable that the word used
for burning the burnt-offering is not the same as that of the
sin-offering, but the same as that of burning incense.

In this offering, then, we have Christ's perfect offering up of Himself,
and then tried in His inmost parts by fiery trial of God's judgment. The
consuming of His life was a sacrifice of a sweet savour, all infinitely
agreeable to God-not a thought, not a will, but was put to the test-His
life consumed in it; but all, without apparent answer to sustain, given
up to God; all was purely a sweet savour to Him. But there was more than
this. The greater part of what has been said would apply to the
meat-offering. But the burnt-offering was to make atonement, an
expression not used in chapter 2. There the personal intrinsic
perfectness of Christ was tested, and the manner of His incarnation,
what He was as man down here unfolded, but death was the first element
of the burnt-offering, and death was by sin. There where man was
(otherwise for him it could not be); where sin was; where Satan's power
as death was; where God's irreversible judgment was, Christ had to
glorify God, and it was a glory not otherwise to be displayed: love,
righteousness, majesty, in the place of sin and death. Christ, who knew
no sin, made sin for us, in perfect obedience and love to His Father
goes down to death; and God is glorified there, Satan's power of death
destroyed, God glorified in man according to all He is, sin being come
in, in obedience and love. He was in the place of sin, and God
glorified, as no creation, no sinlessness, could. All was a sweet savour
in that place, and according to what God was as to it in righteousness
and love.

When Noah offered his burnt-offering, it is said, "And Jehovah smelled a
sweet savour, and Jehovah said in his heart, I will no more curse the
ground for man's sake, for the imaginations of man's heart are only evil
continually." It had repented Him that He had made man, and grieved Him
at His heart; but now, on this sweet savour, Jehovah says in His heart,
"I will no more curse." Such is the perfect and infinite acceptableness
of Christ's offering up of Himself to God. It is not in the sacrifice we
are considering that He has the imposition of sins on Him (that was the
sin-offering), but the perfectness, purity, and self-devotedness of the
victim, but in being made sin, and that ascending in sweet savour to
God. In this acceptability-in the sweet savour of this sacrifice-we are
presented to God. All the delight which God finds in the odour of this
sacrifice-blessed thought!-we are accepted in. Is God perfectly
glorified in this, in all that He is? He is glorified then in receiving
us. He receives us as the fruit and testimony of that in which He has
been perfectly glorified, and that as revealed in redemption, in which
all that He is is wrought out in revelation. Does He delight in what
Christ is, in this His most perfect act? He so delights in us. Does this
rise up before Him, a memorial for ever, in His presence, of delight?
We, also, in the efficacy of it, are presented to Him; in one sense we
are that memorial. It is not merely that the sins have been effaced by
the expiatory act; but the perfect acceptability of Him who accomplished
it and glorified God perfectly in it, the sweet savour of His sinless
sacrifice, is our good odour of delight before God, and is ours; its
acceptance, even Christ's, is ours.

And we are to remark that, though distinct from laying our sins upon
Him, yet death implied sin, and the sacrifice of Christ, as
burnt-offering, had the character which resulted from sin being in
question before God, namely, death. It made the trial and suffering so
much the more terrible; His obedience was tested before God in the place
of sin, and He was obedient unto death, not in the sense of bearing sins
and putting them away, though in the same act, but in the perfection of
His offering of Himself to God, and obedience tested by God; tested by
being dealt with as sin, and therein, only, and a perfect sweet savour.
Hence it was atonement; and, in one sense, of a deeper kind than the
bearing of sins, that is, as the test of obedience and glorifying God in
it. If we have found peace in forgiveness we cannot too much study the
burnt-offering. It is that one act in the history of eternity in which
the basis of all that in which God has glorified Himself morally, that
is, revealed Himself as He is, and of all that in which our happiness is
founded (and its sphere)-for blessed be God they go together-is laid;
and laid in such a way that Christ could say, Therefore doth My Father
love Me; and that in total, self-sacrifice made sin before God (oh,
wondrous thought!) and for us. It became Him. Where is God's
righteousness against sin known? where His holiness? where His infinite
love? where His moral majesty? where what became Him? where His truth?
where man's sin? where His perfectness? and, absolutely, where Satan's
power, but its nullity too? All in the cross, and essentially in the
burnt-offering. It is not as bearing sins, but as absolutely offered to
God and in atonement-blood shedding about sin.

There is another point to remark in this sacrifice distinguishing it. It
was wholly for and to God; for us no doubt, but still wholly to God. Of
other sacrifices (not of the two first, for sin-but of these hereafter)
in some form or other men partook, of this not; it was wholly for God
and on the altar. It was thus the grand absolute essential sacrifice; as
to its effect, connected with us, as blood-shedding was ([Heb
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026.md) and [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029), the Lamb of God.md) present in it
(compare [Eph 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002).md). Hence, though
having the stamp of sin being there in blood-shedding and propitiation,
it was absolutely and wholly sweet savour, wholly to God.

Note \#1

As to acceptance, the Christian has no more conscience of sins; but the
Israelite had never learnt this; and hence, as we have seen, his way of
approaching served, as to the means, to portray the sinner's first
coming to God. The import of Christ's sacrifice is often too little
seen. Man must come as a sinner, and about and owning his sins. He
cannot come truly otherwise, but when entered in peace into God's
presence, feeble as we may be, we view it from God's side, and daily see
more of the reality and value of this great fact which stands alone in
the history of eternity, and on which all and eternal blessing is
immutably founded. Every point and power of good and evil was there
brought to an issue; the absolute enmity of man's heart against God
revealed in grace; Satan's complete power over men; man (Christ) perfect
in obedience and love to His Father in the very place needed when He was
made sin; God perfect in justice against sin (it became Him), and
perfect in love to the sinner. And this being accomplished, the perfect
ground was laid in justice, and in what was accomplished and immutable,
for the display of God's love and God's counsels, in what morally could
not change.

Note \#2

It is to be remarked that we read of no positive sin-offerings before
the law. The clothing of Adam may suppose it, and [Gen
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007.md) may be taken to speak of it, but
they are not professedly offered; burnt-offerings frequently. These
suppose sin and death, and no coming to God but by sacrifice and death,
and reconciliation through it. But the sacrifice is viewed in the
perfect self-offering of Christ, so that God should be perfectly
glorified in that which was infinitely precious in His sight, and all He
was, righteousness, love, majesty, truth, purpose, all glorified in
Christ's death so that He could freely act in His grace. Sin is supposed
in it, and perfectness of self-sacrifice to God there where it was; but
God glorified rather than individuals' sins borne. Hence worship
according to the sweet savour of it is involved in it. A man far
departed from God, as such I cannot come to God at all but on this
ground, and it will remain valid for eternity and secure all things: the
new heaven and earth are secured as the dwelling-place of righteousness
by it. But my actual sins being put away is another thing. In one, the
whole relationship of man, indeed of all things with God, is in
question; in the other, my personal sins. Hence all acceptable sacrifice
was of the former kind: sacrifices for sins when the relationship of a
people with God was established, where every act referred to His actual
presence.

Note \#3

In these cases the burning was outside the camp. It was the same as to
the scape-goat, which immediately connected itself with the rest of the
work.

Note \#4

The burnt-offerings as such were brought voluntarily; still, it seems
clear that this is not the sense of the Hebrew word "ratzon" here, but
for his acceptance, to be in divine favour. It remains, just the same
doctrinally true that Christ, through the eternal Spirit, offered
Himself without spot to God.

Note \#5

This is a signal instance that the order set up in the wilderness was
not the image, but only a shadow of good things to come; for the veil
unrent forbad entrance, the rent veil gives us, through the cross, full
boldness to go in. So that in relationship to God there was contrast.

Note \#6

The number seven is the number of perfection, and twelve also, as may be
seen in many passages of Scripture: the former, of absolute completeness
in good or evil; the latter, of completeness in human administration.

Note \#7

The door of the tabernacle of the congregation is not simply the veil of
the holy place, but the court where they entered from without. The altar
of burnt-offering was at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

Note \#8

It does not appear that the washing of the priests for their
consecration was at the laver; that was according to what was within
when they had got there. But it is always the word, which is figured by
the water.

Note \#9

In the first edition, I had added here the "renewing of the Holy Ghost,"
referring to Titus 3. But though the Holy Ghost surely renews the heart
continually, yet I doubt the justice of the application of this passage
here. The renewing seems more absolute there, anakainoseos. I might have
simply left it out, perhaps, but that I would call the attention of the
reader to the fact that "regeneration" is not the same word as being
"born again." It is paliggenesia, not anagenneesis. It is only found
again, to denote the millennium, in Matthew 19. It is in its import, the
"washing of water," or being "born of water," not the reception of life
by the Spirit. Water is a change of condition of what exists, not in
itself receiving of life, which is being "born of the Spirit." it is the
anakainosis.

Note \#10

That is, it was not yet the priest's part. It may be translated, "one
was to kill him." It was completing the offering, not presenting its
blood in a priestly way.

Note \#11

Much deep instruction is connected with this, but its development
belongs to the New Testament. See Romans 12 and 6, and 1 Peter.

Note \#12

Water thus used as a figure signifies the word in the present power of
the Holy Ghost.

Note \#13

Literally, "justified." You cannot accuse a dead man of sin. And note,
it is not "sins" here, but "sin."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 2](lev002.md)

</div>
