<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev010)  [Next](lev012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 11 and 12.

Priesthood being established, there comes the discernment between holy
things and profane, and the judgment of defilements (chaps. 11-15), and
what was to be done for the purification of defiled persons. We see that
it is this nearness of separation unto God which alone can discern thus,
and such is the service and ever the duty of priests.

First, as to food, that which is allowed to be eaten. In general the
principle seems to be, that anything is allowed that is clean, in this
sense, first, that it is thoroughly according to its element, that is,
in principle, divine order (of course here presented in a figure), as
fishes having scales; secondly, that was allowed which united mature
digestion to the absence of that wilful energy which goes boldly through
everything. These two qualities must be united. The grossness which
swallows down things as they are, or the lack of quiet firmness,
rendered unclean. To be clean, it must be that which at the same time
chews the cud and divides the hoof. Of birds, the carnivorous night
birds and those which cannot be tamed are forbidden; creeping things
also, whatever grovelled and trailed itself on the earth. In general,
there was to be in their eating the discernment of what was clean.

Then we have the judgment of God fallen on that which would have been,
for unfallen man, joy and blessing. The birth of a man, connected now
with sin, renders unclean; that of a woman, in whom was the
transgression, being deceived, still more so \[See Note \#1\].

Note \#1

Connected with this was the weakness of fallen nature (compare [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002).md). All that belonged even to
weakness of nature, being the effect of sin, rendered unclean under the
law. This is also true spiritually. All this was the result of some
manifestation or other of the life that was in the flesh. It was so with
the leper; raw flesh rendered unclean, as well as any other case where
this life (which had become unclean, and had been as set aside and under
judgment through sin), manifested itself externally, even though
weakness alone were the cause of its manifestation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 12](lev012.md)

</div>
