<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev003)  [Next](lev005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 4, 5, 6, and 7.

We come now to the sacrifices which were not sacrifices of sweet
savour-the sin and trespass-offerings, alike in the great principle,
though differing in character and detail: this difference we will
notice. But first a very important principle must be noticed. The
sacrifices of which we have spoken, the sacrifices of sweet savour,
presented the identity of the offerer and the victim: this identity was
signified by the laying on of the hands of the worshippers. But in those
sacrifices the worshipper came as an offerer, whether Christ or one led
by the Spirit of Christ, and so identified with Him in presenting
himself to God-came of his own voluntary will, and was identified as a
worshipper with the acceptability and acceptance of his victim.

In the case of the sin-offering, there was the same principle of
identity with the victim by laying on of hands; but he who came, came
not as a worshipper, but as a sinner; not as clean for communion with
the Lord, but as having guilt upon him; and instead of his being
identified with the acceptability of the victim, though that became
subsequently true, the victim became identified with his guilt and
unacceptableness, bore his sins and was treated accordingly. This was
completely the case where the sin-offering was purely such. I have
added, "though that became subsequently true," because in many of the
sin-offerings a certain part identified them with the acceptableness of
Christ, which, in Him who united in His Person the virtue of all the
sacrifices, could never be lost sight of. The distinction between the
identity of the victim with the sin of the guilty, and the identity of
the worshipper with the acceptance of the victim, marks the difference
of these sacrifices and of the double aspect of the work of Christ very
clearly.

I now come to the details. There were four ordinary classes of sin and
trespass-offerings, besides two very important special offerings, of
which we may speak hereafter: sins where natural conscience was
violated; that which became evil by the ordinance of the Lord, as
uncleannesses which made the worshipper inadmissible, and other things
(this had a mixed character of sin and trespass, and is called by both
names); wrongs done to the Lord in His holy things; and wrongs done to
the neighbour by breaches of confidence and the like. The first class is
in Leviticus 4; the second, attached to it, down to Verse 13 of chapter
5 ([Lev 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#013).md); the third, from Verse
14 to the end ([Lev 5:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#014).md); the
fourth, in the first seven Verses of chapter 6 ([Gen
Lev\_6:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen000.htm#001).md).

The two other remarkable examples of sin-offering were the day of
expiation, and the red heifer, which demand an examination apart. The
circumstances of the offering were simple. In the case of the high
priest and the body of the people sinning, it is evident that all
communion was interrupted. It was not merely the restoration of the
individual to communion which was needed, but the restoration of
communion between God and the whole people; not the forming a relation
(the day of atonement effected that), but the re-establishment of
interrupted communion. Hence the blood was sprinkled before the veil
seven times for the perfect restoration of this communion, and the blood
also put on the horns of the altar of incense. When the sin was
individual, the communion of the people in general was not interrupted,
but the individual had lost his enjoyment of the blessing. The blood was
sprinkled therefore, not where the priest approached-at the altar of
incense; but where the individual did-at the altar of burnt-offering.
The efficacy of the sin-offering of Christ is needed, but has been once
for all accomplished, for every fault; but the communion of the
worshipping body of the church, though lamed and hindered, is not cut
off by the individual sin; but when this is known, restoration is needed
and the offering demanded \[See Note \#1\]. That the Lord may punish the
whole congregation, if the sin lie undetected, we know; for He did so in
Achan. That is, the power belonging to a state in which God is
ungrieved, is enfeebled and lost, and where conscience is awake and the
heart interested in the blessing of God's people, this leads to search
out the cause. But this is connected with the government of God; the
imputation of sin as guilt is another matter, but sin in itself has
always its own character with God. "Israel," said He, "hath sinned;" but
Achan only suffers when the evil is known and purged, and blessing
returns, though with much greater difficulty. The truth is, that He who
knows how to unite general government with particular judgment, even
where there is general faithfulness, puts in evidence individual evil,
or permits it not (a yet higher and happier case); and, on the other
hand, can employ the sin of the individual as a means of chastening the
whole.

Indeed it appears to me very clear, in the case alluded to, that, though
the occasion of the chastening is evident in the sin of Achan, Israel
had shewn a confidence in human strength which was chastised and shewn
vain in the result, as divine strength was shewn all-sufficient in
Jericho. However that is, it is evident from the detail of these
sin-offerings that God can let nothing pass; He can forgive all and
cleanse from all, but let nothing pass. The sin hidden to a man's self
is not hidden to God; and why is it hidden to himself, but that
negligence, the fruit of sin, has stupified his spiritual intelligence
and attention?

God judges sins according to the responsibility of those who are judged.
But in the sovereign work of grace God judges of sin in those who
approach Him, not according to what becomes man, but what becomes
Himself. He dwelt in the midst of Israel, and Israel must be judged
according to what becomes God's presence: our privileges are the measure
of our responsibility. Men admit to their society what becomes
themselves, and do not admit the base and corrupt, allowing their evil,
because it is suited to their estate so to act. And is God alone to
profane His presence by acting otherwise? Is all the evil which man's
corruption leads him into to find its sanction only in the presence of
God? No; God must (in order to make us happy by His presence) judge
evil, all evil, according to His presence, so as to exclude it from it.
Has the moral stupidity, which is the effect of sin, made us ignorant of
it in ourselves? Is God to become blind because sin has made us so-to
dishonour Himself and make others miserable, and all holy joy impossible
everywhere, even in His presence; to let pass the evil? Impossible. No;
all is judged, and judged in the believer according to the place grace
has brought him into.

God is ignorant of nothing, and evil, however hidden to us, is evil to
Him. "All things are naked and open before the eyes of him with whom we
have to do." He may have compassion, enlighten by His Spirit, provide a
way of approach so that the greatest sinner may come, restore the soul
that has wandered, take account of the degree of spiritual light, where
light is honestly sought; but that does not change His judgment of evil.
"The priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his sin wherein
he erred and wist it not, and it shall be forgiven him. It is a
trespass-offering; he hath certainly trespassed against Jehovah."

I have now to remark certain differences in these sin-offerings full of
interest to us in the detail. The bodies of those in which the whole
people, or the high priest (which came to the same thing, for the
communion of the whole body was interrupted), were concerned, were burnt
without the camp; not those for individuals, nor those which were for a
sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire, though the whole were burnt. But
those for the high priest, or the whole people were: they had been made
sin, and were carried out of the camp as such. The sacrifice itself was
without blemish, and the fat was burnt on the altar; but, the offender
having confessed his sins on its head, it was viewed as bearing these
sins, and made sin of God, was taken without the camp; as Jesus (as the
epistle to the Hebrews applies it) suffered without the gate, that He
might sanctify the people with His own blood. This was always the case
when the blood was brought into the sanctuary for sin. One of the
sacrifices, of which I do not enter into the details here, was
abstractedly and altogether viewed in this light of sin, and was slain
and burnt, fat and blood (part of the blood having been first sprinkled
at the door of the tabernacle), and every part of it, without the camp.
This was the red heifer. In the three other sacrifices, which concerned
the whole people, the bodies were burnt indeed without the camp, but the
connection with the perfect acceptance of Christ in His work, as
offering Himself, was preserved, in the burning of the fat on the altar
of burnt-offering, and thus gave us the full sense of how He had been
made sin indeed, but that it was He who knew no sin, and whose offering
in His most inmost thoughts and nature was in the trial of God's
judgment perfectly agreeable. But though the fat was burnt on the altar
to maintain this association and the unity of the sacrifice of Christ,
yet, maintaining the general character and purpose of the diversity, it
is not habitually called \[See Note \#2\] a sweet savour to Jehovah.

There was a difference, however, between one of the three last-mentioned
sacrifices, the sacrifice of the great day of atonement, and the two
others mentioned in the beginning of Leviticus 4. In the sacrifice of
the great day of expiation the blood was carried within the veil; for
this was the foundation of all other sacrifices, of all relationship
between God and Israel, and enabled God to dwell among them so as to
receive the others. Its efficacy lasted throughout the year-for us, for
ever-as the apostle reasons in the Hebrews; and on it was based all the
intercourse between God and the people. Hence the blood of it was
sprinkled on the mercy-seat, to be for ever before the eyes of Him,
whose throne of grace, as of righteousness, that mercy-seat was thus to
be. And God, by virtue of it, dwelt among the people, careless and
rebellious as they were.

Such also is the efficacy of the blood of Jesus. It is for ever on the
mercy-seat, efficacious as the ground of the relationship between us and
God. The other sin-offerings referred to were to restore the communion
of those who were in this relationship. Hence, in [Lev
4:1-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#001.md), the blood was sprinkled on the
altar of incense, which was the symbol of the exercise of this
communion; the residue poured out, as habitually in the sacrifices, at
the altar of burnt-offering-the place of accepted sacrifice; the body,
as we have seen, was burnt. In the case of the offerings for the sin and
trespass of an individual the communion of the body was not directly in
question or interrupted, but the individual was deprived of the
enjoyment of it. Hence the altar of incense was not defiled or
incapacitated, as it were, in its use; on the contrary it was
continually used. The blood of these sacrifices, therefore, was put on
the horns of the altar of burnt-offering, which was always the place of
individual approach. Here, by Christ and the efficacy of the sacrifice
of Christ once offered, every individual soul approaches; and, being
thus accepted, enjoys all the blessing and the privileges of which the
church at large is continually in possession. But for us the veil is
rent, and as to conscience of guilt we are perfected for ever. If our
walk be defiled, water by the word restores the communion of our souls,
and that with the Father and with His Son. To speak of resprinkling of
blood consequently upsets the real position of the Christian, and throws
him back on his own imperfect state as to acceptance and righteousness.
There may be a repeated remedy, but one who is on that ground drops the
question of holiness, and makes continuous righteousness in Christ
uncertain. "Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity,"
is unknown in such cases; as is also that the worshipper once purged
should have no more conscience of sins. Were it so, as the apostle
urges, Christ must have suffered often. Without shedding of blood is no
remission.

But there was another circumstance in these sin-offerings for the
individual. The priest who offered the blood ate the victim. Thus there
was the most perfect identity between the priest, and the victim which
represented the sin of the offerer. As Christ is both, the eating by the
priest shews how He did thus make it His own. Only, in Christ, what was
thus typified was first effected when victim, and the priesthood, as
exercised for us now in heaven, comes after. Still this eating shews the
heart of Christ taking it up as He does for us when we fail, not merely
its being laid vicariously on Him, though then His heart took up our
cause. But He cared for the sheep.

The priest had not committed the sin; on the contrary, he had made
atonement for it by the blood which he had sprinkled, but he identified
himself completely with it. Thus Christ, giving us the most complete
consolation-Himself spotless, and who has made the atonement, yet
identified Himself with all our faults and sins, as the worshipper in
the peace-offering was identified with the acceptance of the sacrifice.
Only that now, the one offering having been made once for all, if sin is
in question, it is in advocacy on high that He now takes it up, and in
connection with communion, not with imputation. There is nothing more to
do with sacrifice or blood sprinkling. His service is founded on it.

The fat was burnt on the altar, where the priest was identified with the
sin which was on the offerer of the victim, but transferred to it. It
was lost, so to speak, and gone in the sacrifice. He who drew nigh came
with confession and humiliation, but, as regarded guilt and judgment, it
was taken up by the priest through the victim; and, atonement having
been made, reached not the judgment-seat of God, so as further to affect
the relation between God and the offender. Yet here it was perpetual
repetition. Communion was restored in the acceptance of the sacrifice,
as the sin which hindered the communion was entirely taken away, or
served only to renew (in a heart humbled into the dust, and annihilated
before the goodness of God) the communion founded on goodness become
infinitely more precious, and established on the renewed sense of the
riches and security of that mediation there typically exhibited, but
which Christ has accomplished once for all, eternally for us, as
sacrifice, and makes good as to the blessings flowing from it
continually on high; not to change the mind of God to us, but to secure
our present communion and enjoyment, in spite of our miseries and
faults, in the presence, the glory, and the love of Him who changes not
\[See Note \#3\].

Some interesting circumstances remain to be observed. It is remarkable
that nothing was so stamped with the character of holiness, of entire,
real separation to God, as the sin-offering. In the other cases, perfect
acceptance, a sweet savour, and in some cases our leavened cakes, are
found therewith in the use of them; but all passed in the natural
delight, so to speak, which God took in what was perfect and infinitely
excellent, though it supposed sin and judgment to be there; but here the
most remarkable and exact sanctions of its holiness were enjoined ([Lev
6:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#026).md). There was nothing in the
whole work of Jesus which so marked His entire and perfect separation to
God His positive holiness, as His bearing sin. He who knew no sin alone
could be made sin, and the act itself was the most utter separation to
God conceivable, yea, an act which no thought of ours can fathom, to
bear all, and to His glory. It was a total consecration of Himself, at
all cost, to God's glory; as God, indeed, could accept nothing else. And
the victim must have been as perfect as the self-offering was.

As a sacrifice then for sins, and as made sin, Christ is specially holy;
as indeed, now in the power of this sacrifice, a Priest present before
God, making intercession, He is "holy, harmless, separate from sinners,
made higher than the heavens." Yet, so truly was it a bearing of sins,
and viewed as made sin, that he who carried the goat before his letting
loose, and he that gathered the ashes of the red heifer, and sprinkled
the water of separation, were unclean until even, and must wash to come
into the camp. Thus are these two great truths in the sin-offering of
Christ distinctly presented to us in these sacrifices. For, indeed, how
can we conceive a greater separation to God, in Christ, than His
offering Himself as a victim for sin? And, on the other hand, had He not
really borne our sins in all their evil, He could not have put them away
really in the judgment. Blessed for ever be His name who has done it,
and may we ever learn more His perfectness in doing it!

We have, then, in these sacrifices, Christ in His devotedness unto
death; Christ in the perfection of His life of consecration to God;
Christ, the basis of the communion of the people with God, who feeds, as
it were, at the same table with them; and finally, Christ made sin for
those who stood in need of it, and bearing their sins in His own body on
the tree. We shall find that in the law of the offerings the question is
chiefly as to what was to be eaten in these sacrifices, and by whom, and
under what conditions.

The burnt-offering and the meat-offering for a priest were to be
entirely burnt. It is Christ Himself, offered wholly to God, who offers
Himself. As to the burnt-offering, the fire burnt all night upon the
altar and consumed the victim, the sweet-smelling savour of which
ascended thus to God, even during the darkness, where man was far from
Him, buried in sleep. This too is true, I doubt not, as to Israel now.
God has the sweet savour of the sacrifice of Christ towards Him, while
the nation forgets Him. However this may be, the only effect for us of
the judgment of the holy majesty of God-the fire of the Lord, now that
Christ has offered Himself, is to cause the sweet smell of this precious
sacrifice to ascend towards God. Of the other sacrifices, the
meat-offering and the sin-offering, the priest ate. The first pictures
the saint in his priestly character feeding on the perfectness of
Christ; the last, Christ, and even those who are His, as priests, in
devoted love and in sympathy with others, identifying themselves with
their sin and with the work of Christ for that sin. To Him alone it was,
of course, to bear that sin; but founded on His work our hearts can take
it up in a priestly way before God. They are connected in grace with it
according to the efficacy of the sacrifice of Christ; they enjoy the
grace of Christ therein. Christ entered into it directly for us, we in
grace into what He did. This is, however, a solemn thing. It is only as
priests that we can participate in it, and in the consciousness of what
it means. The people ate of the peace-offerings, which, though they were
holy, did not require that nearness to God. It was the joy of the
communion of believers, based on the redemption and the acceptance of
Christ. Therefore the directions for these of offerings follow those
given for the sacrifices for sin and trespass, although the
peace-offering comes before the sin-offering in the order of the
sacrifices, because, in the former, it required to be a priest to
partake of them. There are things which we do as priests; there are
others which we do as simple believers.

Note \#1

Only we must always remember that in Christ it has been done once for
all. We have only a shadow of good things to come, and in certain
points, as in this, contrast-a contrast fully developed in Hebrews 10.
In Hebrews, however, it is not restoration after failure, but perfecting
for ever, in the conscience, which takes the place of repeated
sacrifice. The restoration of communion on failure is found in [Jo1
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001.md), founded on the righteous One
being before God for us, and the propitiation made.

Note \#2

There is one case only where it is, [Lev
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#031.md).

Note \#3

There are points in the New Testament it may be well to notice here. The
Hebrews views the Christian as walking down here in weakness and trial,
but as perfected for ever by the work of Christ, no more conscience of
sins, and the priesthood is exercised not to restore communion, but to
find mercy and grace to help. 1 John speaks of communion with the Father
and Son. This is interrupted by any sin, and Christ is our Advocate with
the Father to restore it. The Hebrews is occupied with access to God
within the veil, the conscience being perfect, and we enter with
boldness, hence failure and restoration are not in question. The Father
is not spoken of. In John, as I have said, it is communion and the
actual state of the soul is in question. And it is so true that it is
the standing in Hebrews, that if one falls away, restoration is
impossible. In the tabernacle there was no going within the veil. No
such standing was revealed, and priesthood and communion as far as
enjoyed were mingled together, the Father unknown.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 5](lev005.md)

</div>
