<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk017)  [Next](luk019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001.md)

Grace is the spring of the Christian's walk, and furnishes directions
for it. He cannot with impunity (chapter 17) despise the weak. He must
not be weary of pardoning his brother. If he have faith but as a grain
of mustard seed, the power of God is, so to speak, at his disposal.
Nevertheless, when he has done all, he has but done his duty ([Luk
18:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#005).md). The Lord then shews ([Luk
18:11-37](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011).md) the deliverance from
Judaism, which He still recognised; and, after that, its judgment. He
was passing through Samaria and Galilee: ten lepers come towards Him,
entreating Him, from a distance, to heal them. He sends them to the
priests. This was, in fact, as much as to say, You are clean. It would
have been useless to have them pronounced unclean; and they knew it.
They take Christ's word, go away with this conviction, and are
immediately healed on their way. Nine of them, satisfied with reaping
the benefit of His power, pursue their journey to the priests, and
remain Jews, not coming out of the old sheepfold. Jesus, indeed, still
acknowledged it; but they only acknowledge Him so far as to profit by
His presence, and remain where they were. They saw nothing in His
Person, nor in the power of God in Him, to attract them. They remain
Jews. But this poor stranger the tenth recognises the good hand of God.
He falls at the feet of Jesus, giving Him glory. The Lord bids him
depart in the liberty of faith "Go thy way; thy faith hath saved thee."
He has no longer need to go to the priests. He had found God and the
source of blessing in Christ, and goes away freed from the yoke which
was soon to be judicially broken for all.

For the kingdom of God was among them. To those who could discern it,
the King was there in their midst. The kingdom did not come in such a
manner as to attract the attention of the world. It was there, so that
the disciples would soon desire to see one of those days which they had
enjoyed during the time of the Lord's presence on earth, but would not
see it. He then announces the pretensions of false Christs, the true
having been rejected, so that the people would be left a prey to the
wiles of the enemy. His disciples were not to follow them. In connection
with Jerusalem they would be exposed to these temptations, but they had
the Lord's directions for guidance through them.

Now the Son of man, in His day, would be like the lightning: but, before
that, He must suffer many things from the unbelieving Jews. The day
would be like that of Lot, and that of Noe: men would be at ease,
following their carnal occupations, like the world overtaken by the
flood, and Sodom by the fire from heaven. It will be the revelation of
the Son of man His public revelation sudden and vivid. This referred to
Jerusalem. Being thus warned, their concern was to escape the judgment
of the Son of man which, at the time of His coming, would fall upon the
city that had rejected Him; for this Son of man, whom they had disowned,
would come again in His glory. There must be no looking back; that would
be to have the heart in the place of judgment. Better lose all, life
itself, rather than be associated with that which was going to be
judged. If they should escape and have their lives spared through
unfaithfulness, the judgment was the judgment of God; He would know how
to reach them in their bed, and to distinguish between two that were in
one bed, and between two women who ground the corn of the household at
the same mill.

This character of the judgment shews that it is not the destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus that is meant. It was the judgment of God that could
discern, take away, and spare. Neither is it the judgment of the dead,
but a judgment on earth: they are in bed, they are at the mill, they are
on the housetops and in the fields. Warned by the Lord, they were to
forsake all, and to care only for Him who came to judge. If they asked
where this should be wherever the dead body lay, there would be the
judgment that would come down like a vulture, which they could not see,
but from which the prey would not escape.

Note \#38

The case of the blind man at Jericho is, as already noted, the beginning
(in all the synoptical Gospels) of the last events of Christ's life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 19](luk019.md)

</div>
