<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk003)  [Next](luk005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001.md)

The unknown Son of God on earth, Jesus, is led (chapter 4) into the
wilderness by the Holy Ghost, with whom He had been sealed, to undergo
the temptation of the enemy, beneath which Adam fell. But Jesus endured
this temptation in the circumstances in which we stand, not those in
which Adam stood; that is to say, He felt it in all the difficulties of
the life of faith, tempted in all points like as we are, sin excepted.
Take notice here that it is no question of bondage to sin, but of
conflict. When it is a question of bondage, it is a question of
deliverance, not of conflict. It was in Canaan that Israel fought. They
were delivered out of Egypt; they did not fight there.

In Luke the temptations are arranged according to their moral order:
first, that which bodily need required; second, the world; third,
spiritual subtlety. In each the Lord maintains the position of obedience
and of dependence, giving God andHis communications to man His word
their true place. Simple principle, which shelters us in every attack,
but which, by its very simplicity, is perfection! Nevertheless let us
remember that this is the case; for raising ourselves to marvellous
heights is not the thing required of us, but the following that which
applies to our human condition as the normal rule for its guidance. It
is obedience, dependence doing nothing except as God wills it, and
reliance on Him. This walk supposes the word. But the word is the
expression of the will, the goodness, and the authority of God,
applicable to all the circumstances of man as he is. It shews that God
interests Himself in all that regards him: why then should man act of
himself without looking to God and to His word? Alas! speaking of men in
general, they are self-willed. To submit and be dependent is precisely
that which they will not. They have too much enmity to God to trust in
Him. It was this, therefore, which distinguished the Lord. The power to
work a miracle God could bestow on whom He would. But an obedient man,
who had no will to do anything with respect to which the will of God was
not expressed, a man who lived by the word, a man who lived in complete
dependence upon God and had a perfect trust, which required no other
proof of God's faithfulness than His word, no other means of certainty
that He would intervene than His promise of so doing, and who waited for
that intervention in the path of His will here was something more than
power. This was the perfection of man, in the place where man stood (not
simply innocence, for innocence has no need of trusting God in the midst
of difficulties, and sorrows, and questions raised by sin, and the
knowledge of good and evil), and a perfection which sheltered one who
possessed it from every attack Satan could make upon him; for what could
he do to one who never went beyond the will of God, and to whom that
will was the only motive for action? Moreover, the power of the Spirit
of God was there Accordingly we find that simple obedience directed by
the word is the only weapon employed by Jesus. This obedience requires
dependence on God, and trust in God, in order to accomplish it.

He lives by the word: this is dependence. He will not tempt (that is,
put God to the test) to see if He is faithful: this is trust.

He acts when God wills, and because He wills, and does that which God
wills. All the rest He leaves with God. This is obedience; and, remark,
not obedience as submission to God's will where there was an adverse
one, but where God's will was the one motive for action. We are
sanctified to the obedience of Christ.

Satan is overcome and powerless before this last Adam, who acts
according to the power of the Spirit, in the place where man is found,
by the means which God has given to man, and in the circumstances in
which Satan exercises his power. Sin there was none, or it would have
been to yield, not to conquer. It was shut out by obedience. But Satan
is overcome in the circumstances of temptation in which man is found.
Bodily need, which would have become lust if self-will had entered into
it, instead of dependence on the will of God; the world and all its
glory, which, so far as it is the object of man's covetousness, is in
fact the kingdom of Satan (and it was on that ground that Satan tried to
bring Jesus, and shewed himself to be Satan in so doing); and, lastly,
self-exaltation in a religious way through the things which God has
given us these were the points of the enemy's attack. But there was no
self-seeking in Jesus.

We have found, then, in these things which we have been looking at, a
man filled with the Holy Ghost, and born of the Holy Ghost on earth,
perfectly well-pleasing to God and the object of His affection, His
beloved Son, in the position of dependence; and a man, the conqueror of
Satan amid those temptations by which he usually gains advantage over
man conqueror in the power of the Holy Ghost, and by making use of the
word, as dependent, obedient, and trusting in God in the ordinary
circumstances ofman. In the first position, Jesus stood with the
remnant; in the second, alone as in Gethsemane and on the cross.
Nevertheless, it was for us; and, accepted as Jesus, we have in a
certain sense the enemy to overcome. But it is a conquered enemy whom we
resist in the strength of the Holy Ghost, who is given unto us in virtue
of redemption. If we resist him, he flees; for he has met his conqueror.
The flesh does not resist him. He finds Christ in us. Resistance in the
flesh does not lead to victory.

Jesus conquered the strong man and then spoiled his goods; but it was in
temptation, obedience, having no will but that of God, dependence, the
use of the word, abiding in subjection to God, that Jesus gained the
victory over him. In all this the first Adam failed. After Christ's
victory, we also as servants of Christ gain actual victories, or rather
the fruits of the victory already gained in the presence of God.

The Lord has now taken His place, so to speak, for the work of the last
Adam the man in whom is the Spirit without measure, the Son of God in
this world by His birth. He has taken it as the seed of the woman
(nevertheless, conceived of the Holy Ghost); He has taken it as the Son
of God perfectly well-pleasing to God in His Person as man here below;
and He has taken it as the conqueror of Satan. Owned to be the Son of
God, and sealed with the Holy Ghost by the Father, heaven being open to
Him as man, His genealogy is, however, traced up to Adam; and, the
descendant of Adam, without sin, full of the Holy Ghost, He conquers
Satan (as the obedient man, having no motive but the will of God), and
sets Himself to accomplish the work which God His Father committed to
Him in this world, and that as man, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

He returns, in the power of the Spirit, into Galilee, \[See Note \#12\]
and His fame spreads through all the region round about.

He presents Himself in this character: "The Spirit of Jehovah is upon
me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he
hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, ... to preach the acceptable
year of Jehovah." Here He stops. That which follows in the prophet,
respecting the deliverance of Israel by the judgment which avenges them
of their enemies, is omitted by the Lord.

Now Jesus does not announce promises, but their fulfilment in grace by
His own presence. The Spirit is upon this man, full of grace; and the
God of grace in Him manifests His goodness. The time of deliverance is
come; the vessel of His favour to Israel is there in their midst.

The examination of the prophecy renders this testimony so much the more
remarkable, that the Spirit, having declared the sin of the people and
their judgment, in the chapters that precede these words, speaks (when
introducing the Christ, the Anointed) only of grace and blessing to
Israel: if there is vengeance, it should be executed upon their enemies
for the deliverance of Israel.

But here it is grace in His Person, this man, the Son of God, full of
the Holy Ghost, in order to proclaim the mercy of a God who is faithful
to His promises, and to comfort and lift up the bruised and the poor in
spirit. Blessing was there, presenting itself before them. They could
not misunderstand it, but they do not recognise the Son of God. "Is not
this Joseph's son?" We have here the whole history of Christ the perfect
manifestation of grace in the midst of Israel, His land, and His people;
and they knew Him not. No prophet is accepted in his own country.

But this rejection opened the way to a grace which went beyond the
limits that a rebellious people would set to it. The woman of Sarepta,
and Naaman, were testimonies of this grace.

Wrath fills the heart of those who reject grace. Unbelieving, and
incapable of discerning the blessing that had visited them, they will
not have it go elsewhere. The pride which rendered them unable to
appreciate grace would not hear of its communication to others.

They seek to destroy Jesus, but He goes on His way. Here is the whole
history of Jesus among the people traced beforehand.

He went His way; and the Spirit preserves to us the acts and the cures
which characterise His ministry in the aspect of the efficacy of grace,
and of its extension to others besides Israel.

Power was in Him whose grace was rejected. Acknowledged by devils, if
not by Israel, He expels them by a word. He heals the sick. All the
power of the enemy, all the sad outward effects of sin, disappear before
Him. He heals, He withdraws; and when entreated to remain (the effect of
His works that procured Him that honour from the people which He did not
seek), He goes away to labour elsewhere in the testimony committed to
Him. He seeks to accomplish His work, and not to be honoured.

He preaches everywhere among the people. He casts out the enemy, He
removes sufferings, and proclaims the goodness of God to the poor.

Note \#12

And here note, as anointed with the Holy Ghost and led by Him He goes to
be tempted, and returns in the power of it. None was lost, and this
power was as much shewn in the apparently negative result of overcoming,
as in the miraculous manifestation of power afterwards on men.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 5](luk005.md)

</div>
