<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk007)  [Next](luk009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#001)

In chapter 8 the Lord explains the import and the effect of His
ministry; and especially, I doubt not, its effect among the Jews.

However great the unbelief, Jesus carries on His work to the end, and
the fruits of His work appear. He goes to preach the good news of the
kingdom. His disciples (the fruit, and the witnesses by grace, in their
measure, in the same manner as Himself, of His mighty word) accompany
Him; and other fruits of this same word, witnesses also by their own
deliverance from the power of the enemy, and by the affection and
devotedness flowing from thence by grace a grace which acted also in
them, according to the love and devotedness that attach to Jesus. Here
women have a good place. \[See Note \#24\] The work was strengthened and
consolidated, and characterises itself by its effects.

The Lord explains its true nature. He did not take possession of the
kingdom, He did not seek for fruit; He sowed the testimony of God in
order to produce fruit. This, in a striking way, is the altogether new
thing. The word was its seed. Moreover it was the disciples only who had
followed and attached themselves to His Person, by grace and by virtue
of the manifestation of the power and grace of God in His Person to whom
it was given to understand the mysteries, the thoughts of God, revealed
inChrist, of this kingdom which was not being openly established by
power. Here the remnant is very clearly distinguished from the nation.
To "others" it was in parables, that they might not understand. For that
the Lord Himself must be received morally. Here this parable is not
accompanied by others. Alone it marks out the position. The warning,
which we considered in Mark, is added. Finally the light of God was not
manifested in order to be hidden. Moreover everything should be made
manifest. Therefore they must take heed how they heard, for, if they
possessed that which they heard, they should receive more: otherwise
even that should be taken from them.

The Lord puts a seal upon this testimony, namely, that the thing in
question was the word, which drew to Him and to God those who were to
enjoy the blessing; and that the word was the basis of all relationship
with Himself, declaring, when they spoke to Him of His mother and
brethren, by whom He was related to Israel after the flesh, that He
acknowledged as such none others but those who heard and obeyed the word
of God.

Besides the evident power manifested in His miracles the accounts that
follow to the end of chapter 8 present different aspects of the work of
Christ, and of His reception, and of its consequences.

First the Lord although, apparently, He takes no notice is associated
with His disciples in the difficulties and storms that surround them,
because they have embarked in His service. We have seen that He gathered
the disciples around Himself: they are devoted to His service. As far as
man's power to avert it went, they were in imminent danger. The waves
are ready to swallow them up. Jesus, in their eyes, cares nothing about
it; but God has permitted this exercise of faith. They are there on
account of Christ, and with Him. Christ is with them; and the power of
Christ, for whose sake they are in the storm, is there to protect them.
They are together with Him in the same vessel. If as to themselves they
might perish, they are associated in the counsels of God with Jesus, and
His presence is their safeguard. He permits the storm, but He is Himself
in the vessel. When He shall awake and manifest Himself, all will be
calm.

In the healing of the demoniac, in the country of the Gadarenes, we have
a living picture of what was passing.

As to Israel, the remnant however great the enemy's power is delivered.
The world beseeches Jesus to depart, desiring their own ease, which is
more disturbed by the presence and power of God than by a legion of
devils. He goes away. The man who was healed the remnant would fain be
with Him; but the Lord sends him back (into the world that He quitted
Himself) to be a witness of the grace and power of which he had been the
subject. The herd of swine, I doubt not, set before us the career of
Israel towards their destruction, after the rejection of the Lord. The
world accustoms itself to the power of Satan painful as it may be to see
it in certain cases never to the power of God.

The next two histories present the effect of faith, and the real need
with which the grace that meets it has to do. The faith of the remnant
seeks Jesus to preserve the life of that which is ready to perish. The
Lord answers it, and comes Himself to answer it. On the way (it is there
He was, and, as to final deliverance, He is still there), in the midst
of the crowd that surrounded Him, faith touches Him. The poor woman had
a disease which no means at marl's disposal could heal. But power is
found in the Man, Christ, and comes forth from Him for the healing of
man, wherever faith exists, while waiting for the final accomplishment
of His mission on earth. She is healed, and confesses before Christ her
condition and all that had happened to her: and thus, by means of the
effect of faith, testimony is rendered to Christ. The remnant is
manifested, faith distinguishes them from the multitude; their condition
being the fruit of divine power in Christ.

This principle applies to the healing of every believer, and,
consequently, to that of the Gentiles, as the apostle argues. Healing
power is in the Person of Christ; faith by grace and by the attraction
of Christ profits by it. It does not depend on the relationship of the
Jew, although, as to his position, he was the first to profit by it. It
is a question of what there is in the Person of Christ, and of faith in
the individual. If there is faith in the individual, this power acts; he
goes away in peace, healed by the power of God Himself. But, in fact, if
we consider in full the condition of man, it was not sickness merely
which was in question, but death. Christ, before the full manifestation
of the state of man, met it, so to speak, on the way; but, as in the
case of Lazarus, the manifestation was allowed; and to faith this
manifestation took place in the death of Jesus. Thus, here, it is
permitted that the daughter of Jairus should die before the arrival of
Christ; but grace has come to raise from the dead, with the divine power
that alone can accomplish it; and Jesus, in comforting the poor father,
bids him not to fear, but only to believe, and his daughter should be
made whole. It is faith in His Person, in the divine power in Him, in
the grace that comes to exercise it, which obtains joy and deliverance.
But Jesus does not seek the multitude here; the manifestation of this
power is only for the consolation of those who feel their need of it,
and for the faith of those who are really attached to Him. The multitude
know, indeed, that the maiden is dead; they bewail her, and do not
understand the power of God that can raise her up. Jesus gives back to
her parents the child whose life He had restored. Thus will it be with
the Jews at the end, in the midst of the unbelief of the many. Meantime
by faith we anticipate this joy, convinced that it is our state by
grace; we live: only that for us it is in connection with Christ in
heaven, the firstfruits of a new creation.

With respect to His ministry, Jesus will have this hidden. He must be
received according to the testimony which He bore to the conscience and
to the heart. On the way this testimony was not entirely finished. We
shall see His last efforts with the unbelieving heart of man in the
succeeding chapters.

Note \#24

It is exceedingly interesting to see the distinct place of the disciples
and the women. Nor, as said above, have the women a bad place. We find
them again at the cross and the sepulchre when at any rate save John the
disciples had fled, or, even if called by the women to the sepulchre,
gone home! when they saw He was raised.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 9](luk009)

</div>
