<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk009)  [Next](luk011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001)

The mission of the seventy follows in chapter 10, a mission important in
its character for the development of the ways of God.

This character is, in fact, different in some respects from that of the
beginning of chapter 9. The mission is founded on the glory of Christ
manifested in chapter 9. This of necessity, settles the question more
decisively of the Lord's relations with the Jews: for His glory came
after, and, as to His human position, was the result of His rejection by
the nation.

This rejection was not yet accomplished: this glory was only revealed to
three of His disciples; so that the Lord still exercised His ministry
among the people. But we see these alterations in it. He insists on that
which is moral and eternal, the position into which it would bring His
disciples, the true effect of His testimony in the world, and the
judgment about to fall upon the Jews. Nevertheless the harvest was
great. For love, unchilled by sin, saw the need through the outward
opposition; but there were few moved by this love. The Lord of the
harvest alone could send forth true labourers.

Already the Lord announces that they are as lambs among wolves. What a
change from the presentation of the kingdom to the people of God! They
were to trust (like the twelve) to the care of the Messiah present on
the earth, and who influenced the heart with divine power. They were to
go as the Lord's labourers, openly avowing their object, not toiling for
their food, but as having claims on His part. Wholly devoted to their
work, they were to salute no one. Time pressed. Judgment was coming.
There were those in Israel who were not children of peace. The remnant
would be distinguished by the effect of their mission on the heart, not
yet judicially. But peace should rest on the children of peace. These
messengers exercised the power gained by Jesus over the enemy, and which
He could thus bestow (and this was much more than a miracle); and they
were to declare unto those whom they visited that the kingdom of God had
come nigh unto them. Important testimony! When the judgment was not
executed, it required faith to recognise it in a testimony. If they were
not received, they were to denounce the city, assuring them that,
received or not, the kingdom of God had come nigh. What a solemn
testimony, now that Jesus was going to be rejected a rejection that
filled up the measure of man's iniquity! It would be more tolerable for
infamous Sodom, in the day that judgment should be executed, than for
that city.

This clearly points out the character of the testimony. The Lord
denounces \[See Note \#30\] the cities in which He had wrought, and
assures His disciples that to reject them in their mission was the same
thing as to reject Him, and that, in rejecting Him, He who had sent Him
was rejected the God of Israel the Father. On their return they announce
the power that had accompanied their mission; demons were subject to
their word. The Lord replies that in effect these tokens of power had
made present to His mind the full establishment of the kingdom Satan
cast out entirely from heaven (an establishment of which these miracles
were only a sample); but that there was something more excellent than
this, and in which they might rejoice their names were written in
heaven. The power manifested was true, its results sure, in the
establishment of the kingdom but something else was beginning to appear
a heavenly people were dawning, who should have their portion with Him,
whom the unbelief of the Jews and of the world was driving back to
heaven.

This very clearly unfolds the position now taken. The testimony of the
kingdom rendered in power, leaving Israel without excuse, Jesus passed
into another position into the heavenly one. This was the true subject
of joy. The disciples, however, did not yet understand it. But the
Person and the power of Him who was to introduce them into the heavenly
glory of the kingdom, His right to the glorious kingdom of God, have
been revealed to them by the Father. The blinding of human pride, and
the Father's grace towards babes, became Him, who fulfilled the counsels
of His sovereign grace through the humiliation of Jesus, and were in
accordance with His heart who came to fulfil them. Moreover all things
were given to Jesus. The Son was too glorious to be known, save by the
Father, who was Himself only known by the revelation of the Son. To Him
must men come. The root of the difficulty in receiving Him lay in the
glory of His Person, who was known only to the Father, and this action
and glory of the Father, which needed the Son Himself to reveal it. All
this was in Jesus there on earth. But He could tell His disciples in
private that, having seen in Him the Messiah and His glory, they had
seen that which kings and prophets had in vain desired to see. The
Father had been proclaimed to them, yet they but little understood it.
In the mind of God it was their portion, realised afterwards by the
presence of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of adoption.

We may remark here, the power of the kingdom bestowed on the disciples;
their enjoyment at that moment (by the presence of the Messiah Himself,
bringing with Him the power of the kingdom which overthrew that of the
enemy) of the sight of those things of which the prophets had spoken; at
the same time the rejection of their testimony, and the judgment of
Israel among whom it was rendered; and, finally, the call of the Lord
(while acknowledging in their work all the power that shall establish
the kingdom) to rejoice, not in the kingdom thus established on earth,
but in that sovereign grace of God who, in His eternal counsels, had
granted them a place and a name in heaven, in connection with their
rejection on earth. The importance of this chapter is evident in this
point of view. Luke constantly brings in the better and unseen part in a
heavenly world.

The extent of the dominion of Jesus in connection with this change, and
the revelation of the counsels of God that accompanied it, are given us
in Verse 22 ([Luk 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#022)), as well as
the discovery of the relationships and the glory of the Father and of
the Son; at the same time also the grace shewn to the humble according
to the character and the rights of God the Father Himself. Afterwards we
find the development of the change as to moral character. The teacher of
the law desires to know the conditions of eternal life. This is not the
kingdom, nor heaven, but a part of the Jewish apprehension of the
relationship of man with God. The possession of life was proposed to the
Jews by the law. It had, by scriptural developments subsequent to the
law, been discovered to be eternal life, which they then, at least the
Pharisees, attached as such to the observance of that law a thing
possessed by the glorified in heaven, by the blessed on earth during the
millennium, which we now possess in earthen vessels; which the law, as
interpreted by conclusions drawn from the prophetic books, proposed as
the result of obedience: \[See Note \#31\] "The man that doeth these
things shall live by them."

The lawyer therefore asks what it is that he must do. The answer was
plain: the law (with all its ordinances, its ceremonies, all the
conditions of God's government, which the people had broken, and the
violation of which led to the judgment announced by the prophets
judgment that should be followed by the establishment, on God's part, of
the kingdom in grace) the law, I say, contained the kernel of the truth
in this respect, and distinctly expressed the conditions of life, if man
was to enjoy it according to human righteousness righteousness wrought
by himself, by which he himself should live. These conditions were
summed up in a very few words to love God perfectly, and one's neighbour
as oneself. The lawyer giving this summary, the Lord accepts it and
repeats the words of the Lawgiver: "This do, and thou shalt live." But
man has not done it and is conscious that he has not. As to God he is
far away; man easily gets rid of Him; he will render Him some outward
services and make his boast in them. But man is near; his selfishness
makes him alive to the performance of this precept, which, if observed,
would be his happiness make this world a kind of paradise. Disobedience
to it is repeated every moment, in the circumstances of each day, which
bring this selfishness into play. All that surrounds him (his social
ties) makes man conscious of these violations of this precept, even when
the soul would not of itself be troubled about it. Here the lawyer's
heart betrays itself. Who, he asks, is my neighbour?

The Lord's answer exhibits the moral change which has taken place
through the introduction of grace through the manifestation of this
grace in man, in His own Person. Our relationships with one another are
now measured by the divine nature in us, and this nature is love. Man
under the law measured himself by the importance he could attach to
himself, which is always the opposite of love. The flesh gloried in a
nearness to God which was not real, which did not belong to
participation in His nature. The priest and the Levite pass by on the
other side. The Samaritan, despised as such, did not ask who was his
neighbour. The love that was in his heart made him a neighbour to any
one who was in need. This is what God Himself did in Christ; but then
legal and carnal distinctions disappeared before this principle. The
love that acted according to its own impulses found the occasion of its
exercise in the need that came before it.

Here ends this part of the Lord's discourses. A new subject begins in
Verse 38 ([Luk 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#038)).

From that Verse to the end of Verse 13 in chapter 11 the Lord makes
known to His disciples the two great means of blessing the word and
prayer. In connection with the word, we find the energy that attaches
itself to the Lord, in order to receive it from Himself, and that leaves
everything in order to hear His word, because the soul is laid hold of
by the communications of God in grace. We may remark that these
circumstances are connected with the change that had been wrought at
that solemn moment. The reception of the word takes the place of the
attentions that were due to the Messiah. These attentions were demanded
by the presence of a Messiah on the earth; but, seeing the condition man
was in (for he rejected the Saviour), he needed the word; and Jesus, in
His perfect love, will have nothing else. For man, for the glory of God,
but one thing was needful; and it is that which Jesus desires. As to
Himself, He would go without everything for that. But Martha, though
preparing for the Lord, which was right surely, yet shews how much self
is inherent in this kind of care; for she did not like to have all the
trouble of it.

Note \#30

In Verse 25 of this chapter ([Luk
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#025)), as well as in [Luk
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#034), we have examples of the moral
order in Luke, of which we have spoken (p. 232). The testimonies of the
Lord are perfectly in place. They are of infinite assistance in
understanding the whole connection of the passage, and their position
here throws great light on their own meaning. Historical order is not
the question here. The position taken by Israel by the disciples by all,
through the rejection of Christ, is the subject of which the Holy Ghost
treats. These passages relate to it, and shew very plainly the condition
of the people who had been visited by Jesus, their true character, the
counsels of God in bringing in the heavenly things through the fall of
Israel, and the connection between the rejection of Christ and the
introduction of the heavenly things, and of eternal life, and of the
soul. Nevertheless the law was not broken. In fact its place was taken
by grace, which, outside the law, did that which could not be done
through the law. We shall see this in going on with our chapter.

Note \#31

It is to be remarked, that the Lord never used the word eternal life in
speaking of the effect of obedience. "The gift of God is eternal life."
If they had been obedient, that life might have been endless; but in
fact and truth, now that sin had entered, obedience was not the way to
have eternal life, and the Lord does not so state it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 11](luk011)

</div>
