<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk023)  [Next](joh000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001)

But the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, had prepared
everything for the burial of His Son, who had glorified Him by giving
Himself up to death. He is with the rich in His death. Joseph, a just
man, who had not consented to the sin of his people, lays the Lord's
body in a tomb that had never yet been used. It was the preparation
before the sabbath; but the sabbath was near. At the time of His death
the women faithful (though ignorant) to their affection for Him while
living see where the body is laid, and go to prepare all that was needed
for its embalming. Luke only speaks in general terms of these women: we
shall therefore enter on the details elsewhere, following our Gospel as
it presents itself. The women (chapter 24) come, find the stone rolled
away, and the sepulchre no longer containing the body of Him whom they
had loved. While perplexed at this, they see two angels near them, who
ask why they came to seek the living among the dead, and remind them of
the plain words which Jesus had spoken to them in Galilee. They go and
tell these things to all the disciples, who cannot believe their
account; but Peter runs to the sepulchre, sees everything in order, and
departs, wondering at that which had come to pass. In all this there was
no faith in the words of Jesus, nor in that which the scriptures had
spoken. In the journey to Emmaus the Lord connects the scriptures with
all that happened to Himself, shewing to their minds still lingering
round the thought of an earthly kingdom, that according to these
scriptures God's revealed counsels, the Christ ought to suffer and enter
into His glory, a rejected and heavenly Christ. He awakens that ardent
attention which the heart feels whenever it is touched. He then reveals
Himself in breaking bread the sign of His death: not that this was the
Eucharist, but this particular act was linked with that event. Then
their eyes were opened, and He disappears. It was the true Jesus; but in
resurrection. Here He Himself explained all that the scriptures had
spoken, and presented Himself in life with the symbol of His death. The
two disciples return to Jerusalem.

The Lord had already shewn Himself to Simon an appearance, of which we
have no details. Paul also mentions it as the first with reference to
the apostles. While the two disciples related that which had happened to
them, Jesus Himself stood in their midst. But their minds were not yet
formed to this truth, and His presence alarms them. They cannot realise
the idea of the resurrection of the body. The Lord uses their confusion
(very natural, humanly speaking) for our blessing, by giving them the
most sensible proofs that it was Himself risen; but Himself, body and
soul, the same as before His death. He bids them touch Him, and He eats
before their eyes. \[See Note \#45\] It was indeed Himself.

An important thing remained the basis of true faith: the words of
Christ, and the testimony of scripture. This He sets before them. But
two things were yet required. First, they needed capacity to understand
the word. He opens their understanding therefore, that they might
understand the scriptures, and establishes them as witnesses that were
not only able to say, "Thus it is, for we have seen it"; but "Thus it
must needs have been, for so hath God said in his word"; and the
testimony of Christ Himself was fulfilled in His resurrection.

But now grace was to be preached Jesus rejected by the Jews, slain and
risen again for the salvation of souls, having made peace, and bestowing
life according to the power of resurrection, the work which cleansed
from sin being accomplished, and pardon already granted in thus
bestowing it. Grace was to be preached among all nations, that is to
say, repentance and pardon to sinners; beginning at that place, with
which indeed the patient grace of God still owned a link, through the
intercession of Jesus, but which could only be reached by sovereign
grace, and in which sin the most aggravated rendered pardon the most
necessary, by a testimony which, coming from heaven, must deal with
Jerusalem as it dealt with all. They were to preach repentance and
remission of sins to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. The Jew, a
child of wrath, even as others, must come in on the same ground The
testimony had a higher source, although it was said "to the Jew first."

But, secondly, something more therefore was needed for the
accomplishment of this mission, that is, power. They were to tarry at
Jerusalem until they were endued with power from on high. Jesus would
send the Holy Ghost whom He had promised, of whom the prophets also had
spoken.

While blessing His disciples, heaven and heavenly grace characterising
His relationship with them, Jesus was parted from them, and carried up
into heaven; and they returned to Jerusalem with joy.

It will have been remarked that the narrative of Luke is very general
here, and contains the great principles on which the doctrines and
proofs of the resurrection are founded; the unbelief of the natural
heart so graphically painted in the most simple and touching accounts;
the disciples' attachment to their own hopes of the kingdom, and the
difficulty with which the doctrine of the word took possession of their
hearts, although, in proportion to their realisation, their hearts
opened to it with joy; the Person of Jesus risen, still a man, the
gracious One they knew; the doctrine of the word; the understanding of
the word bestowed; the power of the Holy Ghost given all that belonged
to the truth and to the eternal order of things made manifest.
Nevertheless, Jerusalem was still recognised as the first object of
grace on earth according to God's dispensations towards her; yet she was
not, even as a place, the point of contact and connection between Jesus
and His disciples. He does not bless them from Jerusalem, although, in
the dealings of God with the earth, they were to tarry there for the
gift of the Holy Ghost; for themselves and their relationship with Him
He leads them out to Bethany. From thence He had set out to present
Himself as King to Jerusalem. It was there that the resurrection of
Lazarus took place; therethat the family, which present the character of
the remnant attached to His Person, now rejected, with better hopes in
the most striking manner received Jesus. It was thither He retired when
His testimony to the Jews was ended, that His heart might rest for a few
moments among those whom He loved, who, through grace, loved Him. It was
there that He established the link (as to circumstances) between the
remnant attached to His Person and heaven. From thence He ascends.

Jerusalem is but the public starting-point of their ministry, as it had
been the last scene of His witness. For themselves it was Bethany and
heaven which were connected in the Person of Jesus. From thence was the
testimony to come for Jerusalem herself. This is the more striking when
we compare it with Matthew. There He goes to Galilee, the place of
association with the Jewish remnant, and there is no ascension, and the
mission is exclusively to the nations. It is a carrying out to them,
what was then confined to the Jews and forbidden to be carried further.

NOTE. In the text I have strictly followed the passage; I add some
developments here, connecting this Gospel with the others.

There are two distinct parts in the sufferings of Christ:1st, that which
He suffered from the efforts of Satan as man in conflict with the power
of the enemy who has dominion over death, but with the sense of what it
was from God in view, and this in communion with His Father, presenting
His requests to Him; and 2ndly, that which He suffered to accomplish
expiation for sin, when actually bearing our sins, made sin for us,
drinking the cup which the will of His Father had given Him to drink.

When speaking on the Gospel of John, I shall enter more on the character
of the temptations; but I would notice here, that at the commencement of
His public life the tempter endeavoured to turn Jesus aside by setting
before Him the attractiveness of all that which, as privilege, belonged
to Him, all that might be agreeable to Christ as man, as to which His
own will might work. He was defeated by the perfect obedience of Christ.
He would have Christ, being Son, go out of the place He had taken as
servant. Blessed be God he failed. Christ by simple obedience bound the
strong man as to this life, and then returning in the power of the
Spirit into Galilee spoiled his goods. Putting away sin and bearing our
sins was another matter. Satan then departed from Him for a season. In
Gethsemane he returns, using the fear of death to throw anguish into the
heart of the Lord. And He must needs go through death; and death was not
only Satan's power but God's judgment on man, if man was to be delivered
from it, for it was man's portion; and He alone, by going down into it,
could break its chains. He had become man, that man might be delivered
and even glorified. The distress of His soul was complete. "My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death." Thus His soul was that which the
soul of a man ought to be in the presence of death, when Satan puts
forth all his power in it, with the cup of God's judgment as yet
unemptied in it: only He was perfect in it; it was a part of His
perfection put to the test in all that was possible to man. But with
tears and supplications He makes His request to Him who had power to
save Him from death. For the moment, His agony increases: presenting it
to God makes it more acute. This is the case in our own little
conflicts. But thus the thing is settled according to perfection before
God. His soul enters into it with God; He prays more fervently. It is
now evident that this cup which He puts before His Father's eyes when
Satan presents it to Him as the power of death in His soul must be
drunk. As obedience to His Father, He takes it in peace. To drink it is
but perfect obedience, instead of being the power of Satan. But it must
be drunk in reality; and upon the cross Jesus, the Saviour of our souls,
enters into the second phase of His sufferings. He goes under death as
the judgment of God, the separation of the soul from the light of His
countenance. All that a soul which enjoyed nothing except communion with
God could suffer in being deprived of it, the Lord suffered according to
the perfect measure of the communion which was interrupted. Yet He gave
glory to God "But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of
Israel." The cup for I pass over the outrages and insults of men: we may
spare them the cup was drunk. Who can tell the horrors of that
suffering? The true pains of death, understood as God understands it,
felt according to the value of His presence divinely, as by a man who
depended on that presence as man. But all is accomplished; and that
which God required in respect to sin is done exhausted, and He is
glorified as to it: so that He has only to bless whosoever comes to Him
through a Christ who is alive and was dead, and who lives for ever a
man, for ever before God.

The sufferings of Christ in His body (real as they were), the insults
and upbraidings of men, were but the preface of His affliction, which,
by depriving Him as man of all consolation, left Him wholly in the place
of judgment as made sin, to His sufferings \[See Note \#46\] in
connection with the judgment of sin, when the God who would have been
His full comfort was, as forsaking Him, the source of sorrow which left
all the rest as unfelt and forgotten.

Note \#45

Nothing can be more touching than the way in which He cultivates their
confidence as that One they had known, the man, still a true man (though
with a spiritual body) as He had been before! Handle me and see that it
is I myself. Blessed be God, for ever a man, the same who has been known
in living love in the midst of our weakness.

Note \#46

Psalm 22 is His appeal to God from the violence and wickedness of man to
find Himself there forsaken and only sin in His sight, but perfect
there. Christ suffered all from man hostility, unrighteousness,
desertion, denial, betrayal, and then, as trusting in god, forsaking.
But what a spectacle, the one righteous Man who did put His trust in Him
to have to declare, at the end of His life, openly to all, He was
forsaken of God!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Introduction](joh000)

</div>
