<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar004)  [Next](mar006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#001)

But, in another sense, they are not with Him. They are called to serve,
when He quits the scene of His labour. We learn this from the demoniac
Legion (chapter 5), delivered from his miserable condition. Man and
Israel in particular was completely under the power of the enemy.
Christ, as to the work of His power, completely delivered the one in
whose behalf this power was exercised. He is clothed not naked in his
right mind, and sitting at the feet of Jesus to hear His words. But the
people of the place are afraid, and send Jesus away what the world has
done with Christ; and in the history of the herd of swine we have the
picture of Israel after the remnant has been healed. They are unclean,
and Satan drives them to destruction. Now, when Jesus departs, he who
had personally experienced the mighty effects of His love would have
liked to be with Him; but he was to go home and bear testimony to those
around him of all that Jesus had done. He was to serve in the absence of
Jesus. In all these narratives we see the work and the devotedness of
the Servant, but at the same time the divine power of Jesus manifested
in this service.

In the circumstances that follow the cure of the demoniac, we find the
true position of Jesus portrayed in His work. He is called upon to heal
the daughter of Jairus even as He came to heal the Jews, had that been
possible. As He went toward the house of Jairus to perform this work, a
poor incurable woman touches the hem of His garment with faith, and is
instantly healed. This was the case with Jesus during His passage among
the Jews. In the multitude that surrounded Him, some souls through grace
touched Him by faith. In truth, their disease was in itself incurable;
but Jesus had life in Himself according to the power of God, and faith
drew out its virtue by touching Him. Such are brought to acknowledge
their condition, but they are healed. Outwardly He was in the midst of
all Israel faith reaped the benefit in the sense of its own need and of
the glory of His Person. Now, with respect to the one who was the object
of His journey, remedy was unavailing. Jesus finds her dead, but does
not miss the object of His journey. He raises her again, for He can give
life. Thus too with respect to Israel. On the way, those who had faith
in Jesus were healed, incurable as they were in themselves; but in fact,
as to Israel, the nation was dead in trespasses and sins. Apparently
this put a stop to the work of Jesus. But grace will restore life to
Israel in the end. We see the perfect grace of Jesus intercepting the
effect of the bad tidings brought from the ruler's house. He says to
Jairus, as soon as the messenger has told him of his daughter's death,
and the inutility of troubling the Master any farther, "Be not afraid,
only believe." In effect, although the Lord restores life to a dead
Israel in the end of the ages, nevertheless it is by faith that it takes
place. The case of the poor woman, although in its direct application it
does not go beyond the Jews, yet applies in principle to the healing of
every Gentile who, through grace, is brought to touch Jesus by faith.

This history then gives the character of His service, the manner in
which on account of man's condition it had to be accomplished.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 6](mar006)

</div>
