<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar002)  [Next](mar004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#001)

Such was the question raised in the synagogue (chapter 3) on the
occasion of the man with the withered hand. The Lord sets it publicly
before their conscience; but neither heart nor conscience answered Him;
and He acts in His service according to the goodness and rights of God,
and heals the man. \[See Note \#4\] The Pharisees and their enemies, the
Herodians for all were against God and united in this consult together
how they might destroy Christ. Jesus departs to the sea-coast of the sea
of Tiberias. There the multitude follow Him, because of all that He had
done; so that He is obliged to have a boat, that He may be outside the
crowd. Spirits are subject to Him, compelled to own that He is the Son
of God; but He forbids them to make Him known.

Service in preaching, and in seeking souls, in devoting Himself to all,
shewing Himself by His acts to be the possessor of divine power, hiding
Himself from the notice of men, in order to fulfil, apart from their
applause, the service He had undertaken such was His human life on
earth. Love and divine power were disclosed in the service which that
love impelled Him to accomplish, and in the accomplishment of which that
power was exercised. But this could not be circumscribed by Judaism,
however subject the Lord was to the ordinances of God given to the Jews.

But, God being thus manifested, the carnal opposition of man soon shews
itself. \[See Note \#5\] Here, then, the description of Christ's service
ends, and its effect is manifested. This effect is developed in that
which soon follows, with respect both to the iniquity of man and to the
counsels of God. Meanwhile the Lord appoints twelve of His disciples to
accompany Him, and to go forth preaching in His name. He could, not
merely work miracles but, communicate to others the power to work them,
and that by way of authority. He goes back into the house, and the
multitude re-assemble. And here the thoughts of man display themselves
at the same time as those of God. His friends search for Him as one who
was beside Himself. The scribes, possessing influence as learned men,
attribute to Satan a power which they could not deny. The Lord answers
them by shewing that in general all sin could be pardoned; but that to
acknowledge the power, and attribute it to the enemy, rather than own
Him who wielded it, was taking the place not of ignorant unbelief but of
adversaries, thus blaspheming against the Holy Ghost was a sin that
could never be pardoned. The "strong man" was there; but Jesus was
stronger than he, for He cast out the devils. Would Satan endeavour to
overthrow his own house? The fact that the power of Jesus manifested
itself in this manner left them without excuse. God's "strong man" was
then come: Israel rejected Him; and, as regards their leaders, by
blaspheming against the Holy Ghost, they brought themselves under
hopeless condemnation. The Lord therefore immediately distinguishes the
remnant who received His word from all natural connection He had with
Israel. His mother or His "brethren" are the disciples who stand around
Him, and those who do the will of God. This really sets aside Israel at
that time.

Note \#5

This rapidity characterises Mark, as does the word "immediately."

Note \#4

One cannot but see how the old system, based on what man ought to be for
God, is being set aside for what God is for man. But, the former having
been established by God, nothing but the words and works of Jesus would
have justified the Jews in giving it up. As it was, it was clearly
opposition and hatred to the full revelation of Him who had ordained the
other. Compare [Joh 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022); [Joh
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#024).

Note \#5

This is the secret of all the history of Jesus, Son of David. All the
promises being in Him for the Jews, the servant of every want too and
every sorrow, yet being God and God manifested in Him, man could not
bear it. The mind of the flesh is enmity against God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 4](mar004)

</div>
