<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar014)  [Next](mar016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#001)

Before Pilate (chapter 15), He only witnesses a good confession, a
testimony to the truth where the glory of God required it, and where
this testimony stood opposed to the power of the adversary. To all the
rest He answers nothing. He lets them go on; and the evangelist enters
into no details. To render this testimony was the last service and duty
He had to perform. It is rendered. The Jews make choice of the seditious
murderer Barabbas; and Pilate, hearkening to the voice of the multitude,
won over by the chief priests, delivers Jesus to be crucified. The Lord
submits to the insults of the soldiers, who mingle the pride and
insolence of their class with the hard-heartedness of the executioner
whose function they performed. Sad specimens of our nature! The Christ
who came to save them was, for the moment, under their power. He used
His own power, not to save Himself, but to deliver others from that of
the enemy. At length they lead Him away to Golgotha to crucify Him.
There they offer Him a soporific mixture, which He refuses; and they
crucify Him with two thieves, one on His right hand and the other on His
left, thus accomplishing (for it was all they did or could do)
everything that was written concerning the Lord. It was now the Jews'
and the priests' hour; they had, alas for them! the desire of their
heart. And they make manifest, without knowing it, the glory and
perfection of Jesus. The temple could not rise again without being thus
cast down; and, as instruments, they established the fact which He had
then announced. Farther, He saved others and not Himself. These are the
two parts of the perfection of the death of Christ with reference to
man.

But, whatever might be the thoughts of Christ and His sufferings with
regard to men (those dogs, those bulls of Bashan), the work which He had
to accomplish contained depths far beyond those outward things. Darkness
covered the earth divine and sympathetic testimony of that which, with
far deeper gloom, covered the soul of Jesus, forsaken of God for sin,
but thus displaying incomparably more than at any other time, His
absolute perfection; while the darkness marked, in an external sign, His
entire separation from outward things, the whole work being between Him
and God alone, according to the perfectness of both. All passed between
Him and His God. Little understood by others, all is between Himself and
God: and crying again with a loud voice, He gives up the ghost. His
service was completed. What more had He to do in a world wherein He only
lived to accomplish the will of God? All was finished, and He
necessarily departs. I do not speak of physical necessity, for He still
retained His strength; but, morally rejected by the world, there was no
longer room in it for His mercy towards it: the will of God was by
Himself entirely fulfilled. He had drunk in His soul the cup of death
and of judgment for sin. There was nothing left Him but the act of
dying; and He expires, obedient to the end, in order to commence in
another world (whether for His soul separate from the body, or in glory)
a life where evil could never enter, and where the new man will be
perfectly happy in the presence of God.

His service was completed. His obedience had its term in death His
obedience, and therefore His life, as carried on in the midst of
sinners. What would a life have meant in which there was no more
obedience to be fulfilled? In dying now His obedience was perfected, and
He dies. The way into the holiest is now opened the veil is rent from
top to bottom. The Gentile centurion confesses, in the death of Jesus,
the Person of the Son of God. Until then, the Messiah and Judaism went
together. In His death Judaism rejects Him, and He is the Saviour of the
world. The veil no longer conceals God. In this respect it was all
Judaism could do. The manifestation of perfect grace is there for the
Gentile, who acknowledged because Jesus gave up His life with a cry that
proved the existence of so much strength that the Prince of life, the
Son of God, was there. Pilate also is astonished that He is already
dead. He only believes it when certified of its truth by the centurion.
As to faith far from grace, and even from human justice he did not
trouble himself at all on that point.

The death of Jesus did not tear Him from the hearts of those feeble ones
who loved Him (who perhaps had not been in the conflict, but whom grace
had now brought out from their retreat): those pious women who had
followed Him and had often ministered to His wants, and Joseph, who,
although touched in conscience, had not followed Him, until now,
strengthened at the last by the testimony of the grace and perfection of
Jesus (the integrity of the counsellor finding in the circumstances, not
an occasion of fear, but that which induced him to declare himself)
these women and Joseph are alike occupied about the body of Jesus. This
tabernacle of the Son of God is not left without those services which
were due from man to Him who had just quitted it. Moreover the
providence of God, as well as His operation in their hearts, had
prepared for all this. The body of Jesus is laid in the tomb, and they
all wait for the end of the sabbath to perform their service to it. The
women had taken knowledge of the place.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 16](mar016)

</div>
