<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Mark Index](mar.md)  
  [Previous](mar008)  [Next](mar010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001.md)

In Matthew we saw the transfiguration announced in terms that related to
the subject of that Gospel the rejected Christ taking His glorious
position as Son of man. In each of the Gospels it is in connection with
the moment when this transition is clearly set forth; but in each case
with a particular character. In Mark we have seen the humble and devoted
service of Christ in proclaiming the kingdom, whatever might be the
divine glory that shone through His humiliation. Accordingly the
manifestation of the transition to glory is here announced as the coming
of the kingdom in power. There is nothing that very particularly
distinguishes the recital here from that in Matthew, excepting that the
isolation of Jesus and the three disciples at this moment is more
strongly marked in Verse 2 ([Mar 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#002).md),
and that the facts are related without addition. The Lord afterwards
charges them to tell no one what they had seen, until after His
resurrection from among the dead.

We may remark here, that it is indeed the kingdom in power that is
manifested. It is not the power of the Holy Ghost bringing the sinner as
a holy member of the body into connection with Christ the Head,
revealing to it the heavenly glory of Christ as He is at the right hand
of the Father. Christ is on earth. He is there in connection with the
great witnesses of the Jewish economy (the law and prophecy), but
witnesses who give place entirely to Him, while participating with Him
in the glory of the kingdom. But Christ is manifested in glory on the
earth the man in glory is recognised as Son of God, as He is known in
the cloud. It was the glory as it shall be manifested on the earth, the
glory of the kingdom, and God is still in the cloud, though revealing
His glory in it. This is not our position as yet without a veil; only
that the veil as to our relationship with God is rent from top to
bottom, and we have boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of
Christ. But this is spiritual privilege, not public display our veil as
to that, our body, is not rent; but Christ's, as the title of entrance,
is. \[See Note \#9\]

But this position of glory could not be taken by the Lord, nor the
glorious reign be established, excepting in a new order of things.
Christ must rise from the dead to establish it. It did not accord with
His presentation as Messiah, as He then was. Therefore He commands His
disciples not to make it known till after His resurrection. It would
then be a powerful confirmation of the doctrine of the kingdom in glory.
This manifestation of the glory confirmed the faith of the disciples at
that time (as Gethsemane taught them the reality of His sufferings, and
of His conflicts with the prince of darkness); and would afterwards form
a subject of their testimony, and its confirmation, when Christ should
have taken His new position.

We may see the character of this manifestation, and its relation to the
earthly kingdom of glory of which the prophets had spoken, in [Pe2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019.md). Read there, "We have the word of
prophecy confirmed."

The disciples had stopped at the threshold. In fact, although their eyes
were opened, they saw "men as trees walking." What, they questioned
between themselves, could this "rising from among the dead" mean?
Resurrection was known to them; all the sect of the Pharisees believed
in it. But this power which delivered from the condition in which man
and even the saints were found, implying too that others were still left
in it when that power was exercised, of this they were totally ignorant.
That there was a resurrection in which God would raise up all the dead
at the last day, they had no doubt. But that the Son of man was the
resurrection and the life the absolute triumph over death of the last
Adam, the Son of God having life in Himself, manifested by His
resurrection from among the dead (a deliverance that shall be
accomplished in the saints also in due time), of this they understood
nothing. Doubtless they received the Lord's words as true, as having
authority; but His meaning was incomprehensible to them.

Now unbelief never fails to find out difficulties that justify it in its
own eyes which refuse to perceive the divine proofs of the truth
difficulties great enough in appearance, and which may trouble the minds
of those who, through grace, are inclined to believe, or who have
believed, but are still weak in the faith.

The prophets had said that Elias must first come. The scribes insisted
on this. Struck with the glory that undeniably confirmed the pretensions
of Christ, the disciples speak to Him of this difficulty. The conviction
which the sight of the glory brought to their mind, made them confess
the difficulty with regard to which they had previously been silent, not
daring to bring it forward. But now the proof is strong enough to
embolden them to face the difficulty.

In fact, the word spoke of it, and Jesus accepts it as the truth; Elias
was to come and restore all things. And he shall indeed come before the
manifestation of the glory of the Son of man; but first of all the Son
of man must suffer and be rejected. This also was written, as well as
the mission of Elias. Moreover, before this manifestation of Christ,
which tested the Jews as to their responsibility, God had not failed to
supply them with a testimony according to the spirit and power of Elias;
and they had ill-treated him as they listed. It was written that the Son
of man should suffer before His glory, as truly as that Elias should
come. However, as we have said, in point of testimony to the Jews, he
who took morally the place of Elias had come. They had treated him as
they were going to treat the Lord. Thus also John had said that he was
not Elias, and he quotes Isaiah 40, which speaks of the testimony; but
he never quotes Malachi 4, which relates to Elias personally. The Lord
([Mat 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#010).md) applies [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001.md); but John, Isaiah.

Come down from the mountain, the people rush towards Him, astonished
apparently at this mysterious absence from His disciples, and salute Him
with the reverence with which His whole life had inspired them. But that
which had taken place in His absence only confirmed the solemn truth
that He must depart, which had just been demonstrated by a more glorious
testimony. The remnant even, they who believed, knew not how to profit
by the power which was now on earth. The faith of those even who
believed did not realise the presence of the Messiah the power of
Jehovah, the Healer of Israel: wherefore then still remain among the
people and the disciples? The poor father expresses his affliction in a
touching manner, in words that shew a heart brought by the sense of its
need to a right condition, but very weak in faith. The miserable state
of his child is related, and his heart presents a true picture of the
condition of the remnant faith that required support on account of the
unbelief under which it was buried. Israel was in no better condition
than the poor child. But power was present, capable of all things. That
was not the difficulty. Is there faith to profit by it? was the
question. "If thou canst," said the afflicted father to Jesus. "If thou
canst (replied the Lord) applies to thy faith; "if thou canst believe,
all things are possible." The poor father, true of heart, confesses his
own state with grief, and seeks, in the goodness of Christ, help for his
failure. Thus the position of Israel was plainly shewn forth. Almighty
power was present to heal them to deliver them from the power of Satan.
It was to be done through faith, for the soul was to return to God. And
there was faith in those who, touched by the testimony of His power, and
moved by the grace of God, sought in Jesus the remedy for their woes and
the foundation for their hopes. Their faith was weak and wavering; but
wherever it existed, Jesus acted with the sovereign power of His own
grace, and of the goodness of God that finds its measure in itself.
However far unbelief may have gone in those who should profit by the
grace of a dispensation, wherever there is a need to meet, Jesus answers
to it when He is looked to. And this is a great mercy and encouragement
for us.

Nevertheless, for this power to be exercised by man himself (to which
God called him), it was needful that he should draw very near to God
that he to whom it was committed should accustom himself to communion
with God, by withdrawing from all that connected him with the world and
the flesh.

Let us here recapitulate the principles of this narrative with respect
to their general application. The Lord, who was going away, to be seen
no more of the world until He came in glory, finds, on coming down from
the mount of transfiguration, a case of the power of Satan over man,
over the Jewish people. It had continued from almost the commencement of
the child's existence. The faith that recognises the intervention of God
in Christ, and takes shelter in it from present evil, is weak and
wavering, pre-occupied with the evil, the sight of which conceals in
great measure the power that masters and takes it away. Still the sense
of need is deep enough to make it have recourse to that power.

It is the unbelief which knows not how to count on the power that is
present, which puts an end to the relations of Christ with man. It is
not man's misery that does so it was this that brought Him down to
earth. But the almighty power is present it only needs faith to profit
by it. But if the heart, on account of the enemy's power, turns to
Jesus, it can (thank God) bring its unbelief to Him as well as all the
rest. There is love and power in Him for every kind of weakness. The
people crowd around, attracted by the sight of the enemy's power. Can
the Lord heal him? But can he allow the testimony of Satan's power to
invade their hearts? This is the curiosity of men whose imagination is
filled with the effect of the enemy's presence. But, whatever might be
the unbelief of man, Christ was present, the testimony of a power that,
in love to men, destroyed the effects of the power of the enemy. The
people gather round Jesus sees it, and with a word casts out the enemy.
He acts according to the necessity of His power, and the purposes of the
love of God. Thus the effort of the enemy occasioned the intervention of
Jesus, which the weakness of the father's faith tended to arrest.
Nevertheless, if we lay all our infirmity, as well as our misery, before
Christ, He answers according to the fulness of His power. On the other
hand, if the flesh meddles with the thoughts of faith, it hinders
intelligence in the ways of God. While journeying, Christ explained His
death and His new condition in resurrection. Why blame the lack of
intelligence which hid all this from them, and filled their minds with
ideas of earthly and Messianic glory? The secret of their want of
intelligence lay here. He had told them plainly; but on the way they
disputed among themselves which should have the first place in the
kingdom. The thoughts of the flesh filled their heart, in regard to
Jesus, with exactly the opposite of that which engaged the mind of God
respecting Him. Infirmity, presented to Jesus, finds an answer in power
and in sovereign grace; the flesh and its desires hide from us, even
when thinking of Him, all the import of the thoughts of God. It was
their own glory they were seeking in the kingdom; the cross the true
path to glory was unintelligible to them.

After this the Lord resumes with His disciples the great subject before
Him at this moment; and which was, in every way, that which now must be
decided. He was to be rejected; and He separates Himself from the
multitude, with His disciples, to instruct them on this point.
Pre-occupied with His glory, with His rights as Messiah, they do not
understand it Their faith even, such as it was, blinds them to all
beyond that; because, while rightly attaching itself to the Person of
Christ, it connected or rather, their own hearts, in which the faith
existed, connected with Christ the accomplishment of that which their
flesh desired and sought in Him for themselves. How subtle is the heart!
This betrays itself in their dispute for pre-eminence. Their faith is
too weak to bear elucidations that contradicted their ideas ([Mar
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#032).md). These ideas are manifested
without disguise among themselves. Jesus reproves them, and gives them a
little child for an example, as He had so often done before. He that
would follow Christ must have a spirit quite opposite to that of the
world a spirit belonging to that which was weak and despised by the
pride of the world. In receiving such a one, they would receive Christ;
in receiving Christ, they would receive the Father. It was eternal
things that were in question, and the spirit of a man must then be the
spirit of a child.

The world was so contrary to Christ , that he who was not against Him
was for Him. \[See Note \#10\] The Son of man was to be rejected. Faith
in His Person was the thing, not now individual service to Him. Alas!
the disciples were still thinking of themselves: "He followeth not us."
They must share His rejection; and if any one gave them a cup of cold
water, God would remember it. Whatever would cause them to stumble in
their walk, were it even their own right eye or hand, they would do well
to cut off; for it was not the things of an earthly Messiah that were in
question, but the things of eternity. And all should be tested by the
perfect holiness of God, and that in judgment by one means or another.
Every one should be salted with fire the good and the bad. Where there
was life, the fire would only consume the flesh; for when we are judged,
we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the
world. If the judgment reaches the wicked (and assuredly it shall reach
them), it is condemnation a fire that is not quenched. But, for the
good, there was also something else: they should be salted with salt.
Those who were consecrated to God, whose life was an offering to Him,
should not lack the power of holy grace, which binds the soul to God and
inwardly preserves it from evil. Salt is not the gentleness that pleases
(which grace produces without doubt), but that energy of God within us
which connects everything in us with God, and dedicates the heart to
Him, binding it to Him in the sense of obligation and of desire,
rejecting all in oneself that is contrary to Him (obligation that flows
from grace, but which acts all the more powerfully on that account).
Thus, practically, it was distinctive grace, the energy of holiness,
which separates from all evil; but by setting apart for God. Salt was
good: here the effect produced in the soul, the condition of the soul,
is so called, as well as the grace that produces this condition. Thus
they who offered themselves to God were set apart for Him; they were the
salt of the earth. But if the salt lose its savour, wherewith can it be
salted? It is used for seasoning other things; but if the salt needs it
for itself, there is nothing left that can salt it. So would it be with
Christians; if they who were of Christ did not render this testimony,
where should anything be found, apart from Christians, to render it to
them and produce it in them? Now this sense of obligation to God which
separates from evil, this judgment of all evil in the heart, must be in
oneself. It is not a question of judging others, but of placing oneself
before God, thus becoming the salt, having it in oneself. With regard to
others, one must seek peace; and real separation from all evil is that
which enables us to walk in peace together.

In a word, Christians were to keep themselves separate from evil and
near to God in themselves; and to walk with God in peace among one
another.

No instruction could be more plain, more important, more valuable. It
judges, it directs, the whole christian life in a few words.

But the end of the Lord's service drew near. Having described in these
principles the exigencies of eternity and the character of christian
life, He brings back all the relations of God with man to their original
elements, setting aside the world and its glory, and Jewish glory also,
as to its immediate accomplishment, and pointing out the path of eternal
life in the cross, and in the saving power of God. Nevertheless He takes
the place of obedience Himself, and of service the true place of man in
the midst of all this: God Himself being introduced on the other hand,
in His proper character as God, in His nature and in His divine rights;
the special glory that belongs to dispensations, and the relationships
proper to them, being left out.

Note \#9

The entrance into the cloud does not form part of the revelation here.
We find it in Luke. The cloud for Israel was the place where God dwelt;
it was (Matthew 17) a bright cloud.

Note \#10

Some have difficulty in reconciling this with: "Forbid him not, he that
is not with me is against me." But they coalesce when the main point is
seen; Christ was a divine criterion of man's state, and brought things
to an issue. The world was wholly, absolutely, against Him. If a man was
not, there was no middle state, he was for Him. But things being brought
to an issue, if a man was not for Him, he was of the world, and so
against Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 10](mar010.md)

</div>
