<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar011)  [Next](mar013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001)

The Lord afterwards gives the substance of the whole law, as the
principle of blessing between the creature and God, and that which
formed the touchstone for the heart in the rejection of Christ. I say
for the heart, because the trial was really there, although it was in
the understanding that it appeared. Even when there were really orthodox
principles (Christ being rejected), the heart that was not attached to
His Person could not follow Him in the path to which His rejection led.
The system of God's counsels which depended on that rejection was a
difficulty. Those who were attached to His Person followed Him, and
found themselves in it, without having well understood it beforehand.
Thus the Lord gives the pith of the law the whole law as essentially
divine instruction and the point at which the counsels of God are
transplanted into the new scene, where they will be fulfilled apart from
the wickedness or ill will of man. So that in these few Verses ([Mar
12:28-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028)), the law and the Son of
David are presented, and the latter taking His place as Son of man the
Lord at the right hand of God. This was the secret of all that was going
on. The union of His body, the assembly, with Himself was all that
remained behind. Only in Mark the Prophet recognises the moral
condition, under the law, that tends towards entrance into the kingdom
([Mar 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#034)). This scribe had the
spirit of understanding.

The picture of the condition that would bring in judgment, which we find
in Matthew 23, is not given here (see Synopsis about Matthew 23). It was
not His subject. Jesus, still as the Prophet; warns His disciples
morally; but the judgment of Israel, for rejecting the Son of David, is
not here before His eyes in the same manner (that is to say, it is not
the subject of which the Holy Ghost is here speaking). The real
character of the scribes' devoutness is pointed out, and the disciples
are warned against them. The Lord makes them feel also what it is that,
in the eyes of God, gives true value to the offerings that were brought
to the temple.

Note \#15

That is man under the old covenant, flesh under divine requirement, and
no fruit to grow on it for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 13](mar013)

</div>
