<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat000)  [Next](mat002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

[Matthew 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 1:1</span></span>

The object of the Spirit of God, in this Gospel, being to present
Jehovah as fulfilling the promises made to Israel, and the prophecies
that relate to the Messiah (and no one can fail to be struck with the
number of references to their fulfilment), He commences with the
genealogy of the Lord, starting from David and Abraham, the two stocks
from which the Messianic genealogy sprang, and to which the promises had
been made. The genealogy is divided into three periods, conformably to
three great divisions of the history of the people: from Abraham to the
establishment of royalty, in the person of David; from the establishment
of royalty to the captivity; and from the captivity to Jesus.

We may observe that the Holy Ghost mentions, in this genealogy, the
grievous sins committed by the persons whose names are given, magnifying
the sovereign grace of God who could bestow a Saviour in connection with
such sins as those of Judah, with a poor Moabitess brought in amidst His
people, and with crimes like those of David.

It is the legal genealogy which is given here, that is to say, the
genealogy of Joseph, of whom Christ was the rightful heir according to
Jewish law. The evangelist has omitted three kings of the parentage of
Ahab, in order to have the fourteen generations in each period. Jehoahaz
and Jehoiakim are also omitted. The object of the genealogy is not at
all affected by this circumstance. The point was to give it as
recognised by the Jews, and all the kings were well known to all.

The evangelist briefly relates the facts concerning the birth of Jesus
facts which are of infinite and eternal importance, not only to the
Jews, who were immediately interested in them, but to ourselves facts in
which God has deigned to link His own glory with our interests, with
man.

Mary was betrothed to Joseph. Her posterity was consequently legally
that of Joseph, as to the rights of inheritance; but the child she
carried in her womb was of divine origin, conceived by the power of the
Holy Ghost. The angel of Jehovah is sent, as the instrument of
providence, to satisfy the tender conscience and upright heart of
Joseph, by communicating to him that that which Mary had conceived was
of the Holy Ghost.

We may remark here, that the angel on this occasion addresses Joseph as
"son of David." The Holy Ghost thus draws our attention to the
relationship of Joseph (the reputed father of Jesus) to David, Mary
being called his wife. The angel gives at the same time the name of
Jesus (that is, Jehovah the Saviour) to the child that should be born.
He applies this name to the deliverance of Israel from the condition
into which sin had plunged them. \[See Note \#2\] All these
circumstances happened, in order to fulfil that which Jehovah had said
by the mouth of His prophet, "Behold a the virgin shall be with child,
and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel,
which being interpreted is, God with us."

Here then is that which the Spirit of God sets before us in these few
verses: Jesus, the Son of David, conceived by the power of the Holy
Ghost; Jehovah, the Saviour, who delivers Israel from their sins; God
with them; He who accomplished those marvellous prophecies which, more
or less plainly, drew the outline that the Lord Jesus alone could fill
up.

Joseph, a just man, simple in heart and obedient, discerns without
difficulty the revelation of the Lord, and obeys it.

These titles stamp the character of this Gospel, that is, of the way
Christ is presented in it. And how wonderful this revelation of Him by
whom the words and promises of Jehovah were to be fulfilled! What a
groundwork of truth for the understanding of what this glorious and
mysterious Person was, of whom the Old Testament had said enough to
awaken the desires and to confound the minds of the people to whom He
was given!

Born of a woman, born under the law, heir to all the rights of David
according to the flesh, also the Son of God, Jehovah the Saviour, God
with His people: who could comprehend or fathom the mystery of His
nature in whom all these things were combined? His life in fact, as we
shall see, displays the obedience of the perfect man, the perfections
and the power of God.

The titles which we have just named, and which we read in [Mat
1:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020), are connected with His glory
in the midst of Israel that is to say, the heir of David, Jesus the
Saviour of His people, and Emmanuel. His birth of the Holy Ghost
accomplished [Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007) with regard to
Him as a man born on the earth. The name of Jesus, and His conception by
the power of the Holy Ghost, no doubt go beyond this relationship, but
are linked also in an especial manner with His position in Israel. \[See
Note \#3\]

Note \#2

It is written, "For he shall save his people," thus plainly shewing the
title of Jehovah contained in the word Jesus or Jehoshua. For Israel was
the people of the Lord, that is, of Jehovah.

Note \#3

The wider relationship is more distinctively given in the Gospel of
Luke, where His genealogy is traced up to Adam; but here the title of
Son of man is specially appropriate.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 2](mat002)

</div>
