<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat017)  [Next](mat019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001)

In chapter 18 the great principles proper to the new order of things are
made known to the disciples. Let us search a little into these sweet and
precious instructions of the Lord.

They may be looked at in two ways. They reveal the ways of God with
regard to that which was to take the place of the Lord upon earth, as a
testimony to grace and truth. Besides this, they depict the character
which is in itself the true testimony to be rendered.

This chapter supposes Christ rejected and absent, the glory of chapter
17 not yet come. It passes over chapter 17 to connect itself with
chapter 16 (except so far as the last Verses of chapter 17 give a
practical testimony to His abdication of His true rights until God
should vindicate them). The Lord speaks of the two subjects contained in
chapter 16, the kingdom and the church.

That which would be proper for the kingdom was the meekness of a little
child, which is unable to assert its own rights in the face of a world
that passes it by the spirit of dependence and humility. They must
become as little children. In the absence of their rejected Lord this
was the spirit that became His followers. He who received a little child
in the name of Jesus received Himself. On the other hand, he who put a
stumbling-block in the way of one of those little ones who believed in
Jesus \[See Note \#53\] should be visited with the most terrible
judgment. Alas! the world do this; but woe unto the world on that
account. As to the disciples, if that which they most valued became a
snare to them, they must pluck it out and cut it off must exercise the
utmost carefulness in grace not to be a snare to a little one believing
in Christ, and the most unrelenting severity as to themselves, in
whatever might be a snare to them. Loss of what was most precious here
was nothing, compared with their eternal condition in another world; for
that was in question now, and sin could have no place in God's house.
Care for others, even the weakest, severity with self was the rule of
the kingdom that no snare or evil might be. As to offence, full grace in
forgiveness. They were not to despise these little ones; for if unable
to force their own way in this world, they were the objects of the
Father's special favour, as those who, in earthly courts, had the
peculiar privilege of seeing the king's face. Not that there was no sin
in them, but that the Father did not despise those that were far from
Him. The Son of man was come to save the lost. \[See Note \#54\] And it
was not the Father's will that one of these little ones should perish.
He spoke, I doubt not, of little children like those whom He took in His
arms; but He inculcates on His disciples the spirit of humility and
dependence on the one hand, and on the other, the spirit of the Father,
which they were to imitate in order to be truly the children of the
kingdom; and not to walk in the spirit of man, who seeks to maintain his
place and his own importance, but to humble themselves and submit to
contumely; and at the same time (and this is true glory) to imitate the
Father, who considers the lowly and admits them into His presence. The
Son of man was come on behalf of the worthless. This is the spirit of
grace spoken of at the end of chapter 5. It is the spirit of the
kingdom.

But the assembly more especially was to occupy the place of Christ on
earth. With respect to offences against oneself, this same spirit of
meekness became His disciple; he was to gain his brother. If the latter
would hearken, the thing was to be buried in the heart of the one whom
he had offended; if not, two or three more were then to be taken with
him by the offended person to reach his conscience, or serve as
witnesses; but if these appointed means were unavailing, it must be made
known to the assembly; and if this did not produce submission, he who
had done the wrong should be to him as a stranger, as a heathen and a
publican was to Israel. The public discipline of the assembly is not
treated of here, but the spirit in which Christians were to walk. If the
offender bowed when spoken to, even seventy times seven times a day, he
was to be forgiven. But though church discipline be not spoken of, we
see that the assembly took the place of Israel on earth. The without and
within henceforth applied to it. Heaven would ratify that which the
assembly bound on earth, and the Father would grant the prayer of two or
three who should agree together in making their request; for Christ
would be in the midst wherever two or three should be gathered together
in or to His name. \[See Note \#55\] Thus, for decisions, for prayers,
they were as Christ on the earth, for Christ Himself was there with
them. Solemn truth! immense favour, bestowed on two or three when really
gathered together in His name; but which forms asubject of the deepest
grief when this unity is pretended to, while the reality is not there.
\[See Note \#56\]

Another element of the character proper to the kingdom, which had been
manifested in God and in Christ, is pardoning grace. In this also the
children of the kingdom are to be imitators of God, and always to
forgive. This refers only to wrongs done to oneself, and not to public
discipline. We must pardon to the end, or rather, there must be no end;
even as God has forgiven us all things. At the same time, I believe that
the dispensations of God to the Jews are here described. They had not
only broken the law, but they had slain the Son of God. Christ
interceded for them, saying, "Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do." In answer to this prayer, a provisional pardon was
preached by the Holy Ghost, through the mouth of Peter. But this grace
too was rejected. When it was a question of shewing grace to the
Gentiles, who, no doubt, owed them the hundred pence, they would not
hear of it, and they are given up to punishment, \[See Note \#57\] until
the Lord can say, "They have received double for all their sins."

In a word, the spirit of the kingdom is not outward power, but
lowliness; but in this condition there is nearness to the Father, and
then it is easy to be meek and humble in this world. One who has tasted
the favour of God will not seek greatness on earth; he is imbued with
the spirit of grace, he cherishes the lowly, he pardons those who have
wronged him, he is near God, and resembles Him in his ways. The same
spirit of grace reigns, whether in the assembly or in its members. It
alone represents Christ on the earth; and to it relate those regulations
which are founded on the acceptance of a people as belonging unto God.
Two or three really gathered together in the name of Jesus act with His
authority, and enjoy His privileges with the Father, for Jesus Himself
is there in their midst.

Note \#53

The Lord here distinguishes a believing little one. In the other verses,
He speaks of a little child, making its character, as such, a model of
that of the Christian in this world.

Note \#54

As doctrine, the sinful condition of the child, and its need of the
sacrifice of Christ, are dearly expressed here. He does not say, "Seek,"
as to them. The employing the parable of the lost sheep is striking
here.

Note \#55

It is important to call to mind here, that while the Holy Ghost is
personally fully recognised in Matthew, as in the birth of the Lord, and
(chapter 10) as acting and speaking in the disciples in their service,
as a divine Person, as it is ever from Him alone we can act rightly the
coming of the Holy Ghost, in the order of divine dispensation, forms no
part of the teaching of this gospel, though recognised as a fact in
chapter 10. The view of Christ in Matthew closes with His resurrection,
and the Jewish body are sent out from Galilee as an accepted body to the
world to evangelise the Gentiles, and He declares He will be with them
to the end of the age. So here He is in the midst of two or three
gathered to His name. The church here is not the body by the baptism of
the Holy Ghost; it is not the house where the Holy Ghost dwells on
earth; but where the two or three meet to His name, there Christ is. Now
I do not doubt that all good from life on, and the word of life, comes
from the Spirit, but this is another thing, and the assembly here is not
the body, nor the house, through the coming down of the Holy Ghost. This
was a subsequent teaching and revelation, and remains blessedly true;
but it is Christ in the midst of those assembled to His name Even in
chapter 16 it is He builds, but that is another thing. Of course it is
spiritually He is present.

Note \#56

It is very striking to find here, that the only succession in the office
of binding and loosing which Heaven sanctions is that of two or three
assembled in Christ's name.

Note \#57

This giving up, and the formal opening into the intermediate heavenly
place connected with the Son of man in glory are in Acts 7, where
Stephen recites their history from Abraham, the first called as root of
promise, to that day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 19](mat019)

</div>
