<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat004)  [Next](mat006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001)

He then gathers around Him those who were definitively to follow Him in
His ministry and His temptations; and, at His call, to link their
portion and their lot with His, forsaking all beside.

The strong man was bound, so that Jesus could spoil his goods, and
proclaim the kingdom with proofs of that power which were able to
establish it.

Two things are then brought forward in the Gospel narrative. First, the
power which accompanies the proclamation of the kingdom. In two or three
verses, \[See Note \#16\] without other detail, this fact is announced.
The proclamation of the kingdom is attended with acts of power that
excite the attention of the whole country, the whole extent of the
ancient territory of Israel. Jesus appears before them invested with
this power. Secondly (chapters 5-7), the character of the kingdom is
announced in the sermon on the Mount, as well as that of the persons who
should have part in it (the Father's name withal being revealed). That
is, the Lord had announced the coming kingdom, and with the present
power of goodness, having overcome the adversary; and then shews what
were the true characters according to which it would be set up, and who
could enter, and how. Redemption is not spoken of in it; but the
character and nature of the kingdom, and who could enter. This clearly
shews the moral position which this sermon holds in the Lord's teaching.

It is evident that, in all this part of the Gospel, it is the Lord's
position which is the subject of the teaching of the Spirit, and not the
details of His life. Details come after, in order fully to exhibit what
He was in the midst of Israel, His relations with that people, and His
path in the power of the Spirit which led to the rupture between the Son
of David and the people who ought to have received Him. The attention of
the whole country being thus engaged by His mighty acts, the Lord sets
before His disciples but in the hearing of the people the principles of
His kingdom.

This discourse may be divided into the following parts: \[See Note
\#17\] The character and the portion of those who should be in the
kingdom ([Mat 5:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001)). Their position
in the world ([Mat 5:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013)). The
connection between the principles of the kingdom and the law ([Mat
5:17-48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)). \[See Note \#18\] The spirit
in which His disciples should perform good works ([Mat
6:1-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)). Separation from the spirit of
the world and from its anxieties ([Mat
6:19-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#019)). The spirit of their relation
with others ([Mat 7:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)). The
confidence in God which became them ([Mat
7:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)). The energy that should
characterise them, in order that they might enter into the kingdom; not
however merely enter, many would seek to do that, but according to those
principles which made it difficult for man, according to God the strait
gate; and then, the means of discerning those who would seek to deceive
them, as well as the watchfulness needed that they might not be deceived
([Mat 7:13-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)).

Real and practical obedience to His sayings, the true wisdom of those
that hear His words ([Mat 7:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024)).

There is another principle that characterises this discourse, and that
is the introduction of the Father's name. Jesus puts His disciples in
connection with His Father, as their Father. He reveals to them the
Father's name, in order that they may be in relation with Him, and that
they may act in accordance with that which He is.

Note \#16

It is striking that the whole ministry of the Lord is recounted in one
Verse ([Mat 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023)). All the subsequent
statements are facts, having a special moral import, shewing what was
passing amongst the people in grace onward to His rejection, not a
proper consecutive history. It stamps the character of Matthew very
clearly.

Note \#17

In the text I have given a division which may assist in a practical
application of the sermon on the Mount. With respect to the subjects
contained in it, it might perhaps, though the difference is not very
great, be still better divided thus: [Mat
5:1-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001) contains the complete picture
of the character and position of the remnant who received His
instructions their position, as it should be, according to the mind of
God. This is complete in itself.

[Mat 5:17-48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017) establish the authority
of the law, which should have regulated the conduct of the faithful
until the introduction of the kingdom; the law which they ought to have
fulfilled, as well as the words of the prophets, in order that they (the
remnant) should be placed on this new ground; and the despisal of which
would exclude whoever was guilty of it from the kingdom; for Christ is
speaking, not as in the kingdom, but as announcing it as near to come.
But, while thus establishing the authority of the law, He takes up the
two great elements of evil, treated of only in outward acts in the law,
violence and corruption, and judges the evil in the heart ([Mat
5:22-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)), and at all cost to get rid
of it and every occasion of it, thus shewing what was to be the conduct
of His disciples, and their state of soul that which was to characterise
them as such. The Lord then takes up certain things borne with by God in
Israel, and ordered according to what they could bear. Thus was now
brought into the light of a true moral estimate, divorce marriage being
the divinely given basis of all human relationships and swearing or
vowing, the action of man's will in relationship to God; then patience
of evil, and fulness of grace, His own blessed character, and carrying
with it the moral title to what was His living place sons of their
Father who was in heaven. Instead of weakening that which God required
under the law, He would not only have it observed until its fulfilment,
but that His disciples should be perfect even as their Father in heaven
was perfect. This adds the revelation of the Father, to the moral walk
and state which suited the character of sons as it was revealed in
Christ.

Chapter 6. We have the motives, the object, which should govern the
heart in doing good deeds, in living a religious life. Their eye should
be on their Father. This is individual.

Chapter 7. This chapter is essentially occupied with the intercourse
that would be suitable between His own people and others not to judge
their brethren and to beware of the profane. He then exhorts them to
confidence in asking their Father for what they needed, and instructs
them to act towards others with the same grace that they would wish
shewn to themselves. This is founded on the knowledge of the goodness of
the Father. Finally, He exhorts them to the energy that will enter in at
the strait gate, and choose the way of God, cost what it may (for many
would like to enter into the kingdom, but not by that gate); and He
warns them with respect to those who would seek to deceive them by
pretending to have the word of God. It is not only our own hearts that
we have to fear, and positive evil, when we would follow the Lord, but
also the devices of the enemy and his agents. But their fruits will
betray them.

Note \#18

It is important however to remark that there is no general
spiritualisation of the law, as is often stated. The two great
principles of immorality amongst men are treated of (violence and
corrupt lust), to which are added voluntary oaths. In these the
exigencies of the law and what Christ required are contrasted.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 6](mat006)

</div>
