<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat027)  [Next](mar000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001.md)

I shall examine the details of the resurrection elsewhere Here I only
consider its bearing in this Gospel. The sabbath ended (Saturday evening
with us chapter 28), the two Marys come to see the sepulchre. At this
moment that was all they did. Verses 1-2 ([Mat
28:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001).md) are not consecutive, 2-4 ([Mat
28:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#002).md) go together. When the
earthquake and its attendant circumstances took place, no one was there
except the soldiers. At night all was secure. The disciples knew nothing
of it in the morning. When the women arrived at dawn, the angel who sat
at the door of the sepulchre re-assured them with the tidings of the
Lord's resurrection. The angel of the Lord had come down and opened the
door of the tomb, which man had closed with every possible precaution.
\[See Note \#90\] They had in truth only guaranteed by unexceptionable
witnesses the truth of the apostles' preaching, by placing the soldiers
there. The women, by their visit the evening before, and in the morning
when the angel spoke to them, received a full assurance to faith of the
fact of His resurrection. All that is presented here is the facts. The
women had been there in the evening. The intervention of the angel
certified to the soldiers the true character of His coming forth from
the tomb; and the visit of the women in the morning established the fact
of His resurrection as an object of faith to themselves. They go and
announce it to the disciples, who so far from having done that which the
Jews imputed to them did not even believe the assertions of the women.
Jesus Himself appears to the women who were returning from the
sepulchre, having believed the words of the angel.

As I have already said, Jesus connects Himself with His former work
among the poor of the flock, afar from the seat of Jewish tradition, and
from the temple, and from all that linked the people with God according
to the old covenant. He appoints His disciples to meet Him there, and
there they find Him and recognise Him; and it is there, in this former
scene of the labours of Christ, according to Isaiah 8 and 9, that they
receive their commission from Him. Hence we have not the ascension of
Christ at all in this Gospel, but all power is given unto Him in heaven
and in earth, and accordingly the commission given to His disciples
extends to all nations (Gentiles). To them they were to proclaim His
rights, and make disciples of them.

It was not however the name of the Lord only, nor in connection with His
throne at Jerusalem. Lord of heaven and earth, His disciples were to
proclaim Him throughout all nations, founding their doctrine on the
confession of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. They were
to teach, not the law, but the precepts of Jesus. He would be with them,
with the disciples who thus confessed Him, unto the end of the age. It
is this which connects all that will be accomplished until Christ sits
upon the great white throne with the testimony that He Himself rendered
on the earth in the midst of Israel. It is the testimony of the kingdom,
and of its Head, once rejected by a people that knew Him not. It links
the testimony to the nations with a remnant in Israel owning Jesus as
Messiah but now risen from the dead, as He had said, but not to a Christ
known as ascended on high. Nor does it present Jesus alone, nor Jehovah,
as any longer the subject of testimony, but the revelation of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost as the holy name by which the nations were connected
with God.

Note \#90

But I apprehend the Lord Jesus had left the tomb before the stone was
rolled away; that was for mortal eyes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Introduction](mar000.md)

</div>
