<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat008)  [Next](mat010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001.md)

In the following chapter (chapter 9), while acting in the character and
according to the power of Jehovah (as we read in Psalm 103), "Who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, who healeth all thy diseases"; it is the
actual grace in itself towards and for them, in which He came, which is
presented. It gives the character of His ministry, as the previous one
gives the dignity of His Person and the bearing of what He was. He
presents Himself to Israel as their true Redeemer and Deliverer; and, to
prove His title (which unbelief already opposed) to be this blessing to
Israel, and to pardon all their iniquities which raised a barrier
between them and their God, He accomplishes the second part of the
verse, and heals the disease. Beautiful and precious testimony of
kindness to Israel, and at the same time, the demonstration of His glory
who stood in the midst of His people! In the same spirit, as He had
forgiven, and healed, He calls the publican and goes to his house come
not to call the righteous, but sinners.

But now we enter on another portion of the instruction in this Gospel
the development of the opposition of unbelievers, of the learned men and
the religionists in particular; and that of the rejection of the work
and Person of the Lord.

The idea, the picture of that which took place, has been already set
before us in the case of the Gergesene demoniac the power of God present
for the entire deliverance of His people, of the world, if they received
Him power which the devils confessed to be that which should hereafter
judge and cast them out, which displayed itself in blessing to all the
people of the place, but which was rejected, because they did not desire
such power to dwell among them. They would not have the presence of God.

The narration of the details and the character of this rejection now
commences. Observe that [Mat 8:1-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#001.md)
gives the manifestation of the Lord's power this power being truly that
of Jehovah on the earth. From [Mat
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002.md); [Mat
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008.md), the reception this power met with
in the world, and the influence which governed the world, are set forth,
whether as power, or morally in the hearts of men.

We come here to the historical development of the rejection of this
intervention of God upon the earth.

The multitude glorify God who had given such power to a man. Jesus
accepts this place. He was man: the multitude saw Him to be man, and
acknowledged the power of God, but did not know how to combine the two
ideas in His Person.

The grace which contemns the pretensions of man to righteousness is now
set forth.

Matthew, the publican, is called; for God looks at the heart, and grace
calls the elect vessels.

The Lord declares the mind of God on this subject, and His own mission.
He came to call sinners; He would have mercy. It was God in grace, and
not man with his pretended righteousness counting on his merits.

He assigns two reasons which make it impossible to reconcile His course
with the demands of the Pharisees. How should the disciples fast when
the Bridegroom was there? When the Messiah was gone, they might well do
so. Moreover it is impossible to introduce the new principles and the
new power of His mission into the old Pharisaic forms.

Thus we have grace to sinners, but (grace rejected) now comes at once a
higher proof that Messiah-Jehovah was there, from her bed of death, He
obeys the call. As He goes, a poor woman, who had already employed every
means of cure without success, is instantaneously healed by touching in
faith the hem of His garment.

This history supplies us with the two great divisions of the grace that
was manifested in Jesus. Christ came to awaken dead Israel; He will do
this hereafter in the full sense of the word. Meanwhile, whosoever laid
hold of Him by faith, in the midst of the multitude that accompanied
Him, was healed, let the case be ever so hopeless. This, which took
place in Israel when Jesus was there, is true in principle of us also.
Grace in Jesus is a power which raises from the dead, and which heals.
Thus He opened the eyes of those in Israel who owned Him to be the Son
of David, and who believed in His power to meet their need. He cast out
devils also, and gave speech to the dumb. But having performed these
acts of power in Israel, so that the people, as to the fact, owned them
with admiration, the Pharisees, the most religious part of the nation,
ascribe this power to the prince of the devils. Such is the effect of
the Lord's presence on the leaders of the people, jealous of His glory
thus manifested among them over whom they exercised their influence. But
this in no way interrupts Jesus in His career of beneficence. He can
still bear testimony among the people. In spite of the Pharisees His
patient kindness still finds place. He continues to preach and to heal.
He has compassion on the people, who were like sheep without a shepherd,
given up, morally, to their own guidance. He still sees that the harvest
is plenteous and the labourers few. That is to say, He still sees every
door open to address the people and He passes over the wickedness of the
Pharisees.

Let us sum up what we find in the chapter, the grace developed in
Israel. First, grace healing and forgiving as in Psalm 103. Then grace
come to call sinners, not the righteous; the bridegroom was there, nor
could grace in power be put in Jewish and Pharisaic vessels; it was new
even in respect of John Baptist. He comes in reality to give life to the
dead, not to heal, but whoever then touched Him by faith for there were
such were healed in the way. He opens eyes to see, as Son of David, and
opens the dumb mouth of him whom the devil possessed. All is rejected
with blasphemy by the self-righteous Pharisees. But grace sees the
multitude as yet as having no shepherd; and while the porter holds the
door open, He ceases not to seek and minister to the sheep.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 10](mat010.md)

</div>
