<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic006)  [Next](nah000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001)

In chapter 7 the prophet takes the place of intercessor before God, in
the name of the people-presenting to Him at once their deep misery and
their iniquities \[See Note \#1\] -speaking in their name, and
identifying himself with them; or, more exactly, he takes up the
reproach of the city ([Mic 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009)),
beginning with her grief at the state she is in, but passing on, as we
see often in Jeremiah, to his own distinct prophetic office, and so
marking out the position of the remnant; speaking, but with the divine
mind, as in the midst of the people-having their place, but judging
their conduct in it-yet with all the interest attached to the love God
bore them. He seeks anxiously among the people for something suitable to
their title of the people of God; he finds nothing but fraud and deceit,
and lying in wait for blood, that they might do evil with both hands
earnestly. Still all is said in the way of the city's confession; so
that out of this she can look, as bowing to God's hand-to one who will
Himself plead her cause and execute judgment for her.

We find here a striking circumstance. The Lord Jesus declares in the
Gospel, that that which the prophet describes, as the height of
iniquity, should be produced by the preaching of the gospel. Such is the
iniquity of the heart which the light brings into activity, stirring up
a hatred which is only the more exasperated by the nearness of its
object.

The effect on the prophet of that which he sees around him (that which
the Spirit of Christ produces, where he acts in view of the
all-pervading evil) was that he looked to Jehovah and waited for the God
of his salvation. He takes the position pointed out as that which
Jehovah could recognise. He accepts the indignation of Jehovah, until He
Himself should plead the cause of His servant. In fact Jehovah would
bring him forth to the light-would shew him His righteousness. The
deliverance should then be complete; and she who said to Jerusalem,
"Where is thy God?" (the constant cry of the unbeliever, who rejoices in
the chastisement of the people of Christ, as in the sufferings of Christ
Himself, mistaking these righteous dealings of a God whom he knows
not)-she who rejoiced in the abasement of those whom Jehovah loved,
should be trodden down as the mire of the streets ([Mic
7:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#007)).

From that time they should come from Egypt, from Assyria, from the seas
and the mountains, to the rebuilded city; but before this the land
should be desolate. Nevertheless Jehovah would lead His people as a
shepherd and plant them again in their land as at first; and God would
shew forth His marvellous works, as when He brought them up from Egypt;
and the nations should be confounded at all the might of Israel and
should be afraid before Jehovah their God.

The last three Verses of the prophecy express the faith and the
sentiments of adoration that fill the prophet's heart at the thought of
the goodness of God, who pardoned the iniquities of the people and cast
their sins into the depths of the sea; who delighted in mercy, and who
would perform His promises to Abraham and that which He had sworn unto
the fathers in days of old. Who was a God like unto Him, who manifested
Himself in His ways of grace towards His beloved people, towards the
feeble remnant despised of all, but whom Jehovah in His love never
forgot, in His faithfulness never forsook, in spite of all their
rebellion?

Note \#1

This character is one of the most touching features of the prophetic
office. "If," said Jeremiah, "he be a prophet, let him make intercession
to Jehovah, that that which is left may not go to Babylon." "He is a
prophet," said God to Abimelech, in speaking of Abraham, "and he will
pray for thee." In the Psalms also it is written," There is no prophet
left-none to say, How long?"-that is to say, none who knew how to reckon
upon the faithfulness of Jehovah their God, and, knowing that it was
only a chastisement, plead with Him for His people (compare Isaiah 6).
The Spirit of God declares judgment indeed on God's part, but, because
God loved the people, becomes a Spirit of intercession in the prophet
for the people. With us the same thing is developed in a rather
different, but more blessed and perfect manner. Intelligence of the will
of God enters more into it: "If ye abide in me, and my words abide in
you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you." And all
are prophets in this ([Jo1 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Introduction](nah000)

</div>
