<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Micah Index](mic.md)  
  [Previous](mic004)  [Next](mic006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001.md)

But there was something more definite still to be declared; the
principal enemy of the last days was to be pointed out, and this in
special connection with another and fatal sin of Jerusalem and her
people. The Messiah and His rejection are introduced. The daughter of
troops gathers herself in troops to besiege Jerusalem-the Assyrian army
(see [Mic 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#005).md). But here it is quite a
different thing from the attack of Sennacherib. Judah had now plunged
much deeper into sin and rebellion. The true Judge of Israel should be
smitten with a rod upon the cheek. The Christ should be mocked and
beaten.

[Mic 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002.md) describes Him in a striking
manner. It was on this Verse that the scribes and chief priests rested,
when they certified Herod that Christ should be born in Bethlehem. It
represents Him as being born at Bethlehem, and at the same time as
eternal, and as the true Ruler in Israel. The second Verse ([Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002).md) is in parenthesis. It declares
the birthplace, whence He that should rule over Israel for Jehovah
should go forth; and, at the same time, it reveals the eternal glory of
His Person.

[Mic 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#003.md) is connected with [Mic
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001.md), and exhibits the consequences of
the sin there pointed out. Israel, and more especially Judah, is given
up, yet only for a season, the period of which is designated in a
remarkable and instructive manner-until she which travaileth hath
brought forth. Israel (exercised, travailing, long preferring to stand
on the footing of Hagar rather than on that of Sarah) must pass through
all the afflictions, the anguish, the judgments, the chastisements of
God, necessary to lead her to the acceptance of the punishment of her
iniquity; being at length by His grace thoroughly convinced of the need
of that grace, and of the mercy of God, and thus brought into a
condition fitted to her being the vessel of the manifestation of that
Son who should be born unto her -the Naomi brought back by grace, to
whom (with respect to His manifestation in this world) the King is
reputed to be born. Compare Isaiah 9, where the idea is developed in
connection with Israel, "to us a Son is born"; and Revelation 12, where
the historical fact, and its connection with Israel in the last days,
are brought together.

Another very important element of this last scene of the present age is
pointed out in this verse. Israel is given up to judgment, forsaken of
God, in a certain sense, for having rejected the Christ, the Lord. But
now she who travaileth has brought forth. Afterwards (and this is the
element I refer to) the remnant of the brethren of this first-born Son,
instead of being added to the church (Acts 2), return unto the children
of Israel. The Christ is not ashamed to call them His brethren; but at
this period they no longer become members of His body. Their relation is
with Israel. This is the position in which they are placed before God.

He, then, who had been rejected becomes the Shepherd of Israel, and that
according to the strength of Jehovah in the majesty of the name of
Jehovah His God. Israel dwells in safety, for His King becomes great
unto the ends of the earth. By Him the Assyrian should be overthrown,
and his land laid waste by that Israel whom he had sought to overthrow.

Israel in that day possesses a double character. The remnant of Jacob is
the instrument of refreshing, in the precious grace that comes from God,
and waits not for the laboured and varied efforts of man. They shall be
as the showers upon the grass, that tarry not for man, nor wait for the
sons of men. But, nevertheless, Israel is also that which rises up among
the nations, as a lion among the beasts of the field, from whom none can
deliver. They are the instruments and testimony of the power of God. The
blessing and the strength of Jehovah is with them. The prophet declares.
that all the enemies of Israel shall be cut off and perish. But Jehovah
will at the same time destroy out of the midst of Israel all their false
human strength, their chariots, their strong cities-all that ministers
to the pride of man and leads him to trust in himself. He will destroy
all their idols; Israel shall no longer worship the works of their own
hands; every trace of idolatry shall be taken away. At the same time
vengeance and wrath, such as had not been heard of, shall be executed
upon the nations.

This division of the prophecy ends here: the first at the close of
chapter 2: [Mic 4:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009.md) giving, in
general, the two evils with which judged Jerusalem had to do-Babylon and
the gathering of the nations in the latter day, and her glorious
deliverance; and chapter 5 the connection of Messiah both with the
judgment and with the deliverance from the latter of these evils and the
introduction of the blessing, of which the description had been given in
[Mic 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001.md), as being the purpose of
Jehovah. In that sense, [Mic 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#008.md)
closes the second part; but from thence to the end of chapter 5 are two
appendices, so to speak, which unfold the double evil which comes on
Jerusalem, and the connection of the people with their deliverers in
judgment first, and then deliverance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 6](mic006.md)

</div>
