<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nahum Index](nah)  
  [Previous](nah000)  [Next](nah002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nahum Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)

[Nahum 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">nah 1:1</span></span>

The following commentary covers Chapters 1, 2, and 3.

If we were to examine closely the different characters of the nations
who have been connected with the people of God, we should perhaps find
in each a specific form of evil pretty clearly delineated. At all events
it is so in the principal enemies of that people. Egypt, Babylon,
Nineveh, are prominently marked by that which they morally represent.
Egypt is the world in its natural condition, whence the people have come
forth. Babylon is corruption in the activity of power, by which the
people are enslaved. Nineveh is the haughty glory of the world, which
recognises nothing but its own importance-the world, the open enemy of
God's people, simply by its pride. She shall be judged like all the
rest, and disappear for ever under the judgment of the Almighty. Jehovah
has given a commandment against her, that no more of her name be sown.
This judgment is so simple, that the prophecy which declares it requires
very little explanation.

It commences with an exhibition of the character of God, in view of that
which He has to bear from the pride of man. God is jealous, and Jehovah
revengeth. It is a solemn thought that, however great His patience, a
day is coming which will prove that He does not bear with evil. Yet it
is a comforting thought; for the vengeance of God is the deliverance of
the world from the oppression and misery of the yoke of the enemy and of
lust, that it may flourish under the peaceful eye of its Deliverer.

No doubt, He has long allowed evil to go on. He is not impatient, as our
poor hearts are. He is slow to wrath-a wrath so much the more terrible
that it is the justice of One who is never impatient. He is great in
power, and will not at all acquit the guilty. \[See Note \#1\] Who can
stand before His indignation, or abide the fierceness of His anger?

But this is not all: His indignation is not vague and devastating
without distinction when He gives it free course. He is good; He is a
stronghold in the day of trouble. When the evil and the judgment
overflow-the evil which is a judgment, and the judgment before which
nothing that it reaches can stand-He is Himself the sure refuge of all
that trust in Him: He Himself knows all that do so. As for the glory of
the enemy, it shall be destroyed, blotted out, brought to nothing.
Reckless in the midst of their pleasures, drunken and suspecting
nothing, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry.

In [Nah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#011) we find the one so often
mentioned by the prophets-the Assyrian, who imagines evil against
Jehovah. [Nah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#012), although obscure,
applies, I think, to Israel. Israel, too, alas! boasting of their
security and strength according to the spirit of the world, will undergo
the invasion, the overflowing of the great waters, the scourge of God.
But when this passes through the land (that is, of Israel), they shall
be cut down \[See Note \#2\] (compare [Isa
28:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#018); [Isa
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#025)). But this scourge completes the
judgment of God; and the deliverance of Israel, the prophet says, should
now be complete and final (compare [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005); [Isa
10:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#024)). The yoke of the Assyrian
should be broken for ever, and the proud and hostile power of the world
destroyed, as the anti-christian corruption and rebellion had already
been judged. The good tidings of full deliverance should be spread
abroad, and Judah should keep her solemn feasts in peace.

I doubt not that the invasion of Sennacherib was the occasion of this
prophecy; but most evidently it goes much beyond that event, and the
judgment is final. This is another instance of that which we have so
frequently observed in the prophets-a partial judgment, serving as a
warning or an encouragement to the people of God, while it was only a
forerunner of a future judgment, in which all the dealings of God would
be summed up and manifested.

The wicked should no more pass through Judah; he should be utterly cut
off.

If God permitted the total devastation and ruin of Jacob, it was because
the time of judgment was come-a judgment that should not stop there. He
began, no doubt, at His own house, but would He stop there? No. What,
then, should be the end of the enemies of God's people, if He no longer
endured evil in His own people? Let Nineveh, then, now defend herself if
she could. But no, that den of lions should be invaded, and the young
lions destroyed and unable to defend themselves. See the same argument
at the end of Isaiah 2 and the commencement of chapter 3. Jacob was
judged; the whole family, as well as Israel, emptied and ruined; and now
it was the turn of the world. However great the pride of Nineveh, she
was no better than others of whose ruin she was probably herself the
instrument (Assyria and Egypt had long been rivals). The strongholds of
the Assyrians should be like figs that fall with the first shaking, and
their people without strength should be but as women. The ruin should be
entire. Fire should devour them. No doubt, this had an historical
fulfilment in the fall of Nineveh; but its complete accomplishment will
take place when the Assyrian shall return-I do not say with respect to
this city itself, which has been destroyed, but the power that will
possess the territory and inherit the pride of the land of Nimrod.

Note \#1

This is ever true, and of immense importance. God never holds the guilty
for innocent. It is contrary to His nature. It would not be the truth.
He may put away sin, and receive the cleansed sinner; but He cannot act
as if it did not exist when it does, nor be indifferent to it while He
remains Himself. He may for good chastise, and to shew His government
(that is, deal with sin in this respect); or He may have it entirely put
away and blotted out, according to the exigencies of His own nature and
glory, which is salvation for us; and both are true. But He cannot leave
it anywhere as not existing or indifferent.

Note \#2

If not, the thought is, though the Assyrians be prosperous and safe in
full prosperity, yet (as Sennacherib) when they come into Judah they
shall be cut down, and then (as in Isaiah 10) Israel's deliverance
should be final.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Chapter 2](nah002)

</div>
