<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num018)  [Next](num020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001.md)

But if, on the one hand, priesthood must lead the people through the
wilderness, and if Moses's rod of authority cannot do this, if it can
only smite; on the other, there must be a provision connected with it
for removing the defilements taking place during the journey, that the
communion of the people with God may not be interrupted. That is the
reason why the sacrifice of the heifer is placed here, apart from all
the others, because it was prescribed in order to meet the defilements
of the wilderness. But if the consideration of Christ (even though it be
Christ offered for sin, and the participation in His priestly work, in
connection with that sacrifice) was a most holy thing realised in the
communion of the most holy place; being occupied with that sin, even in
a brother, and that to purify him, defiled even those who were not
guilty of it.

These are the subjects of chapter 19. What follows is the ordinance
given on this occasion. To touch a dead body was indeed being defiled
with sin; for sin is here considered under the point of view of
defilement which precluded the entrance into the court of the
tabernacle. Christ is presented in the red heifer as unspotted by sin,
and as never having borne the yoke of it either; but He is led forth
without the camp, as being wholly a sacrifice for sin. The priest who
brought the heifer did not kill it; but it was killed in his presence.
He was there to take knowledge of the deed. The death of Christ is never
the act of priesthood. The heifer was completely burned without the
camp, even its blood, except that which was sprinkled directly before
the tabernacle of the congregation, that is, where the people were to
meet God. There the blood was sprinkled seven times (because it was
there that God met with His people), a perfect testimony in the eyes of
God to the atonement made for sin. They had access there according to
the value of this blood. The priest threw into the fire cedar-wood,
hyssop, and scarlet (that is, all that was of man, and his human glory
in the world). "From the cedar down to the hyssop," is the expression of
nature from her highest elevation to her lowest depth. Scarlet is
external glory (the world, if you please). The whole was burned in the
fire which consumed Christ, the sacrifice for sin. Then, if anybody
contracted defilement, though it were merely through neglect, in
whatever way it might be, God took account of the defilement. And this
is a solemn and important fact: God provides for cleansing, but in no
case can tolerate anything in His presence unsuited to it. It might seem
hard in an inevitable case, as one dying suddenly in the tent. But it
was to shew that for His presence God judges of what is suited to His
presence. The man was defiled and he could not go into God's tabernacle.

To cleanse the defiled person, they took some running water, into which
they put the ashes of the heifer, and the man was sprinkled on the third
and on the seventh days; then he was clean: signifying that the Spirit
of God, without applying anew the blood to the soul .(that in the type
had been sprinkled once for all when the people met God), takes the
sufferings of Christ (the proof that sin and all that is of the natural
man and of the world have been consumed for us in His expiatory death),
and applies them to it. It is the proof, the intimate conviction, that
nothing is nor can be imputed. It was in this respect wholly done away
in the sacrifice, whose ashes (the witness that it was consumed) are now
applied. But it produces upon the heart the deeply painful conviction
that it has got defiled, notwithstanding redemption, and by the sins for
which Christ has suffered in accomplishing it. We have found our will
and pleasure, if only for a moment, in what was the cause of His pain;
and this in the face of His sufferings for sin, but, alas! in
forgetfulness of them-even for that sin the motions of which we yield to
so lightly now: a feeling much deeper than that of having sins imputed.
For it is in reality the new man, in his best feelings, who judges by
the Spirit and according to God, and who takes knowledge of the
sufferings of Christ and of sin, as seen in Him on the cross.

The first feeling is bitterness, although without the thought of
imputation-bitterness, precisely because there is no imputation, and
that we have sinned against love as well as against holiness, and that
we must submit to that conviction. But lastly (and it seems to me it is
the reason why there was the second sprinkling), it is the consciousness
of that love, and of the deep grace of Jesus, and the joy of being
perfectly clean, through the work of that love. The first part of the
cleansing was the sense of the horror of sinning against grace; the
second, the mind quite cleared from it by the abounding of grace over
the sin.

We may remark that, as it is merely the needed purifying for the way,
nothing else is noticed; no sacrifices, as in the case of the leper.
There it was drawing nigh to God, according to the value of Christ's
work, when cleansed from sin. Here it is the practical restoration of
the soul inwardly. There is no sprinkling with blood: the purifying is
by water, Christ's death being fully brought in in its power by the Holy
Ghost. The details shew the exactness of God, as to these defilements
though He cleanses us from them. They shew also that any one who has to
do with the sin of another, though it be in the way of duty to cleanse
it, is defiled; not as the guilty person, it is true, but we cannot
touch sin without being defiled. The value of grace and of priesthood is
also made evident.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 20](num020.md)

</div>
