<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num004)  [Next](num006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#001.md)

Let us pursue the study of the book. Chapter 5 presents three things, in
connection with the purity of the camp, looked at as the dwelling-place
of God, and in connection with our pilgrim passage through the
wilderness, which is the great subject of the Book of Numbers; a passage
in which all is put to the test, and in which the presence of God
ungrieved in the midst of us is our only security, and guidance, and
strength.

Every defilement was to be purged out. God took knowledge of the wrong
done there against a brother. If this be always true, it is the more so
when applied to the wrong done to Him, who has not been ashamed to call
us His brethren. When the trespass could not be recompensed to the
person who had suffered the wrong, or to his kinsman, it was due to God
in the person of the priest, beside the sin-offering. In God's camp no
wrong could be committed without amends being made for it. Then comes
the question of jealousy. If the faithfulness of Israel, the church, or
an individual, to God or to Christ, be questioned, there must be the
trial of it. It seems to me that the dust of the tabernacle was the
power of death in God's presence, fatal to the natural man, but
precious, as the death of sin, for him who has life. The water is the
power of the Holy Ghost acting by the word on the conscience.

The power of the Holy Spirit judging thus (according to the sentence of
death against the flesh), the state of unfaithfulness-which was thought
to be hidden from the true husband of the people, makes the sin
manifest, and brings down the chastening and the curse upon the
unfaithful one, and that evidently by the just judgment of God. Drinking
death, according to the power of the Spirit, is life to the soul. "By
these things," says Hezekiah, "men live, and in all these things is the
life of my spirit"; even when they are the effect of chastening, which
is not always necessarily the case. But if any of the accursed things be
hidden-if there be unfaithfulness towards Jesus, undetected, it may be,
by man, and God puts it to the test; if we have allowed ourselves to be
enticed by him who has the power of death, and the holy power of God is
occupied with death, and comes to deal with this power of the enemy-the
concealed evil is laid bare, the flesh is reached; its rottenness and
its powerlessness are made manifest, however fair its appearances may
be. But if we be free from unfaithfulness, the result of the trial is
only negative; it shews that the Spirit of holiness finds nothing to
judge, when He applies death according to the holiness of God.

In the offering without either oil or frankincense, the woman is set
before God, according to the judgment of God displayed against sin, in
His holiness and majesty, when Christ was made sin for us. Sin which is
confessed has never that effect; for the conscience is purified from it
by Christ. The unfaithfulness here spoken of, is that of the heart of
Israel-of the church to Christ. All these things apply, not to the
acceptance of the believer, or of the church as to righteousness-that is
treated of where drawing near to God is in question-but to the judgment
of our ways in the wilderness journey, inasmuch as God is in our midst.

The church would do well to consider how far she has given herself to
another. There are some, assuredly, amongst its members who have not
done it in heart. If Christ did not discover the iniquity, and cause it
to be judged, He would be, so to speak, identified with the iniquity of
the bride, and thus defiled thereby ([Num
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#031).md); He will therefore surely do so
What is here said of the church may be equally said of each one of its
members: remembering here also, that the question is one, not of
salvation, but of the walk down here, the walk in the wilderness being
ever the subject of this book. \[See Note \#1\] Let us also observe that
the soul, or the church, can, in other respects, shew a zeal, an
extraordinary devotedness, which are indeed sincere, whilst it falls
into a fault which it conceals from itself up to a certain point. But
nothing can counterbalance unfaithfulness to one's husband.

Note \#1

Looked at as a professing whole, or as an individual who makes
profession, there may be the discovery that there is nothing real; as
the case has been in Israel according to the flesh and will be also in
the professing church. They have been unfaithful to their husband.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 6](num006.md)

</div>
