<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num010)  [Next](num012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001.md)

We are now brought to turn our thoughts in another direction-to see the
conduct of the people in the wilderness, and alas! what is it except a
history of unfaithfulness and rebellion? Let us add, however, that it is
also that of the forbearance and the grace of God. It is an extremely
humbling and instructive picture. We shall briefly review the different
forms of unbelief which are here presented to us. The first thing we
find, after the sweet manifestation of the love of God, is the murmuring
of the people. They complain of fatigue, where God is seeking a
resting-place for them. God chastens them. Humbled, they cry unto Moses,
and upon his intercession the chastening is removed; but their heart
remains alienated from the Lord, and, seduced by the mixed multitude who
accompanied them, and to whom Canaan was not a land of promise, they get
wearied with the manna. How often does Christ, the bread of life, not
suffice a heart not in communion with God! The heart seeks elsewhere for
its nourishment; it wants something else; it remembers what the flesh
used to enjoy in the world, whilst it forgets the bondage in which it
was held. It knows no more the power of the word-"he that cometh to me
shall never hunger." God grants the people the object of their desires:
instead of being ashamed when they see that God is equally able to
satisfy them in the wilderness, they greedily gather the quails, and the
wrath of God falls upon this wicked people.

Moses, wearied of them as of a heavy burden, complains, in his turn, of
his glorious position. God relieves him of the weight of his charge, but
not without upbraiding him; and He adjoins seventy persons to him to
help him in bearing it. The Spirit of God acts in two of them, though
they do not present themselves to receive it where Moses was: they
prophesy in the camp. Joshua, jealous of the glory of his master, wishes
them to be silenced. But if Moses, \[See Note \#1\] unable to bear the
weight of his glory, has been obliged to share it with others, and, up
to a certain point, lose part of it, he shews at least, in this
circumstance, the depth of the grace that was in him. He does not envy
those who prophesy in the camp. "Would God," he says, "that all were
prophets!" There is something very beautiful in the spirit which
animated this servant of God. Finally, whatever may be God's
arrangements, He is sovereign in the dispensations of His Spirit.

Note \#1

Remark here the difference even in the blessed apostle's faith,
comparing [Num 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#012.md) here and [Gal
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019.md); see also [Co2
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#028.md). It is possible that this
failure of Moses under the pressure of the weight of the people, giving
occasion to the prophesying in the camp, was the occasion also of the
rising up of Miriam and Aaron against him. At any rate God maintained
the authority of His servant, who, as to himself, held his ground by
unfeigned meekness, and leaving all that concerned himself to God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 12](num012.md)

</div>
