<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num008)  [Next](num010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 8 and 9.

Chapter 8 speaks of the candlestick. \[See Note \#1\] The lamps were to
make the light shine from it, and cause that light to be diffused around
and before it. This is the case when that which is the vessel of the
Holy Spirit shines with the light of God. Whether it be Israel or the
church, it throws light before it. "Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven." It is because the profession of the Christian is clear and
unequivocal that men, seeing his good works, know to whom to attribute
them. The candlestick was of pure gold only, beaten work; it was
properly divine, and that only, God's light in the sanctuary. The twelve
loaves, connected with what was divine, were the government of God in
man; the table was of wood, though overlaid with gold; the number we
have seen as marking divine government, but in man, specially true of
Israel, but the testimony of God in light is purely divine.

We have next the purification of the Levites and their consecration to
the service of Jehovah. This prefigures the consecration of the members
of the church to God for service. The Levites were sprinkled, \[See Note
\#2\] then shorn like the lepers, and their clothes washed, all their
manifested life purified according to the purification of the sanctuary,
their ways suited to the service of God. After that the whole people
laid their hands upon them, and they laid theirs upon the sacrifices. In
the offerings which accompanied their consecration there was no
peace-offering, because it was a question of service and not of
communion; but the sacrifices which represented the efficacy of the
atonement, and the devotedness unto death of the Lord Jesus, were
offered, and characterised the ground and nature of their service. They
are the double character of the death of Christ. The meat-offering was
there also with the burnt-offering; all that constituted Christ as an
offering to God, glorifying God in death as regards sin, bearing sins,
and also in living perfection and devotedness fully tried in the fire,
were found. In the application the sin-offering comes first.

The children of Levi belonged to Jehovah as His redeemed, having been
saved, when He judged sin, and themselves offered as an offering to
Jehovah. The laying on of hands identified with the victim the person
who did so. If it were an offering for sin, the offering was identified
with the sinner in his sin; if it were a burnt-offering, the offerer was
identified with the value of the consecration to God's glory of the
victim in respect of sin. [Rom 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016.md)
is an allusion to this consecration of the Levites, and considers the
church as thus offered to God from among the Gentiles. The Israelites
having also laid their hands upon the Levites, the whole people were, so
to speak, identified in this consecration with them, as an offering made
by them to Jehovah, so that the Levites represented them before Him. We
find here again, what we have already seen, that the Levites were given
to Aaron and his sons, as the church is given to Christ, the true Priest
and Son over the house of God, to be used in the service of the house.
They were first offered by Israel to Jehovah for His service by Aaron
the priest ([Num 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#011).md); it was a
wave-offering (tenupha); that is, they were presented before the Lord as
consecrated to Him. Then ([Num 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#013).md)
they were set before Aaron and his sons, and so under their hand given
to the Lord, wholly given to Him instead of the firstborn ([Num
8:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#016).md). How solemn and perfect is
the offering up of the servant of the Lord to Him, according to the
purification of the sanctuary and all the value and true character of
Christ's offering of Himself to God, and the divine judgment of sin.
\[See Note \#3\]

The passover, the memorial of redemption, and in consequence the symbol
of the unity \[See Note \#4\] of the people of God, as an assembly
redeemed by Him, is obligatory during the journey through the
wilderness. \[See Note \#5\] Only God makes a provision, in grace and
forbearance, for those who were not able to keep it according to His
will, to whom it had reference. But these provisions of forbearance and
grace kept continually present the idea of a redeemed people and one
under the direct fatherly government of God. Besides this we have the
precious declaration that God Himself conducted His people by His
presence. At His commandment they pitched; at His commandment they
journeyed. They kept the charge of Jehovah, according to the commandment
of Jehovah. God grant that we, who have His Spirit, may thus be led in
all things, to stay or to go entirely under His immediate direction! If
we are near God in His communion, we shall be guided by His eye; if not,
we shall be guided by His eternal providence, as horses, and mules, with
bits and bridles, that we may not stumble.

Note \#1

The introduction of this type at this place shews how much the order of
the types, and their introduction in such or such a place, refers to the
things typified and to their moral order.

Note \#2

The leper was washed, not merely sprinkled. He was outside the camp,
wholly unclean before God. It was cleansing, not consecration; he had
been, before the washing, brought under the blood-sprinkling-the full
abiding efficacy of Christ's work in itself. Then he was washed with
water, cleansed personally in the power of the Spirit and word,
according to that water that came out of Christ's side. His clothes or
outward demeanour were even cleansed too, and all that could harbour
defilement removed. Here it was the consecration of those who, in an
ordinary sense were clean and within. The sprinkling was a sign calling
to remembrance consecration according to Christ's death, what was fit
for the sanctuary, bringing them into that conscious separation to God's
service; and so their clothes, their outward demeanour, were washed. It
was all of the same nature-the water-but with the leper it was the body
of sin destroyed, cleansing from it so as not to serve it. Here it was
consecration too.

Note \#3

They served from 25 to 50, the first five years a kind of noviciate, as
after 50 they ministered, but were not charged with the service.

Note \#4

In Israel this unity was simply that of a people redeemed together to
the enjoyment of a common portion, not a body as the church.

Note \#5

Yet those who had only wilderness character were not in a condition to
keep it. None born there were circumcised till they came to Gilgal
across the Jordan.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 10](num010.md)

</div>
