<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num002)  [Next](num004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#001.md)

In chapter 3 we have the Levites set apart, according to the thoughts of
God, for service. They are a figure of the church, or rather of the
members of the church in their service, even as the priests are the
figure of Christians drawing near to the throne of God, though both be a
shadow, not a perfect image.

The Levites were firstfruits offered to God, for they were instead of
the firstborn in whom God had taken Israel to Himself, when He smote the
firstborn of the Egyptians. Thus it is that the church \[See Note \#1\]
is, as the firstfruits of the creatures of God, holy to the Lord. The
number of the firstborn being greater than that of the Levites, those
that were over were redeemed, as a sign that they belonged to God, and
the Levites became God's possession for His service ([Num
3:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#012).md). It is the same with regard
to the church: it belongs wholly to God to serve Him down here.

But, besides, the Levites were entirely given to Aaron the high priest;
for the service of the church, or of its members, is wholly dependent on
Christ in the presence of God, and has no other object but that which
concerns Him, and that which is connected with, and flows from the place
and service which He Himself renders to God in the true tabernacle,
carrying out in service here the ends for which He is in the holy place
up there; but directly connected with the sanctuary-that is for us
heaven, for we belong to heaven, and our walk and all our service is
referred to, and characterised by our connection with it. Our
conversation (living association) is in heaven; we purify ourselves as
He is pure, and are called to walk worthy of God, who has called to His
own kingdom and glory,-worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing. Only, the
veil being rent, we are much more fully connected with that than the
Levites were even in figure. The service of the saints has no value (on
the contrary, it is sin), except as it is united to the priesthood (that
is to Christ on high, in the presence of God for us, with whom we,
indeed, are also associated in this nearness, priests by grace); and
hence all is accomplished in direct reference to Him in that heavenly
character. In all its details, consequently, our service is absolutely
good for nothing, if it be not linked with our communion with the Lord
and with the priesthood of Christ. Christ is "a Son over his own house."
"There are differences of administrations, but the same Lord." The Holy
Ghost gives the capacity and the gift for service; but in the exercise
of this capacity and of this gift, we are the servants of Christ.

Thus, as regards our service, we have these three principles: 1, we are
redeemed, delivered from the judgments, under which are the enemies of
God, being taken from the midst of those enemies; 2, as a consequence of
this first fact, we belong absolutely to God; bought with a price, we
are no longer our own, but God's, to glorify Him in our bodies which are
His; 3, we are entirely given to Christ, who is the Head of the house of
God, the Priest, for the service of His tabernacle. Blessed bondage,
happy self-renunciation, true deliverance from a world of sin! Service
is rendered in dependence on Christ, and in the communion of the Lord:
it is linked to the priesthood and flows from and is connected with
Himself, and the place where He is, and with which He has connected our
hopes, our lives, and the affections of our hearts. We serve from, and
in view of that: "to present every man perfect in Christ Jesus."

Service appears to be limited to the tabernacle, that is, to be
exercised in the midst of God's people and in connection with their
drawing near to God. For the preaching of the gospel to those without
made no part of the Jewish system, which was the shadow, but not the
perfect image, of the present state of things. The gospel is the
expression of grace visiting sinners, to effect their salvation, a love
that goes actively out. The institution of the Levites is here presented
to us in principle: we shall find, further on, their purification and
their consecration to God.

We may remark here, that with regard to that which is most elevated in
the calling of the church, all her members are one. The priests, the
high priest excepted, accomplished, all equally or together, the service
of the offerings to God. And so it is with the church; all its members
equally draw near unto God, and are in the same relationship with Him.
(A priest acting for another Israelite who brought an offering, or who
had sinned, represented rather Christ Himself). The order of the service
of the Levites, on the other hand, was according to the sovereignty of
God, who put each one in his place. Thus, in the service of the church,
the greatest differences are found, and each one has his own place
assigned him.

The same thing will likewise, I believe, take place in the glory
(compare Eph. 4; 1 Cor. 12). All are conformed to the likeness of the
Son; but as each has been filled with the Holy Ghost for service, and
thus according to the counsels of God, they-to whom it is given of the
Father to sit on the right hand or on the left-are over ten cities or
five. All enter together into the joy of their Lord. We are all
brethren, having only one Master. But the Master gives grace to each
according to His own will, according to the counsels of God the Father.
He who denies brotherly unity denies the sole authority of the Master.
He who denies the diversity of services equally denies the authority of
the Master who disposes of His servants as He pleases, and chooses them
according to His wisdom and His divine rights.

Note \#1

I speak always of the church here in its individual members as
indicating the class of persons.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 4](num004.md)

</div>
