<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num000)  [Next](num002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

[Numbers 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 1:1</span></span>

The following commentary covers Chapters 1 and 2.

The first thing to be noticed is, that God numbers His people exactly,
and arranges them, once thus recognised, around His tabernacle: sweet
thought, to be thus recognised and placed around God Himself! But here
it had no reference to calling by faith, but to families, and
households, and tribes. That order was carefully maintained when
encamped at rest, or on their march; but it was the order of a nation
and its tribes. God dwelt there, but the unity of the body, or of the
Spirit-union in any sense had no place. Three tribes on each side of the
court kept the tabernacle of Jehovah. Levi alone was excepted, in order
to be consecrated to the service of God: therefore the tribe of Levi
encamped according to their families immediately around the court.
Moses, Aaron, and the priests were placed opposite the entrance whereby
God was approached. The least things in the word deserve to be noticed.
Psalm 80 is entirely opened by the position of the tribes. The spirit of
the psalmist asks, in the last days of the desolation of Israel, for God
to lead them and to manifest His power as He did when He led them
through the wilderness; he asks for the power of His presence on the ark
of testimony, as God manifested it when it was said, at the moment when
Israel set forward, "Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be
scattered." Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh were the three tribes
nearest the ark in the camp of Israel; that is why it is said, in Verse
2 of the Psalm ([Psa 80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002)), "before
Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh." In the setting forward of the camp,
the order given was that the tabernacle, surrounded by the Levites,
should be in the midst of the tribes, as it was when the camp was at
rest ([Num 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#017)). It was in the midst
of them as of an army that was its guard, as the rallying-point of
worship and approach when the camp was at rest. They kept the charge of
the Lord. In chapter 10 we shall find that another arrangement took
place as a matter of fact: of this, in its place.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 2](num002)

</div>
