<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num030)  [Next](num032.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#001.md)

War is found in the wilderness (though it is not characteristic of it)
whenever we fall into the snares the enemy there lays for us. There are
always conflicts in the heavenly places in order to the enjoyment of the
things promised there. But in the wilderness it is patience which is in
exercise. But if there be failure, if we fall into idolatry, if we
commit fornication with the world by yielding to its baits, if in any
way whatever we contract friendship with the world in the desert, we
make wars for ourselves, without having even the advantage of acquiring,
in this kind of warfare, any spiritual ground. God is obliged to make
our relations with the world undergo a total change. If we had not
formed intimacies with them, we should not have had that trouble; but,
since as our friends they deceive us, we must become enemies. Having no
relations whatever with them is our proper and peaceful position.

How often we must act the part of enemies with the world, because we
have sought to have to do with them as friends, and they were a snare to
our souls! However, God gives a complete victory as soon as we treat
them as foes: only, all that seduced must be utterly destroyed. There
must be nothing spared, no concession.

The Lord orders also concerning the joy resulting from the wars of His
people with their enemies. He chooses whom He will for the war, and
honours them; but He will also honour, in their place, those who have
been left behind according to His sovereign will, and who have
faithfully discharged the perhaps less arduous task allotted to them;
but who have, however, done it according to His will. God Himself is
also recognised there in the Levites and the priests.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 32](num032.md)

</div>
