<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num009)  [Next](num011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#001)

Chapter 10 speaks of the silver trumpets which served for calling the
assembly of the people, and for the journeying of the camps, but which
serve also for other purposes. It was the testimony of God, rendered
publicly, with two chief ends in view; to gather the people, and to make
them journey. It is so indeed, practically; the testimony of God gathers
His people around Him, and makes them go forward. The testimony of God
was the sign of His intervention, whilst, at the same time, its result
was to produce it. The priests who, in communion with their head, were
to be in the intimacy of the thoughts of God, sounded the trumpets when
needed. All was thus done according to communion with God in His
sanctuary. After the people were brought into the land, if war arose,
they sounded an alarm: they proclaimed the testimony of God, without
being afraid, and God remembered His people and interfered. So with us,
we need never fear the attack of the enemy; instead of being frightened,
let us give a faithful testimony, in answer to which God has pledged
Himself to come in in power. Let us not fear: in nothing terrified by
our adversaries. The trumpets were also used in the solemn feasts; for
the testimony and the memorial of God constitute the joy of His gathered
people. Thus the whole people in national unity and order, were
assembled as the camp where God was, and were to march in like order.
All was complete for the order of the people, and the service of
Jehovah.

At length the people are called to take the first stage of their
journey. The order followed in the march differs from that which had
been prescribed, in this, that the tabernacle, with its curtains, went
after the first three tribes, that it might be set up to receive the
ark, which followed the second division. Still this was merely a detail
in the arrangements, to have all ready when the ark arrived. But God
appears in a remarkable manner in grace, outside the whole order He had
prescribed; for it is the ark itself which precedes the whole camp.
Moses had asked a child of the wilderness to be to them instead of eyes;
but what man does not care to do, God takes upon Himself. He comes out
of the place which He had taken in the midst of the tribes, to be taken
care of, so to speak, and honoured there, and makes Himself, in some
sort, their servant, seeking a place where they might rest in the
trackless desert.

It was not in Canaan, but a place in the wilderness, where the Lord went
a three days' journey to seek a rest for them. A beautiful picture of
the tender and precious grace of Him who, if He makes us pass through
the wilderness for our good, does not fail to be there with us, and who
takes care, in putting out His sheep, to go before them, and to solace
them with His love. Mighty leader of His people by the way, He is their
joy and their glory when He comes to rest in their midst! This closes
the divinely instituted order of the camp and the grace that led them
through the wilderness. Compare [Psa
132:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#008), where God at the close of
Israel's history (anticipating David) arises into His rest. Psalm 68 is
God's intervention to establish the rest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 11](num011)

</div>
