<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num014)  [Next](num016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001.md)

After all this unbelief of the people, when God had declared that the
earth should be filled with His glory, by the cutting off of the
rebellious congregation, and when one might have supposed they had
forfeited the land for ever, it is perfectly beautiful, in chapter 15,
to see the Lord returning into the perfect rest of His fore-ordained
counsels, and of His immutable being, and giving instructions relative
to the time when the people shall have entered the land He has given
them. It speaks of the offerings of righteousness they are invited to
bring to Him of their free-will, and of the wine of joy which was to
accompany these offerings; and as this is grace, the love of God reaches
out beyond Israel, and, bringing the stranger near to His people, He
makes one law for both. The firstfruits belong to Him. The sins of
ignorance are forgiven by means of the sacrifice required by the
perfectness of the ways of God. The sin committed presumptuously alone
brings destruction. God orders them to put upon the fringe of the
borders of their garments a riband of blue, that they may remember His
commandments, and be kept from that which would render them profane. The
heavenly principle must enter into the minutest details of life, even
into those that are nearest to the earth, if we wish to escape the
serious evils which bring down the judgment of God. The introduction of
the stranger in this chapter is of the highest interest, as a testimony
to grace. But we have not, as yet, seen the final apostasy which brings
down the judgment at the very moment when it is accomplished.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 16](num016.md)

</div>
