<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num013)  [Next](num015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 13 and 14.

Next, the pleasant land is despised. I shall here call the attention of
the reader to some points mentioned on this subject in other parts of
the Bible. \[See Note \#1\] Jehovah has brought the people to the
borders of the land; Moses tells them to go up. The people propose
sending spies; Moses consents. It seems that they had God's sanction,
for they went according to the word of the Lord. But this request was
prompted by the weakness and unbelief of the people. There are many
things commanded of God, and which we are bound to do as soon as they
are the object of a command from Him, in the result of which His ways
are displayed, which, however, are only owing to our lack of faith. The
consequence of it is, that the result abundantly confirms the faith of
the faithful, of the remnant; but unbelief reaps what it has sown. So it
is in this case. First, the report brought to Moses is in a right
spirit; but the difficulties immediately present themselves, and
unbelief measures them with man, instead of with God. Then the witnesses
draw their words from the people's feelings, and express a judgment
founded on their unbelief. Having thus entirely departed in heart from
the Lord, and fallen into the current of the unbelief of the people,
through their own, they belie the convictions they had formed when
enjoying the sight of the goodness of Jehovah, and come to declare that
the land even is bad, and end with justifying themselves by complaining
of God. For now it is no longer Moses who has brought them here, it is
God Himself; they accuse Him of it. Moreover, they cannot contain their
rage against those whose faithful testimony condemns their unbelief.

How often is this the case, that the difficulties which draw out the
unbelief of the heart lead to speak evil of the position to which we
have been divinely called, and of which once we had tasted the
blessedness! All flowed from forgetfulness of God: Was He a grasshopper,
in comparison with the sons of Anak? What matter if walls were high, if
they fell down at the blowing of a ram's horn? But now God Himself
interferes. They will be dealt with according to their faith; they shall
perish in the wilderness, according to their wish. The faithful ones and
the children will alone be brought into the land; but not without
undergoing, in their march, the consequences of the unbelief of the
mass. However, other hopes and other consolations will be their portion.

The effect of the intercession of Moses is to obtain from God that the
people should be spared; but this is His declaration-He will be
glorified in judgment over a rebellious people who despise the promises,
and the earth shall thus be filled with His glory. Moses here appeals to
the revelation of the name of Jehovah, on which footing He governs the
people, and not to the promises made to the fathers; and the answer he
receives is in keeping with that name. Caleb prefigures the faithful
remnant; Joshua is not named ([Num
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#024).md), for he represents Christ
introducing the people into the land of promise.

At the end of the forty years Caleb was obliged to subdue, name for
name, the same persons who had filled the souls of the spies with
terror. Unbelief, when in spite of it we are to enjoy the effects of the
promise, does not make us escape the difficulties. In fine, when we have
judged the folly of unbelief, and we see the consequences of it, it is
of no avail, because of these last, to undertake a work. God is not with
us; and, if we persist in going up, we shall find the enemy such as our
unbelief has pictured him to us.

Note \#1

See [Deu 1:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#020.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 15](num015.md)

</div>
