<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num016)  [Next](num018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 17 through 18.

From chapter 17 to 20 this subject is set forth with the circumstances
relative to it. First, the authority of Aaron is established by signs
shewn by the power of God, in his rod, put with the others near God-the
source of all authority. The power of life and blessing displays itself
with a rapidity which makes manifest the presence of God. The buds, the
flowers, and the fruit grow on dry wood. Priesthood, living and
victorious over death, through divine efficacy, \[See Note \#1\] must
lead the people; God's authority is entrusted to it. The carnal people,
always astray, bold just before in the presence of the majesty of God,
are afraid of His presence now that His grace manifests itself, and say
that they cannot draw near Him. This opens the way for still deeper
views on the place that priesthood holds in general.

In chapter 18 the place of priesthood is clearly defined, as well as
that of the Levites. The priests alone draw near to the holy place; they
alone are allowed this intimacy with God. But, in consequence of their
position, there are sins, iniquities which they are called to bear, as
an effect of this proximity, which would not be remarked among those who
are outside. That which is unbecoming the presence and the sanctuary of
God does not become His priests. They bear the iniquity of the holy
place. If the people disobeyed the law, doubtless they were punished;
but that which defiled the sanctuary fell upon Aaron and his sons. What,
then, is the measure of holiness given to the children of God-alone true
priests? It is the purification of the sanctuary itself, not what is fit
for man, but what is fit for God. The service of the Levites, and the
Levites themselves were given as a gift to the priests. Priesthood also
was a pure gift to Aaron and his sons. Because of the anointing, the
most holy things were given them to eat, which was a special privilege
of the priests. The same thing is true with regard to us.

Whatever is precious in the offering of Christ, in every point of
view-in His life and in His death; in that bread come down from heaven,
contemplated in His life of devotedness and grace here below; and in His
death for us-all is the food and nourishment of our souls, in that
communion with God in which we ourselves are kept in our priesthood. The
priests alone ate the holy things, and they ate them in a holy place. It
is only in the sense of the presence of God, and under the efficacy of
that oil which is not poured on flesh, that we can truly realise what is
precious in the work of Christ.

Verse 10 ([Num 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#010)) presents
something very remarkable; for what is here said, and nowhere else, is
that they were to eat them in the most holy place, the holy of holies.
There is no difficulty in the terms. I have sometimes thought that it
might mean, from among the most holy things; but if it be not that, the
meaning is then in the holy of holies, and only relates to the antitype.
That is, it is only in the presence and before the throne of the
sovereign God Himself that we can really feed on that precious food.
Historically the priests were not there; being in the sanctuary of God,
they were accounted as being there.

There were things which, though truly belonging to the priestly family,
were not properly eaten in the priestly character, such as the
heave-offerings, the wave-offerings; the daughters ate of them as well
as the sons: all that were clean in the house could partake of them.
Thus, in the joys of the children of God, there are some that belong to
them as a family. We enjoy our blessings and all that is offered by man
to God. It is a joy for the soul. All that the Spirit of Christ works to
the glory of God, even in His members, and still more what He has done
in Christ Himself, is the food of the soul of the household of God, and
strengthens them. Do not our souls enjoy those firstfruits, the best of
the new wine and the wheat-the firstfruits of that noble harvest of God,
the produce of His seed on the soil of His election? Yes, we enjoy them
in thinking of them. But the sin-offering, the trespass-offerings, the
meat-offerings, all that in which we share in spirit in the deep work of
Christ, is only eaten in the character and the spirit of a priest. We
must, according to the efficacy of this work of Christ, enter into the
spirit in which He presents Himself after His sacrifice, moved by His
perfect love, in the presence of the Most High-enter into the sentiments
of love, of devotedness in the consciousness of the holiness of God; in
a word, into the feelings with which He presents Himself as a priest
before Him, in order to connect, by love and the efficacy of His
offering, the holiness of God, with the blessing of him who has
sinned-to realise that which is precious in Christ in that work, to
share in it (for so it is) in grace. And, effectively, that only takes
place in the most holy place, in the presence of God, where He appears
for us. In fine, whether the joys of the family of God's house, or this
holy participation in spirit in the work of Christ, all we have just
been speaking about belongs to the priesthood. Even the Levites were to
recognise in all that God gave them as strangers in the land of promise,
the rights and the authority of the priests.

Now, if we make the distinction between the two, all believers are
priests; ministers, in their capacity of ministers, are only Levites.
Their service (besides that which is towards the world, a character
which the dispensation did not bear, and which, therefore, is not the
subject here) is to minister to the priestly joy and service of the
saints with God. Our service will meet with reward in heaven, our
priestly place will be nearness to God and joy in Him. It is evident
that partaking in spirit (to partake in it in reality is of course
impossible) in the sacrifice of Christ for sin, in eating of it as a
priest, is a very holy thing, a privilege enjoyed in a very holy place;
everything is specially holiness here.

Note \#1

That is grace; righteous judgment could destroy, but not bring through;
grace alone can.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 18](num018)

</div>
