<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Obadiah Index](oba)  
  [Previous](amo009)  [Next](oba001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Obadiah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)

[Obadiah](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">oba 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Obadiah

Edom is frequently spoken of in the prophets. This people, who, as well
as Jacob, were descended from Isaac, had an inveterate hatred to the
posterity of the younger son who were favoured as the people of Jehovah.
Psalm 137 tells of this hatred in the seventh verse. In Psalm 83 Edom
forms a part of the last confederacy against Jerusalem, the object of
which was to cut off the name of Israel from the earth. Ezekiel 35
dwells upon this perpetual hatred, shewn from the first in the refusal
to give them a passage through the land, and upon the desire of Edom to
possess the land of Israel. Our prophet enlarges upon the details of the
manifestation of this hatred, which burst forth when Jerusalem was
taken. It is possible that there was something of this sort when
Jerusalem was taken by Nebuchadnezzar. Edom is united with Babylon in
Psalm 137 as the inveterate enemy of Jerusalem.

But it is evident that the prophecy extends to other events. Jerusalem
shall again be attacked by these Gentiles, who seek to satiate their
hatred to the city of Jehovah, and to gratify their ambitious purposes.
Edom plays a sorrowful part on this occasion, and its judgment is
proportioned to its sin. The nation is entirely cut off. When the rest
of the world rejoice, the desolation of Edom shall be complete. Edom had
purposed to take advantage of the attack of the nations upon Jerusalem,
to possess itself of the land, and had united with them to take part in
the attack, by lying in wait-as was natural to a people whose habits
were those of the Arab tribes-to cut off the retreat of the fugitives,
laying hands, when possible, on their substance, and giving them up also
to their enemies. The men of Edom knew not that the day of Jehovah was
upon all the nations, and that this conduct would but bring down an
especial curse on their own heads. Their judgment is thus described: God
takes away their wisdom, their pride deceives them, their strength fails
them, in order that they may be entirely cut off. We have seen them
joining the last confederacy against Jerusalem, and taking part in the
destruction of that city. But it appears that their confederates deceive
them ([Oba 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#007); and Edom, thus
ill-treated by former allies, become "small among the heathen" ([Oba
1:1-)](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001) The nations are the first
instruments of Jehovah's vengeance. But another and yet more terrible
event is linked with the name of Edom, or Idumea, and is the occasion of
Jehovah's judgment falling upon that people. It is in Edom that the
armies of the nations will be assembled in the last days. We have the
account of this in Isaiah 34 and 63. See [Isa
34:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005), the rest of the chapter
displaying the judgment of desolation in the strongest possible
language. Isaiah 63 shews us Jehovah Himself returning from the
judgment, having trodden the winepress alone. Of the peoples there were
none with Him.

Finally, Israel itself shall be an instrument in the hand of Jehovah for
the judgment of Esau ([Oba 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018). The
destruction in Isaiah relates especially to the armies of the nations,
which, in their movements, find themselves assembled in Edom. The part
which Israel takes in the judgment is on the people in general; and, I
suppose, afterwards, when Christ is at their head as the Messiah
(compare [Oba 1:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017)); and [Isa
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014) appears to confirm this view of
the passage. At all events it takes place after Israel's blessing.

That none shall be left of Edom is also declared in [Oba
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#005); [Oba
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#006); [Oba
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009); [Oba
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018); [Jer
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#009); [Jer
49:10-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#010); and it will be observed that
there is no restoration of a remnant, as in the case of Elam and others
([Jer 49:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#039)). A part of the latter
prophecy establishes the same facts as that of Obadiah, in nearly the
same words. The same judgment is pronounced in Ezekiel 35, and in Isaiah
34, already quoted. We see in these chapters, as well as in Isaiah 63,
that it is the controversy of Jerusalem, that Jehovah pleads with Edom
([Eze 35:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#012); [Isa
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#008); [Isa
63:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#004)). In these passages Jehovah does
not forget His thoughts of love towards Zion and His people.

He closes the prophecy of Obadiah with the testimony of the effect of
His call to repentance, of His unchangeable faithfulness to His promises
and unwearying love. Power and might against those formidable enemies
should be given to Israel, who should in peace possess the territory
which their enemies had invaded. Deliverance should be on Mount Zion;
from thence Mount Esau should be judged, and the kingdom should be
Jehovah's. As corrupt power had been judged in Babylon, so in Edom
hatred to the people of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Obadiah Chapter 1](oba001)

</div>
