<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](pe1004)  [Next](pe2001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001)

The apostle returns to christian details. He exhorts the elders, himself
an elder; for it appears that among the Jews this title was rather
characteristic than official. (Compare [Pe1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005).) He exhorts them to feed the
flock of God. The apostle designates himself as one who had been a
witness of the sufferings of Christ, and who was to be a partaker of the
glory that shall be revealed. It was the function of the twelve to be
witnesses of the life of Christ (John 15), as it was that of the Holy
Ghost to testify of His heavenly glory. Peter places himself at the two
ends of the Lord's history, and leaves the interval devoid of all except
hope, and the pilgrimage towards an end. He had seen the sufferings of
Christ; he was to share His glory when He should be revealed. It is a
Christ who puts Himself in relation with the Jews, now known only by
faith. During His life on earth, He was in the midst of the Jews,
although suffering there and rejected. When He shall appear, He will
again be in relation with the earth and with that nation.

Paul speaks differently, while at the same time confirming these truths.
He only knew the Lord after His exaltation; he is not a witness of His
sufferings; but he seeks for the power of His resurrection and the
fellowship of His sufferings. Paul's heart is bound to Christ while He
is in heaven, as united to Him above; and, although he desires the
Lord's appearing, for the restitution of all things of which the
prophets had spoken, he rejoices to know that he shall go with joy to
meet Him, and shall return with Him when He is revealed from heaven.

The elders were to feed the flock of God with a ready mind, and not as
by constraint, nor for gain, nor as governing an inheritance of their
own, but as ensamples to the flock. Loving care was to be lavished upon
it, for the sake of Christ, the chief Shepherd, with a view to the good
of souls. Moreover it was the flock of God which they were to feed. What
a solemn as well as sweet thought! How impossible for anyone to
entertain the notion of its being his flock, if he has laid hold of the
thought that it is the flock of God, and that God allows us to feed it !

We may observe that the heart of the blessed apostle is where the Lord
had placed it. " Feed my sheep" was the expression of the Lord's perfect
grace towards Peter, when He was leading him to the humiliating but
salutary confession that it needed the eye of God to see that His weak
disciple loved Him. At the moment that He convinced him of his utter
nothingness, He entrusted to him that which was dearest to Himself.

Thus we see, here, that it is the apostle's care, the desire of the
heart, that they should feed the flock. Here, as elsewhere, he does not
go beyond the Lord's appearing. It is at that period that the ways of
God in government of which the Jews were the earthly centre shall be
fully manifested. Then shall the crown of glory be presented to him that
has been faithful, that has satisfied the chief Shepherd's heart.

The young were to submit themselves to those who were older, and all to
one another. All were to be clothed with humility: for God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble. These are still the principles of
His government. Under His hand they were therefore to humble themselves;
they should be exalted in due time. This was to commit themselves to
God. He knew what was needful. He who loved them would exalt them at the
right time. He cared for them: they were to rest on Him, commit all
their cares to Him.

On the other hand, they were to be sober and vigilant, because the
adversary sought to devour them. Here whatever may be his wiles, however
he may lie in wait for Christians it is in the character of a roaring
lion, one who excites open persecution, that the apostle presents him.
They were to resist him, steadfast in the faith. Everywhere the same
afflictions were found. Nevertheless the God of grace is the Christian's
confidence. He has called us to participate in His eternal glory. The
apostle's desire for them is that, after they had suffered for a time,
the God of grace should make them perfect, complete should stablish and
strengthen them, building up their hearts on the foundation of an
assurance that cannot be shaken. To Him, he adds, be glory and dominion.

We see that the Christians to whom he wrote were suffering, and that the
apostle explained these sufferings on the principles of the divine
government, with regard especially to the relation of Christians with
God, as being His house, whether those sufferings were for
righteousness' sake or for the name of the Lord. It was but for a time.
The Christian's hope was elsewhere; christian patience was well-pleasing
to God. It was their glory, if it was for the name of Christ. Besides
which, God judged His house, and watched over His people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 1](pe2001)

</div>
