<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](pe1001)  [Next](pe1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001)

Thus cleansed therefore and born of the word, they were to put off all
fraud, hypocrisy, envy, slander; and, as new-born babes, to seek for
this milk of the understanding, in order to grow thereby (for the word
is the milk of the child, as it was the seed of its life); and we are to
receive it as babes in all simplicity, if in truth we have felt that the
Lord is good and full of grace. It is not Sinai (where the Lord God
declared His law from the midst of the fire, so that they entreated not
to hear His voice any more), to which I am come, or from which the Lord
is speaking. If I have tasted and understood that the Lord acts in
grace, that He is love towards me, and that His word is the expression
of that grace, even as it communicates life, I shall desire to feed on
this milk of the understanding, which the believer enjoys in proportion
to his simplicity; that good word which announces to me nothing but
grace, and the God whom I need as all grace, full of grace, acting in
grace, as revealing Himself to me in this character a character which He
can never cease to maintain towards me, making me a partaker of His
holiness.

I now know the Lord Himself: I have tasted that which He is. Moreover
this is still in contrast with the legal condition of the Jew, although
it is the fulfillment of that which the Psalms and the prophets had
declared (the resurrection having plainly revealed in addition a
heavenly hope). It was they themselves who were now the spiritual house,
the holy priesthood. They came to the Living Stone, rejected indeed of
men, but chosen of God and precious, and they were built up on Him as
living stones. The apostle delights in this word " living." It was to
him the Father had revealed that Jesus was the Son of the living God. No
one else had then confessed Him as such, and the Lord told him that on
this rock (that is, on the Person of the Son of God in power of life,
manifested in the resurrection, which declared Him to be such) He would
build His assembly. Peter, by his faith, participated in the nature of
this living rock. Here then ([Pe1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005))
he extends this character to all believers, and exhibits the holy house
built on the Living Stone, which God Himself had laid as the chief
corner-stone elect and precious. Whosoever believed in Him should not be
confounded. \[See Note \#4\] Now, it was not only in the eyes of God
that this stone was precious, but in the eyes of faith which feeble as
the possessors of it may be sees as God sees. To unbelievers this stone
was a stone of stumbling and of offence. They stumbled at the word,
being disobedient, to which also they were appointed. It does not say
that they were appointed to sin nor to condemnation, but these
unbelieving and disobedient sinners, the Jewish race long rebellious,
and continually exalting themselves against God were destined to find in
the Lord of grace Himself a rock of offence; and to stumble and fall
upon that which was to faith the precious stone of salvation. It was to
this particular fall that their unbelief was destined.

Believers, on the contrary, entered into the enjoyment of the promises
made to Israel, and that in the most excellent way. Grace and the very
faithfulness of God had brought the fulfillment of the promise in the
Person of Jesus, the minister of the circumcision for the truth of God
to fulfill the promises made to the fathers. And, although the nation
had rejected Him, God would not deprive of the blessings those who in
spite of all this difficulty to faith and to the heart had submitted to
the obedience of faith and attached themselves to Him who was the
despised of the nation. They could not have the blessing of Israel with
the nation on earth, because the nation had rejected Him; but they were
brought fully into the relationship with God of a people accepted of
Him. The heavenly character which the blessing now assumed did not
destroy their acceptance according to the promise; only they entered
into it according to grace. For the nation, as a nation, had lost it;
not only long ago by disobedience, but now by rejecting Him who came in
grace to impart to them the effect, of the promise.

The apostle, therefore, applies the character of " holy nation" to the
elect remnant, investing them in the main with the titles bestowed in
Exodus 19, on condition of obedience, but here in connection with the
Messiah, their enjoyment of these titles being founded on His obedience
and rights acquired by their faith in Him.

But, the privileges of the believing remnant being founded on the
Messiah, the apostle goes farther, and applies to them the declarations
of Hosea, which relate to Israel and Judah when re-established in the
fullness of blessing in the last days, enjoying those relationships with
God into which grace will bring them at that time.

"Ye are," he says, "a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a purchased
people." These are almost the words of Exodus 19. He goes on: "Which in
time past were not a people, but are now the people of God; who formerly
had not obtained mercy, but have now obtained it." These are the words
of Hosea 2. This sets before us, in the most interesting way, the
principle on which the blessing is founded. In Exodus the people were to
have this blessing if they exactly obeyed the voice of God. But Israel
had not obeyed, had been rebellious and stiffnecked, had gone after
strange gods, and rejected the testimony of the Spirit; yet, after their
unfaithfulness, God Himself has laid in Zion a Stone, a chief
corner-stone, and whosoever believed in Him should not be confounded. It
is grace that, when Israel had failed in every respect, and on the
ground of obedience had lost everything, God should bestow on them by
Jesus, through grace, that which was promised them at first on condition
of obedience. In this way all was secured to them.

The question of obedience was settled on Israel's disobedience by grace,
and by the obedience of Christ, the foundation laid by God in Zion. But
this principle of grace abounding over sin by which is shewn the
inability of disobedience to frustrate the purposes of God, for this
grace came after the completion of disobedience this principle, so
glorious and so comforting to the convinced sinner, is confirmed in a
striking way by the quotation from Hosea. In this passage from the
prophet, Israel is presented, not merely as guilty, but as having
already undergone judgment. God had declared that He would no more have
mercy (with regard to His patience toward the ten tribes); and that
Israel was no longer His people (in His judgment on unfaithful Judah).
But afterwards, when the judgment had been executed, He returns to His
irrevocable purposes of grace, and allures Israel as a forsaken wife,
and gives her the valley of Achor the valley of trouble, in which Achan
was stoned, the first judgment on unfaithful Israel after their entrance
into the promised land for a door of hope. For judgment is changed into
grace, and God begins all afresh upon a new principle. It was as though
Israel had again come up out of Egypt, but upon an entirely new
principle. He betroths her to Him for ever, in righteousness, in
judgment, in grace, in mercy, and all is blessing. Then He calls her
"Ruhama," or, "the object of mercy," and " Ammi," " my people."

These, then, are the expressions which the apostle uses, applying them
to the remnant who believed in Jesus, the stumbling-stone to the nation,
but the chief corner-stone from God to the believer. Thus the condition
is taken away, and instead of a condition we have blessing after
disobedience, and after judgment the full and assured grace of God,
founded (in its application to believers) on the Person, the obedience,
and the work of Christ.

It is affecting to see the expression of this grace in the term "
Achor." It was the first judgment on Israel in the land of promise for
having profaned themselves with the forbidden thing. And there it is
that hope is given: so entirely true is it that grace triumphs over
justice. And it is this which has taken place in the most excellent way
in Christ. The very judgment of God becomes in Him the door of hope, the
guilt and the judgment having alike passed away for ever.

Two parts of the christian life so far as it is the manifestation of
spiritual power result from this, in the double priesthood; of which the
one answers to the present position of Christ on high, and the other
anticipatively to the manifestation of His glory on earth the
priesthoods of Aaron, and of Melchisedec. For He is now within the veil
according to the type of Aaron; hereafter He will be a priest on His
throne it will be the public manifestation of His glory on earth. Thus
the saints exercise " a holy priesthood " ([Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)) to offer up spiritual sacrifices
of praise and thanksgiving. Sweet privilege of the Christian, thus
brought as near as possible to God ! He offers sure of being accepted,
for it is by Jesus that he offers them his sacrifices to God.

This part of the christian life is the first, the most excellent, the
most vital, the source of the other (which is its expression here
below); the most excellent, because, in its exercise, we are in
immediate connection with the divine object of our affections. These
spiritual sacrifices are the reflex, by the action of the Holy Ghost, of
the grace which we enjoy; that which the heart returns to God, moved by
the excellent gifts of which we are the object, and by the love which
has given them. The heart (by the power of the Holy Ghost) reflects all
that has been revealed to it in grace, worshiping the Author and Giver
of all according to the knowledge we have of Himself through this means;
the fruits of the heavenly Canaan in which we participate presented as
an offering to God; the entrance of the soul into the presence of God to
praise and adore Him.

This is the holy priesthood, according to the analogy of the priesthood
of Aaron, and of the temple at Jerusalem which God inhabited as His
house.

The second priesthood of which the apostle speaks is to shew forth the
virtues of Him who has called us out of darkness into His marvelous
light. Its description is taken, as we have seen, from Exodus 19. It is
a chosen generation, a holy nation, a royal priesthood. I only allude to
the Melchisedec priesthood to shew the character of a royal priesthood.
Priests, among the Jews, drew near to God. God had formed the people for
Himself: they were to shew forth all His virtues, His praises. Christ
will do this perfectly in the day of His glory. The Christian is called
to do it now in this world. He is to reproduce Christ in this world. It
is the second part of his life.

It will be noticed that the first Chapter of this epistle presents the
Christian as animated by hope, but under trial the precious trial of
faith. The second Chapter presents him in his privileges, as of a holy
and royal priesthood, by means of faith.

After this ([Pe1 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011)), the apostle
begins his exhortations. Whatever may be the privileges of the
Christian, in his position as such, he is always viewed as a pilgrim on
the earth; and, as we have seen, the constant government of God is the
object which presents itself to the mind of the apostle. But he warns
them first, with regard to that which is inward, against those sources
from which the corruptions spring, that (in the scene of this
government) would dishonour the name of God and even bring in judgment.

Their conversation was to be honest among the Gentiles. Christians bore
the name of God. The mind of men, hostile to His name, sought to bring
disgrace upon it, by attributing to Christians the evil conduct which
they themselves followed without remorse, while at the same time
complaining ([Pe1 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#004)) that they would
not go with them in the same excesses and disorder. The Christian had
only to follow the path of faithfulness to God. In the day when God
would visit men these calumniators, with their will broken and their
pride subdued by the visitation of God, should be brought to confess by
means of the good works which, in spite of their calumnies, had always
reached their consciences that God had acted in these Christians, that
He had been present among them.

Note \#4

In this passage, so to speak (as in this alone), Peter meets the
doctrine of the assembly, and that under the character of a building,
not of a body or a bride; that which Christ built, not what was united
to Him. So Paul also presents it to us in [Eph
2:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020). In this view, though going on
on earth, it is Christ's work and a continuing process; no human
instrumentality is referred to: I will build, says Christ; it grows,
says Paul; living stones come, says Peter. This must not be confounded
with the building into which men may build wood and hay and stubble, as
the same thing; though the outward thing which God set up good, left to
man's responsibility, as, ever, was soon corrupted. Individuals are
built up by grace, and it grows into a holy temple. All this refers to
Matthew 16. The responsibility of human service in this respect is found
in 1 Corinthians 3, and the assembly is there given in another point of
view. The body is another thing altogether, the doctrine is taught in
Ephesians 1-4.; 1 Corinthians 12., and other passages.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 3](pe1003)

</div>
