<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2)  
  [Previous](pe2002)  [Next](jo1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001)

In the last Chapter, as we have said, it is materialism: trust in the
stability of that which can be seen, in contrast with trust in the word
of God which teaches us to look for the coming of Jesus, the return of
the Lord. They judge by their senses. There is, say they, no appearance
of change. This is not the case. To the eye of man it is indeed true
that there is none. But these believers are willfully ignorant of the
fact that the world has been already judged once; that the waters, out
of which by the mighty word of God the earth came, had for the moment
swallowed it up again, all perishing except those whom God preserved in
the ark. And by the same word the present heavens and earth are reserved
for the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men. It is not that the
Lord is slack concerning the promise of His return, but that He is still
exercising grace, not wishing any to perish, but that all should come to
repentance. And a thousand years are to Him but as a day, and a day as a
thousand years. But the day of the Lord shall come, in which all things
will pass away, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat and all
that is on the earth will be consumed. Solemn consideration for the
children of God, to maintain them in complete separation from evil, and
from all that is seen, looking for and hastening the day in which the
heavens shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent
heat! Everything on which the hopes of the flesh are founded shall
disappear for ever.

Nevertheless, there shall be new heavens and a new earth, in which
righteousness shall dwell. It is not here said, "shall reign," which
would be the thousand years of the Lord's dominion; here it is the
eternal state, in which the government, that has brought all things into
order, will terminate, and unhindered blessing will flow from God, the
kingdom being given up to God the Father.

It is in following out the ways of God in government that the apostle
carries them on to the eternal state, in which the promise will be
finally accomplished. The millennium itself was the restitution, of
which the prophets had spoken; and, morally, the heavens and the earth
had been changed by the imprisonment of Satan and the reign of Christ
(see [Isa 65:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017), Jerusalem having
been made a rejoicing); and the heavens indeed entirely cleared by
power, never to be defiled by Satan again, the saints on high too in
their eternal state, the earth delivered, but not yet finally freed.
But, materially, the dissolution of the elements was, necessary for the
renewal of all things.

It will be observed, that the Spirit does not speak here of the coming
of Christ, except to say that it will be scoffed at in the last days. He
speaks of the day of God, in contrast with the trust of unbelievers in
the stability of the material things of creation, which depends, as the
apostle shews, on the word of God. And in that day everything on which
unbelievers rested and will rest shall be dissolved and pass away. This
will not be at the commencement of the day, but at its close; and here
we are free to reckon this day, according to the apostle's word, as a
thousand years, or whatever length of period the Lord shall see fit.

So solemn a dissolution of all that the flesh rests upon should lead us
so to walk as to be found of the Lord, when He comes to introduce that
day, in peace and blameless; accounting that the apparent delay is only
the Lord's grace, exercised for the salvation of souls. We may well
wait, if God makes use of this time to rescue souls from judgment, by
bringing them to the knowledge of Himself, and saving them with an
everlasting salvation. This, the apostle says, had been taught by Paul,
who wrote to them (the Hebrew believers) of these things, as he did also
in his other epistles.

It is interesting to see that Peter, who had been openly rebuked before
all by Paul, introduces him here with entire affection. He notices that
Paul's epistles contained an exalted doctrine, which they who were
unstable, and not taught of God, perverted. For Peter in fact does not
follow Paul in the field on which the latter had entered. This however
does not prevent his speaking of Paul's writings as forming a part of
the scriptures; " as also the other scriptures," he says. This is an
important testimony; which moreover gives the same character to the
writings of one who is able to bestow this title on the writings of
another.

Let Christians then be watchful, and not allow themselves to be seduced
by the errors of the wicked but strive to grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To Him be glory both now
and for ever. Amen!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 1](jo1001)

</div>
