<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2.md)  
  [Previous](pe1005)  [Next](pe2002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)

[2 Peter 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 1:1</span></span>

The Second Epistle of Peter is even more simple than the First. Like
those of Jude and John, it is written essentially with a view to the
seducers, who, with large promises of liberty, beguiled souls into sin
and licentiousness, denying the coming of Christ, and in fact disowning
all His rights over them. The epistle admonishes the same Christians to
whom the First was written, pointing out the characteristic features of
these false teachers; denouncing them with the utmost energy; explaining
the long-sufferance of God, and announcing a judgment which, like His
patience, would befit the majesty of Him who was to execute it.

But before giving these warnings, which begin with Chapter 2, the
apostle exhorts Christians to make their own calling and election sure
not evidently in the heart of God, but as a fact in their own hearts,
and in practical life, by walking in such a manner as not to stumble; so
that testimony to their portion in Christ should be always evident, and
an abundant entrance be ministered to them.

These exhortations are founded, first, on that which is already given to
Christians; secondly, on that which is future namely, the manifestation
of the glory of the kingdom. In touching upon this last subject, he
indicates a still more excellent portion the bright Morning Star, the
heavenly Christ Himself and our association with Him before He appears
as the Sun of righteousness. Thirdly, we shall see that the warnings are
founded also on another basis namely, the dissolution of the heavens and
the earth, proving the instability of all that unbelief rested upon, and
furnishing for the same reason a solemn warning to the saints to induce
them to walk in holiness.

The apostle describes his brethren as having obtained the same precious
faith as himself through the faithfulness of God \[See Note \#1\] to the
promises made to the fathers, for that surely is the force of the word
"righteousness" in this place. The faithfulness of the God of Israel had
bestowed on His people this faith (that is to say, Christianity), which
was so precious to them. Faith here is the portion we have now in the
things that God gives, which in Christianity are revealed as truths,
while the things promised are not yet come. It was in this way that the
believing Jews were to possess the Messiah, and all that God gave in
Him, as the Lord had said. " Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe
in God, believe also in me. There are many mansions in my Father's
house; I go to prepare a place for you." That is to say, " You do not
visibly possess God; you enjoy Him by believing in Him. It is the same
with respect to Me: you will not possess Me corporeally, but you ,shall
enjoy all that is in Me righteousness, and all the promises of God by
believing." It was thus that these believing Jews, to whom Peter wrote,
possessed the Lord: they had received this precious faith.

He wishes them, as is the custom, " Grace and peace," adding, " through
the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord." It is the knowledge of God
and of Jesus, which is the centre and the support of faith, that which
nourishes it, and in which it is developed and divinely enlarged, and
which guards it from the vain imaginings of seducers. But there is a
living power with this knowledge a divine power in that which God is to
believers as He is revealed in this knowledge to faith; and this divine
power has given to us all that pertains to life and godliness. By the
realising knowledge which we possess of Him who has called us, this
divine power becomes available and efficacious for all that appertains
to life and godliness "he knowledge of him who hath called us by glory
and by virtue."

Thus we have here, the call of God to pursue glory as our object,
gaining the victory by virtue spiritual courage over all the enemies
that we find in our path. It is not a law given to a people already
gathered together, but glory proposed in order to be reached by
spiritual energy. Moreover we have divine power acting according to its
own efficacy, for the life of God in us, and for godliness.

How precious it is to know that faith can use this divine power,
realised in the life of the soul, directing it towards glory as its end!
What a safeguard from the efforts of the enemy, if we are really
established in the consciousness of this divine power acting on our
behalf in grace! The heart is led to make glory its object; and virtue,
the strength of spiritual life, is developed on the way to it. Divine
power has given us all needed.

Now, in connection with these two things namely, with glory and with the
energy of life very great and precious promises are given us; for all
the promises in Christ are developed either in the glory or in the life
which leads to it. By means of these promises we are made partakers of
the divine nature; for this divine power, which is realised in life and
godliness, is connected with these great and precious promises that
relate either to the glory, or to virtue in the life that leads to it
that is to say, it is divine power which develops itself, in realising
the glory and heavenly walk which characterises it in its own nature. We
are thus made morally partakers of the divine nature, by divine power
acting in us and fixing the soul on what is divinely revealed. Precious
truth! Privilege so exalted! and which renders us capable of enjoying
God Himself, as well as all good.

By the same action of this divine power, we escape the corruption that
is in the world through lust; for the divine power delivers us from it.
Not only do we not yield to it, but we are occupied elsewhere, and the
action of the enemy upon the flesh is kept off; the desires from which
one could not cleanse oneself are removed; the corrupt relationship of
the heart with its object ceases. It is a real deliverance; we have the
mastery over ourselves in this respect; we are set free from sin.

But it is not enough to have escaped by faith from even the inward
dominion of the desires of the flesh; we must add to faith to that faith
which realises divine power, and the glory of Christ that shall be
revealed we must add to faith, virtue. This is the first thing. It is,
as we have said, the moral courage which overcomes difficulties, and
governs the heart by curbing all action of the old nature. It is an
energy by which the heart is master of itself, and is able to choose the
good, and to cast aside the evil, as a thing conquered and unworthy of
oneself. This indeed is grace; but the apostle is here speaking of the
thing itself, as it is realised in the heart, and not of its source. I
have said that this is the first thing; because, practically, this
self-government this virtue, this moral energy is deliverance from evil,
and renders communion with God possible. It is the one thing which gives
reality to all the rest, for without virtue we are not really with God.
Can divine power develop itself in the laxity of the flesh? And if we
are not really with God if the new nature is not acting knowledge is but
the puffing up of the flesh; patience but a natural quality, or else
hypocrisy; and so on with the rest. But where there is this virtue, it
is very precious to add knowledge to it. We have then divine wisdom and
intelligence to guide our walk: the heart is enlarged, sanctified,
spiritually developed, by a more complete and profound acquaintance with
God, who acts in the heart and is reflected in the walk. We are guarded
from more errors we are more humble, more sober-minded: we know better
where our treasure is, and what it is, and that everything else is but
vanity and a hindrance. It is therefore a true knowledge of God that is
here meant.

Thus walking in the knowledge of God, the flesh, the will, the desires,
are bridled; all their practical power diminishes, and they disappear as
habits of the soul; they are not fed. We are moderate; there is
self-restraint; we do not give way to our desires; temperance is added
to knowledge. The apostle is not speaking of the walk, but of the state
of the heart in the walk. Still, being thus governed, and the will
bridled, one bears patiently with others; and the circumstances that
must be passed through are, in all respects, borne according to the will
of God, be they what they may. We add patience to temperance. The heart,
that spiritual life, is then free to enjoy its true objects a principle
of deep importance in the christian life. When the flesh is at work in
one way or another (even if its action is purely inward), if there is
anything whatever that the conscience ought to be exercised about, the
soul cannot be in the enjoyment of communion with God in the light
because the effect of the light is then to bring the conscience into
exercise. But when the conscience has nothing that is not already judged
in the light, the new man is in action with regard to God, whether in
realising the joy of His presence or in glorifying Him in a life
characterised by godliness. We enjoy communion with God; we walk with
God; we add to patience godliness.

The heart being thus in communion with God, affection flows out freely
towards those who are dear to Him, and who, sharing the same nature,
necessarily draw out the affections of the spiritual heart: brotherly
love is developed.

There is another principle, which crowns and governs and gives character
to all others: it is charity, love properly so called. This, in its
root, is the nature of God Himself, the source and perfection of every
other quality that adorns christian life. The distinction between love
and brotherly love is of deep importance; the former is indeed, as we
have just said, the source whence the latter flows; but as this
brotherly love exists in mortal men, it may be mingled in its exercise
with sentiments that are merely human. with individual affection, with
the effect of personal attractions, or that of habit, of suitability in
natural character. Nothing is sweeter than brotherly affections; their
maintenance is of the highest importance in the assembly; but they may
degenerate, as they may grow cool; and if love, if God, does not hold
the chief place, they may displace Him set Him aside shut Him out.
Divine love, which is the very nature of God, directs, rules, and gives
character to brotherly love; otherwise it is that which pleases us that
is, our own heart that governs us. If divine love governs me, I love all
my brethren; I love them because they belong to Christ; there is no
partiality. I shall have greater enjoyment in a spiritual brother; but I
shall occupy myself about my weak brother with a love that rises above
his weakness and has tender consideration for it. I shall concern myself
with my brother's sin, from love to God, in order to restore my brother,
rebuking him, if needful; nor, if divine love be in exercise, can
brotherly love, or its name, be associated with disobedience. In a word,
God will have His place in all my relationships. To exact brotherly love
in such a manner as to shut out the requirements of that which God is,
and of His claims upon us, is to shut out God in the most plausible way,
in order to gratify our own hearts. Divine love then, which acts
according to the nature, character, and will of God, is that which ought
to direct and characterise our whole christian walk, and have authority
over every movement of our hearts. Without this, all that brotherly love
can do is to substitute man for God. Divine love is the bond of
perfectness, for it is God, who is love, working in us and making
Himself the governing object of all that passes in the heart.

Now, if these things are in us, the knowledge of Jesus will not be
barren in our hearts. But if, on the contrary, they are wanting, we are
blind; we cannot see far into the things of God: our view is contracted;
it is limited by the narrowness of a heart governed by its own will, and
turned aside by its own lusts. We forget that we have been cleansed from
our old sins; we lose sight of the position Christianity has given us.
This state of things is not the loss of assurance, but the forgetfulness
of the true christian profession into which we are brought purity in
contrast with the ways of the world.

Therefore we ought to use diligence, in order to have the consciousness
of our election fresh and strong, so as to walk in spiritual liberty.
Thus doing, we shall not stumble; and thus an abundant entrance into the
eternal kingdom will be our portion. Here, as throughout, we see that
the apostle's mind is occupied with the government of God, applying it
to His dealing with believers, in reference to their conduct and its
practical consequences. He is not speaking in an absolute way of pardon
and salvation, but of the kingdom of the manifestation of His power who
judges righteously whose sceptre is a sceptre of righteousness. Walking
in the ways of God, we have part in that kingdom, entering into it with
assurance, without difficulty, without that hesitation of soul which is
experienced by those who grieve the Holy Ghost, and get a bad
conscience, and allow themselves in things that do not accord with the
character of the kingdom, or who shew by their negligence that their
heart is not in it. If on the contrary the heart cleaves to the kingdom,
and our ways are suitable to it, our conscience is in unison with its
glory. The way is open before us: we see into the distance, and we go
forward, having no impediments in our way. Nothing turns us aside as we
walk in the path that leads to the kingdom, occupied with things
suitable to it. God has no controversy with one who walks thus. The
entrance into the kingdom is widely opened to him according to the ways
of God in government.

The apostle desires, therefore, to remind them of these things, although
they knew them, purposing, so long as he was in his earthly tabernacle,
to stir up their pure hearts to keep them in remembrance; for soon would
he have laid aside his earthly vessel, as the Lord had told him, and by
thus writing to them, he took care that they should always bear them in
mind. It is very plain that he was not expecting other apostles to be
raised up, nor an ecclesiastical succession to take their place as
guardians of the faith, or as possessing sufficient authority to be a
foundation for the faith of believers. He was to provide for this
himself, in order that, on his removal, they might find something on his
part that would remind the faithful of the instructions he had given
them. For this purpose he wrote his epistle.

The divine importance and certainty of that which he taught were worthy
of this labour. We have not, says the apostle, followed cunningly
devised fables when we made known unto you the power and coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses of His majesty.

The apostle is speaking, as his words plainly shew, of the
transfiguration. I notice it here, in order to mark more evidently that
in his thoughts of the Lord's coming he does not go beyond His appearing
in glory. For the moment He was hidden from those who trusted in Him:
this was a great trial of their faith, for the Jews were accustomed, as
we know, to look for a visible and glorious Messiah. To believe without
seeing was the lesson they had to learn; and it was a magnificent
support to their faith, this fact, that the apostle, who taught them,
had, with his two companions, seen, with their own eyes, the glory of
Christ manifested had seen it displayed before them, together with that
of former saints who share His kingdom. At that time Jesus received, in
testimony from God the Father, honour and glory; a voice addressing Him
from the excellent glory from the cloud, which was to a Jew the
well-known dwelling place of Jehovah the Most High God owning Him as His
well-beloved Son; a voice which the three apostles also heard (even as
they saw His glory), when they were with Him on the holy mount. \[See
Note \#2\] We see that it is here the glory of the kingdom, and not the
dwelling, in the Father's house for ever with the Lord, which occupies
the apostle. It is a manifestation to men living on the earth; it is the
power of the Lord, the glory which He receives from God the Father as
the Messiah, acknowledged to be His Son, and crowned with glory and
honour before the eyes of the world. It is into the everlasting kingdom
that the apostle wishes them to have an enlarged entrance. It is the
power and glory that Christ received from God, which the apostle saw,
and to which he bears testimony. We shall indeed have this glory, but it
is not our portion, properly so called: for this is within the house, to
be the bride of the Lamb, and it does not display itself to the world.
With regard however to the assembly the two things cannot be separated;
if we are the bride, we shall assuredly participate in the glory of the
kingdom. \[See Note \#3\] To the Jew, who was accustomed to look for
this glory (whatever might be his idea respecting it), the fact of the
apostle's having seen it was of inestimable importance. It was the
heavenly glory of the kingdom, as it shall be manifested to the world; a
glory that shall be seen when the Lord returns in power. (Compare [Mar
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001).md) It is a communicated glory which
comes from the excellent glory. Moreover the testimony of the prophets
relates to the manifested glory; they spoke of the kingdom and glory,
and the brightness of the transfiguration was a splendid confirmation of
their words. We have, says the apostle, the words of the prophets
confirmed. Those words proclaimed indeed the glory of the kingdom which
was to come, and the judgment of the world, which was to make way for
its establishment on earth. This announcement was a light in the
darkness of our world, truly a dark place, that had no other light than
the testimony which God had given, through the prophets, of that which
shall happen to it, and of the future kingdom whose light shall finally
dispel the darkness of separation from God in which the world lies.
Prophecy was a light that shone during the darkness of the night; but
there was another light for those that watched.

For the remnant of the Jews, the Sun of righteousness should rise with
healing in His wings; the wicked should be trodden as ashes under the
feet of the righteous. The Christian, instructed in his own privileges,
knows the Lord in a different way from this, although he believes in
those solemn truths. He watches during the night which is already far
spent. He sees in his heart, by faith, \[See Note \#4\] the dawn of day,
and the rising of the bright star of the morning. He knows the Lord as
they know Him who believe in Him before He is manifested, as coming for
the pure heavenly joy of His own before the brightness of the day shines
forth. They who watch see the dawn of day; they see the morning star.
Thus we have our portion in Christ not only in the day, and as the
prophets spoke of Him, which all relates to the earth, although the
blessing comes from on high; we have the secret of Christ and of our
union with Him, and of His coming to receive us to Himself as the
morning star, before the day comes. We are His during the night; we
shall be with Him in the truth of that heavenly bond which unites us to
Him, as set apart for Himself while the world does not see Him. We shall
be gathered to Him, before the world sees Him, that we may enjoy
Himself, and in order that the world may see us with Him when He
appears.

The joy of our portion is, that we shall be with Himself, "for ever with
the Lord." Prophecy enlightens the Christian, and separates him from the
world, by testimony to its judgment, and the glory of the coming
kingdom. The testimony of the Spirit to the assembly does this, by the
attraction of Christ Himself, the bright Morning Star our portion while
the world is still buried in sleep.

The bright morning star is Christ Himself, when (before the day, which
will be produced by His appearing) He is ready to receive the assembly,
that she may enter into His own peculiar joy. Thus it is said, "I am the
bright and morning star." ([Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016)..md) This is what He is for the
assembly, as He is the root and offspring of David for Israel.
Consequently, as soon as He says " the morning star," the Spirit, who
dwells in the assembly and inspires her thoughts, and the bride, the
assembly itself which waits for her Lord, say, " Come !" Thus, in [Rev
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#028.md), the faithful in Thyatira are
promised by the Lord that He will give them the morning star, that is to
say, joy with Himself in heaven. The kingdom and the power had been
already promised them according to Christ's own rights ([Rev
2:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026).md); but the assembly's proper
portion is Christ Himself. In addition to the declaration of the
prophets, with regard to the kingdom, it is thus that the assembly
expects Him.

The apostle goes on to warn the faithful, that the prophecies of
scripture were not like the utterances of human will, and were not to be
interpreted as though each had a separate solution as though every
prophecy were sufficient to itself for the explanation of its full
meaning. They were all parts of one whole, having one and the same
object, even the kingdom of God; and each event was a preliminary step
towards this object, and a link in the chain of God's government which
led to it, impossible to be explained, unless the aim of the whole were
apprehended the revealed aim of the counsels of God in the glory of His
Christ. For holy men, moved by the Holy Ghost, pronounced these oracles,
one and the same Spirit directing and co-ordaining the whole for the
development of the ways of God to the eye of faith, ways which would
terminate in the establishment of that kingdom, the glory of which had
appeared at the transfiguration.

Thus we have here (Chapter 1) these three things: First, divine power
for all that appertains to life and godliness, a declaration of infinite
value, the pledge of our true liberty. Divine power acts in us, it gives
to us all needed to enable us to walk in the christian life.

Secondly, there is the government of God, in connection with the
faithfulness of the believer, in order that a wide and abundant entrance
into the everlasting kingdom may be granted us, and that we may not
stumble. The great result of this government will be manifested in the
establishment of the kingdom, the glory of which was seen on the holy
mount by the three apostles.

But, thirdly, for the Christian there was something better than the
kingdom, something to which the apostle merely alludes, for it was not
the especial subject of the communications of the Holy Ghost to him as
it was to the Apostle Paul, namely, Christ taking the assembly to
Himself, a point not found either in the promises or the prophecies, but
which forms the precious and inestimable joy and hope of the Christian
taught of God.

This first Chapter has thus taught us the divine aspect of the christian
position, given to the apostle for the instruction, in the last days, of
believers from among the circumcision.

Note \#1

This passage may be translated "of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ,"
and perhaps ought to be so rendered since it speaks of the faithfulness
of God to His promise. The Epistle to the Hebrews dwells also on the
fact that Jesus is Jehovah.

Note \#2

In Luke 9 the higher part of the blessing is brought before us. They
feared when they entered into thecloud. God had talked with Moses from
the cloud face to face, but here they enter into it. The heavenly and
eternal character, what is perpetual, is much more brought out in Luke.

Note \#3

Compare Luke 12, where the joy within the house is connected with
watching; the inheritance with service.

Note \#4

This is the construction of the sentence: "We have also the prophetic
word confirmed, in giving heed to which ye do well (as to a light
shining in a dark place, until the day shall dawn, and the morning star
arise, in your hearts."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 2](pe2002.md)

</div>
