<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philippians Index](phi)  
  [Previous](phi003)  [Next](col001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)

The Philippians were therefore to stand fast in the Lord. This is
difficult when the general tone is lowered; painful also, for one's walk
becomes much more solitary, and the hearts of others are straitened. But
the Spirit has very plainly given us the example, the principle, the
character, and the strength of this walk. With the eye on Christ all is
easy; and communion with Him gives light and certainty; and is worth all
the rest which perhaps we lose.

The apostle nevertheless spoke gently of those persons. They were not
like the false judaising teachers who corrupted the sources of life, and
stopped up the path of communion with God in love. They had lost this
life of communion, or had never had more than the appearance of it. He
wept for them.

I think that the apostle sent his letter by Epaphroditus, who probably
also wrote it from the apostle's dictation; as was done with regard to
all the epistles, except that to the Galatians, which, as he tells us,
he wrote with his own hand. When therefore he says ([Phi
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)), "true \[or faithful\]
yokefellow," he speaks as I think, of Epaphroditus, and addresses him.

But he notices also two sisters even, who were not of one mind in
resisting the enemy. In every way he desired unity of heart and mind. He
entreats Epaphroditus (if indeed it be he) as the Lord's servant to help
those faithful women who had laboured in concert with Paul to spread the
gospel. Euodias and Syntyche were perhaps of the number the connection
of thought makes it probable. Their activity, having gone beyond the
measure of their spiritual life, betrayed them into an exercise of
self-will which set them at variance. Nevertheless they were not
forgotten, together with Clement and others, who were fellow-labourers
with the apostle himself, whose names were in the book of life. For love
for the Lord remembers all that His grace does; and this grace has a
place for each of His own.

The apostle returns to the practical exhortations addressed to the
faithful, with regard to their ordinary life, that they might walk
according to their heavenly calling. "Rejoice in the Lord." If he even
weeps over many who call themselves Christians, he rejoices always in
the Lord; in Him is that which nothing can alter. This is not an
indifference to sorrow which hinders weeping, but it is a spring of joy
which enlarges when there is distress, because of its immutability, and
which becomes even more pure in the heart the more it becomes the only
one; and it is in itself the only spring that is infinitely pure. When
it is our only spring, we thereby love others. If we love them besides
Him, we lose something of Him. When through exercise of heart we are
weaned from all other springs, His joy remains in all its purity, and
our concern for others partakes of this same purity. Nothing moreover
troubles this joy, because Christ never changes. The better we know Him,
the better are we able to enjoy that which is ever enlarging through
knowing Him. But he exhorts Christians to rejoice: it is a testimony to
the worth of Christ, it is their true portion. Four years in prison
chained to a soldier had not hindered his doing it, nor being able to
exhort others more at ease than he.

Now this same thing will make them moderate and meek; their passions
will not be excited by other things if Christ is enjoyed. Moreover He is
at hand. A little while, and all for which men strive will give place to
Him whose presence bridles the will (or rather puts it aside) and fills
the heart. We are not to be moved by things here below until He shall
come. When He comes, we shall be fully occupied with other things.

Not only are the will and the passions to be bridled and silenced, but
anxieties also. We are in relationship with God; in all things He is our
refuge; and events do not disturb Him. He knows the end from the
beginning. He knows everything, He knows it beforehand; events shake
neither His throne, nor His heart; they always accomplish His purposes.
But to us He is love; we are through grace the objects of His tender
care. He listens to us and bows down His ear to hear us. In all things
therefore, instead of disquieting ourselves and weighing everything in
our own hearts, we ought to present our requests to God with prayer,
with supplication, with a heart that makes itself known (for we are
human beings) but with the knowledge of the heart of God (for He loves
us perfectly); so that, even while making our petition to Him, we can
already give thanks, because we are sure of the answer of His grace, be
it what it may; and it is our requests that we are to present to Him.
Nor is it a cold commandment to find out His will and then come: we are
to go with our requests. Hence it does not say, you will have what you
ask; but God's peace will keep your hearts. This is trust; and His
peace, the peace of God Himself, shall keep our hearts. It does not say
that our hearts shall keep the peace of God; but, having cast our burden
on Him whose peace nothing can disturb, His peace keeps our hearts. Our
trouble is before Him, and the constant peace of the God of love, who
takes charge of everything and knows all beforehand, quiets our
disburdened hearts, and imparts to us the peace which is in Himself and
which is above all understanding (or at least keeps our hearts by it),
even as He Himself is above all the circumstances that can disquiet us,
and above the poor human heart that is troubled by them. Oh, what grace!
that even our anxieties are a means of our being filled with this
marvellous peace, if we know how to bring them to God, and true He is.
May we learn indeed how to maintain this intercourse with God and its
reality, in order that we may converse with Him and understand His ways
with believers!

Moreover, the Christian, although walking (as we have seen) in the midst
of evil and of trial, is to occupy himself with all that is good, and is
able to do it when thus at peace, to live in this atmosphere, so that it
shall pervade his heart, that he shall be habitually where God is to be
found. This is an all-important command. We may be occupied with evil in
order to condemn it; we may be right, but this is not communion with God
in that which is good. But if occupied through His grace with that which
is good, with that which comes from Himself, the God of peace is with
us. In trouble we shall have the peace of God; in our ordinary life, if
it be of this nature, we shall have the God of peace. Paul was the
practical example of this; with regard to their walk, by following him
in that which they had learnt and heard from him and seen in him, they
should find that God was with them.

Nevertheless, although such was his experience, he rejoiced greatly that
their loving care of him had flourished again. He could indeed take
refuge in God; but it was sweet to him in the Lord to have this
testimony on their part. It is evident that he had been in need; but it
was the occasion of more entire trust in God. We can easily gather this
from his language; but, he delicately adds, he would not, by saying that
their care of him had now at last flourished again, imply that they had
forgotten him. The care for him was in their hearts; but they had not
had the opportunity of giving expression to their love. Neither did he
speak in regard of want; he had learnt for it is practical experience
and its blessed result we find here to be content under all
circumstances, and thus to depend on no one. He knew how to be abased:
he knew how to abound; in every way he was instructed both to be full
and to be hungry, to be in abundance and to suffer want. He could do all
things through Him who strengthened him. Sweet and precious experience!
not only because it gives ability to meet all circumstances, which is of
great price, but because the Lord is known, the constant, faithful,
mighty friend of the heart. It is not 'I can do all things,' but "I can
do all through him who strengtheneth me." It is a strength which
continually flows from a relationship with Christ, a connection with Him
maintained in the heart. Neither is it only 'One can do all things.'
This is true; but Paul had learnt it practically. He knew what he could
be assured of and reckon on what ground he stood on. Christ had always
been faithful to him, had brought him through so many difficulties and
through so many seasons of prosperity, that he had learnt to trust in
Him, and not in circumstances. And Christ was the same ever. Still the
Philippians had done well, and it was not forgotten. From the first God
had bestowed this grace upon them, and they had supplied the apostle's
need, even when he was not with them. He remembered it with affection,
not that he desired a gift, but fruit to their own account. "But," he
says, "I have all," his heart turning back to the simple expression of
his love He was in abundance, having received by Epaphroditus that which
they had sent him, an acceptable sacrifice of sweet odour, well-pleasing
to God.

His heart rested in God; his assurance with regard to the Philippians
expresses it. My God, he says, shall richly supply all your need. He
does not express a wish that God may do so. He had learnt what his God
was by his own experience. My God, he says, He whom I have learnt to
know in all the circumstances through which I have passed, shall fill
you with all good things. And here he returns to His character as he had
known Him. God would do it according to His riches in glory in Christ
Jesus. There he had learnt to know Him at the beginning; and such he had
known Him all along his varied path, so full of trials here and of joys
from above. Accordingly he thus concludes: "Now unto our God and Father"
for such He was to the Philippians also "be glory for ever and ever." He
applies his own experience of that which God was to him, and his
experience of the faithfulness of Christ, to the Philippians. This
satisfied his love, and gave him rest with regard to them. It is a
comfort when we think of the assembly of God.

He sends the greeting of the brethren who were with him, and of the
saints in general, especially those of Caesar's household; for even
there God had found some who through grace had listened to His voice of
love.

He ends with the salutation which was a token in all his epistles that
they were from himself.

The present state of the assembly, of the children of God, dispersed
anew, and often as sheep without a shepherd, is a very different
condition of ruin from that in which the apostle wrote; but this only
adds more value to the experience of the apostle which God has been
pleased to give us; the experience of a heart which trusted in God
alone, and which applies this experience to the condition of those who
are deprived of the natural resources that belonged to the organised
body, to the body of Christ as God had formed it on earth. As a whole,
the epistle shews proper christian experience, that is, superiority, as
walking in the Spirit, to everything through which we have to pass. It
is remarkable to see that sin is not mentioned in it, nor flesh, save to
say he had no confidence in it.

He had at this time a thorn in the flesh himself, but the proper
experience of the Christian is walking in the Spirit above and out of
the reach of all that may bring the flesh into activity.

The reader will remark that Chapter 3 sets the glory before the
Christian and gives the energy of christian life; Chapter 2, the
self-emptying and abasement of Christ, and founds thereon the
graciousness of the christian life, and thoughtfulness of others: while
the last Chapter gives a blessed superiority to all circumstances.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 1](col001)

</div>
