<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa040)  [Next](psa042) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 41](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Psalms 40 and 41.

In Psalm 40 then Christ is seen, not only in His passage through the
sorrows which beset His way, if He took up the cause of the disobedient
and guilty people of His love sorrows which gave Him the tongue of the
learned, and enabled Him to enter into those of the tried and spared
ones in the latter days, and give a voice to their cry suited to their
condition before God; but primarily the deliverance in which, having
waited on Jehovah in these sorrows, Jehovah's faithfulness was proved,
so that He came out from them for the encouragement of many, and then
the blessed key to His whole history in His having undertaken to do the
will of Jehovah, the whole Jewish system under the law being thus closed
and set aside. He has been perfectly faithful to Jehovah in the face of
the whole congregation of Israel, yet is in the deepest sorrow and
trial. So the psalm closes, and it is important it should, because the
thesis of it is complete deliverance. Hence the application of this very
deliverance to the sorrows of Christ, which were analogous to that of
the remnant, is most precious for the remnant when they are in them.

But this principle is brought out in a very distinct way in the psalm,
and makes it one of the most remarkable in this wonderful book. It
brings out the connection of Christ with Israel in the remnant in the
most striking way possible lays it down as a foundation for the whole
teaching of the Psalms, though the circumstances are altered after Psalm
41. That Christ is personally spoken of in it, I need hardly say, as the
apostle quotes it as His words, undertaking that blessed work by which
figures and symbols were set aside, and which has perfected, as he tells
us, the believer for ever. "Lo, I come" is the word of the Son's free
offering of Himself to accomplish the whole will of God in His work here
below according to the everlasting counsels of the Godhead. It is the
blessed Lord's undertaking the work. His work was to obey; but He in
perfect free voluntariness offers Himself for it in the delight of
willingly undertaken obedience. In the great congregation of Israel, in
pursuing His service to Jehovah, He had not shrunk (whatever reception
He met with) from preaching righteousness had not refrained His lips. He
had been faithful to His service at all cost; and it was Jehovah He thus
proclaimed. His righteousness, His faithfulness, His salvation, His
lovingkindness, and His truth, He had not refrained from declaring
before the whole body of Israel. Such had been His service.

Then, all changes with this faithful One; for innumerable evils have
compassed Him about. He looks for Jehovah's lovingkindness and truth, to
whom He had been faithful. Nor is it all that evils had compassed Him,
that men sought after His soul to destroy it. "Mine iniquities have
taken hold on me." He says, "so that I am not able to look up." Of
course, with Christ they were those of others of all the redeemed, and
also particularly of Israel viewed as a nation. In this state He desires
that those that seek Jehovah may be able to praise, to say continually,
Let Jehovah be magnified; and that the others may be ashamed and
confounded. He separates the godly remnant who seek Jehovah from those
who, when He is faithfully and lovingly presented, are enemies to Him
who manifests His name. Thus Christ closes His experience in this world,
poor and needy, yet assured that Jehovah thinks upon Him.

He is not forsaken in what is presented here, but comes into that place,
through a life of faithfulness, in which He was to undergo that dreadful
moment. It is the cry when, so to speak, He confesses the sins before
the victim is consumed or slain. He is in the deep sorrow of the
position crying to Jehovah, not in the wrath shown in the time of His
not being heard. The psalm depicts not that wrath, but the faithfulness
of Christ in waiting for Jehovah when in the sorrow, rather than seek
ease, or have twelve legions of angels, or drink the stupefying myrrh,
or shrink back from suffering the will of God any more than He did from
facing man when He preached it. He waited patiently for Jehovah; and He
inclined unto Him and heard His cry. This was His perfection: no outlet
from obedience sought, no shrinking, no turning back or aside. He waited
for Jehovah's time in the path of perfect obedience, and it came. The
time, as said of Joseph, came that His cause was known; it is not said
here how or when. The object of the Spirit here was to show to the tried
ones that One had gone before them in the path of sorrow and had been
heard. We can say that it was fully in resurrection; but even on the
cross the dark hour was passed, and with a loud voice He could commend
His own spirit to His Father, and His mother to His beloved disciple.

But these are details history has given us, not prophecy; they would not
have been available for the remnant. They want to know that they will be
heard when waiting patiently for Jehovah. If killed, the answer will be
for them in resurrection; if not, to have Israel's place in blessing, I
doubt not with the Lamb on Mount Zion, as having gone through (however
feebly or infirmly) like trials and sorrows in faithfulness to Jehovah
in the great congregation. Do their iniquities alarm them? they are not
left out. They do not yet know atonement, but they know that One, who
could say, "Mine iniquities have taken hold of me," waited patiently,
was heard and delivered. They wait, trusting the mercy of Jehovah,
though peace be not yet known. Their iniquities have taken hold of them,
so that they feel: how can they hope Jehovah will deliver them? There is
forgiveness with Him, that He may be feared. And the psalm assures them
that One in like depths has been set free. When they look upon Him, they
will judge their sins in the light of His having born them and they will
find peace; but the foundation of peace is laid in hope for them here. A
heart failing under iniquities, laying hold of it, can look for
deliverance. It has been found (and however obscure their light, and it
will be), the ground of hope is laid. Compare [Isa
50:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#010), which describes this very
state, consequent, as to the remnant, on Christ's being justified and
helped.

But this is not all. Messiah puts Himself in this association with them.
"He hath put a new song in my mouth, praise unto our God: many shall see
it and fear, and shall trust in Jehovah." Blessed is the man that makes
Jehovah his trust and does not trust outward prosperity nor apostatise
to lying vanities. So in Verse 5 ([Psa
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005)), to usward. That is, in Verse 1
([Psa 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#001)), we have Christ, who has
waited on Jehovah, and been heard, and brought up out of a horrible pit
and miry clay. I doubt not that David's heart sung it: still it is
surely Christ in prophetic purpose. But then Christ identifies Himself
(though, as we have seen, distinguishing the remnant) with Israel.
Praise, He says, unto our God. The effect of this is that many see it,
fear, and trust in Jehovah. It acts on the remnant in the latter day,
and leads them to trust in Jehovah. They can trust for deliverance too;
many will. His preaching righteousness to the great congregation
gathered a little flock. His deliverance as the suffering One will be
blessed to many. Who hath begotten me all these? says Zion in that day.
This may take in the ten tribes too; still, as a principle, a multitude
will be there. It was not so at Christ's first coming. He was to be a
despised and rejected One in His own history and trial.

Verse 5 ([Psa 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005)). These are the
thoughts of Jehovah in blessing. This leads to the great thought, the
center and groundwork of it all Christ coming to do Jehovah's will. Now,
we can comment, or, still better, the Spirit of God has commented for
us, on the value of His doing Jehovah's will. Here we have much more the
faithfulness of Christ in doing it, His being overwhelmed with
iniquities taking hold of Him in His own spirit, as we see in
Gethsemane, but deliverance. We must remember that the confession of
sins over the head of the sacrifice was not the slaying, or casting into
the fire, of the victim. So Christ's acknowledging thus, or confessing
the iniquities with which He was charging Himself as His, was not His
enduring the wrath, nor His being cut off out of the land of the living.
Dreadful indeed it must have been to Him, as we see in the Gospels, and
He saw all that was coming upon Him by reason of it; still it was
essentially different confessing the sins and bearing the wrath due to
them. His confession of sins His people must (I will not say imitate,
but) take up in the knowledge that those He confessed were their own;
and may, till grace is fully known, do it with dreadful anguish and
apprehension of the wrath to come. It is this which particularly,
besides outward trials, constitutes the analogy between the Jewish
remnant and the Lord. The wrath endured in atonement, we know, He
endured that we never might.

In this psalm then we see Christ, according to the eternal counsels of
God, come to do God's will in human nature, taking His place in the
midst of the great congregation of Israel, suffering most deeply in
consequence, getting into the horrible pit, but His trust is firm in
Jehovah. He waited patiently for Him, and He is brought up, and a new
song put into His mouth. The first three Verses ([Psa
40:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#001)) state the great fact: Jehovah
heard and delivered out of the horrible pit. It is a lesson for all the
remnant. How blessed is the man who trusts Jehovah, and does not look at
the appearance of persons to turn aside after vanity! Then we get the
course of events. Wonderful have been Jehovah's counsels. Christ comes
to do His will as a man, delights to do it, declares Jehovah's
righteousness before all. This brings Him into the greatest distress.
Evils come upon Him unnumbered, and, besides that, His iniquities (those
of His people) come upon Him; but patience has its perfect work, and He
is perfect and complete in all the will of God; and, as the psalm shows
at the beginning, He is delivered, as we well know. But, as already
said, the psalm recites His faithfulness especially. Hence we see Him up
to the close of the trial still under it. What He asks for is that the
ungodly, being found His enemies, may be set aside; but that the poor of
the flock may be able to praise, rejoice, and be glad in Jehovah.

It is beautiful to see His perfect patience in the trial, that the whole
will of God may be accomplished, and seeking the joy and full blessing
of the poor remnant; yet Himself taking the place of complete dependence
on Jehovah, and praying for His coming in as God. Obedience and
dependence are the two characteristics of the acting of the divine life
in man towards God. It may be remarked here that the testimony in the
congregation is closed when the innumerable evils come upon Him. The
preface of the psalm speaks of the horrible pit when He is out of it,
and we know whereunto He was obedient; but His death is not spoken of
here. In the body of the psalm we have, as come to do God's will, His
faithfulness in life as witness, and the evils that came upon Him at the
close when He had to meet the burden of the iniquity of His people. The
fourth Verse ([Psa 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#004)) applies to
the remnant the result of Christ's faithfulness for instruction and
encouragement.

A few words on the expression, "opened my ears." The word is not the
same as in Exodus 21. There it is attaching the ear with an awl to the
door post; the man thus became a servant for ever. Nor is it the same as
in Isaiah 50, where it has the signification of being so completely a
servant to His Master's will that He received His commands morning by
morning. Here it is "digged ears" that is, took the place of a servant).
But this He did, as may be seen in Philippians 2, by becoming a man.
Hence the Spirit accepts the interpretation of the LXX "a body hast thou
prepared me." Compare John 13 (which answers in point of time to Exodus
21); [Luk 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#037), and [Co1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028).

Psalm 41 shows the blessedness of the man who understands this position
of the poor of the flock and enters into it (compare [Mat
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003); [Luk
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#020)). It is spoken in the person of
one of the suffering remnant doubtless with the psalmist's own
experience. It is one of the psalms in which Christ takes up an
expression to show how, in the close of His life, when He entered into
their sorrows, He tasted fully their bitterness. Still the poor man is
upheld in his integrity, and set before Jehovah's face. The apparent
triumph of the wicked is short.

This closes the book. It is the experience, as a whole, of the remnant
before they are driven out, or at the least of those who are not so. And
the covenant name of Jehovah is used. Hence, the place of Christ is
entered into, so far as He came and set Himself amongst the poor of the
flock upon earth, and led the life of sorrow and integrity in the midst
of evil. Of this last psalm He is not the subject, as Verse 4 ([Psa
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004)) shows.

We have seen an introduction in the first eight psalms, in which the
whole scene is brought before us in its principles and result in the
purpose of God; then in Psalms 9, 10, the actual historical
circumstances of the Jews in the latter day. Thus, as to historical
facts, their state forms the groundwork and subject of the whole book;
while the way in which Christ could enter into their sorrows, and they
be encouraged by His example, is fully introduced. His whole life amidst
the nation is passed in review; but particularly the close, when, after
declaring God's righteousness in the great congregation, He passed into
the deep sufferings of the last hours of His passage on earth, going on
to His being forsaken of God. Yet it was for Him surely for us, blessed
be God the path of life.

Psalm 40 has this peculiar interest, that it gives us, not merely the
history of Christ, His faithfulness, but His freely offering Himself to
accomplish all that the Father's counsels required of Him; and then
shows Him waiting in obedience till Jehovah was pleased to come in. And
then He has the new song to sing. Of this intervention of God the
resurrection was the grand witness; through which, as we have seen in
Psalm 22, He has awakened, or rather created, it in so many other
hearts. As is common, the first three Verses ([Psa
40:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#001)) give the thesis the rest all
that led up to this: only here it is traced from His first offering
Himself to do it.

The reader will remark in Psalm 41 what we have noticed as
characterising the remnant the acknowledgment of sin (([Psa
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004))), and the declaration of
integrity (([Psa 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#012))). We have
Christ using it as to Himself, showing, though the psalm be not of Him,
how He took the place to which the spirit of the whole applies. The
proud and wicked could despise and trample upon the meek and lowly, and
perhaps chastened, remnant. Here it is more the false and treacherous
spirit of those whom he ought to have been able to trust. Blessedness is
with those who understand, the meek and lowly ones who are chastened,
for they understand the Lord's ways; the meek one himself looks to the
Lord when His hand is upon him. The point of the psalm is the
blessedness of those who understand and enter into the position of those
with whom Jehovah is dealing. This place, Christ fully took, though not
chastened with sickness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 42](psa042)

</div>
