<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa015)  [Next](psa017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001)

With Psalm 16 we begin a very important series of psalms those in which
the connection of Christ Himself with the remnant is brought before us
by the divine Spirit. In Psalm 16, Christ takes formally His place among
the remnant. It is quoted by the apostle Peter to prove His
resurrection, and the principle of it is referred to in the epistle to
the Hebrews to show His participation in human nature. \[See Note \#1\]
After examining many critical authorities, I adhere to the English
translation of the second verse. The third leaves the sense obscure,
from not changing the preposition. "But to the saints" answers to "said
unto the Lord," not to "extendeth not to thee." He says to the Lord, "My
goodness... to the saints,... in them is all my delight." Thus this
psalm has a most important and deeply interesting place. It is Christ
taking His place in grace amongst the poor remnant of Israelof the
servant to tread the path of life which none as in flesh had found in
this world, and that leading through death to beyond it, where there was
fullness of joy. He takes the place of dependence, of trust, not of
divine equality. And He who says He does not, must have had title to do
so, or need not have said it. He was taking another place. He takes the
place of servant, and calls Jehovah His Lord. Nor was this all. He takes
a place, however alone He might be in perfection and perfect in doing
it, with the saints on earth. And this He does, not merely as a fact,
but with the fullest affection. His delight is in them. He joys to call
them the excellent of the earth.

Note further, it is not with the heavenly saints He associates Himself,
nor are those of whom He speaks here united to Him in heaven, but He
associated with them. Some may go to heaven by that path of life of
which He has Himself left the track, but His association with them, and
theirs with Him, is under the title of the excellent of the earth.

We may further remark, that the whole psalm breathes this spirit, and
takes this place, of dependence, so precious for the poor remnant. It is
not, Destroy this temple and I will raise it up in three days that was
taking a divine place. His body was a temple; He raised it up Himself.
Here He leans as man on Jehovah in both perfect. "Thou wilt not leave my
soul in hell, nor wilt thou suffer thy Holy One to see corruption." Let
us now consider the contents of this psalm in more detailed order. We
have already noticed the first verses; but the principles are of the
last importance, as presenting Christ taking this place, so that I
return to them.

Messiah looks as man to God to preserve Him. He takes the place of man.
It is not merely a Jew already there calling on Jehovah, but a man with
God. He puts His trust in Him. The principle of trust Paul alleges in
Hebrews 2 as a witness that Messiah was the true man. Next, He takes the
place of a servant. He says to Jehovah for now He takes His place before
Him "Thou art my Adoni, my Lord." This is a definite and distinct place.
He moreover takes His place, not in divine goodness towards others, but
before God in a man's place. My goodness, He says, extendeth not to
thee. Thus He said to the young man who came to Him, "Why callest thou
me good? there is none good but one, that is God." But though in truth
alone, looked at in His relationship to man, for all were sinners, He
takes His place with the remnant, the excellent of the earth. This He
did historically, when He went to the baptism of John Baptist, with
those whom the Spirit led to God in the holy path of repentance. They
went first there. He associates Himself with them in grace. Still, we
look on to the full result in the last days even here. He will not hear
of any God but Jehovah. The sorrows of those who did should be
multiplied. Jehovah Himself was His portion, and He maintained Him in
the sure enjoyment of that which He was to enjoy in the purpose of God,
and pleasant was the place where the lines had fallen to Him. It was
Jehovah's inheritance on the earth that was His portion, and this is
specially in Israel. Such was His portion; but then there was His path
first. Here He blesses Jehovah too. His counsel was always His guide. He
walked by it. The secret of Jehovah was with Him to guide Him; and away
from men, when all was brought into the silence of His heart and its
inmost feelings, His own inmost thoughts were light and guidance. It is
ever so when we are in communion with God; for, though in the heart
(such thoughts are always His light in it, the fruit, and the moral
fruit, of the working of His Spirit) there was the positive direction
and guidance of Jehovah, and those inward apprehensions of His soul, the
result of divine work in it.

In Christ of course this was perfect. It is well, while judging of all
by the word, not to neglect this working of the soul, as moved and
taught of God. The mind of the Spirit in moral discernment, is found in
it. Besides this guidance, there was positive purpose of heart. He had
set Jehovah always before Him. This only direction did He follow, and
because of His being near, and at His right hand, He would not be moved.
It was not self-dependence, but trust in Jehovah. This was indeed the
path of life, though as yet unmanifested in visible power (compare [Rom
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)).

Hence He would rejoice through all, and pass through death with
unclouded hope; His flesh should rest in it; as a man He did not fear
it. Jehovah, whom He trusted, would not leave His soul in Hades, nor
suffer His Holy One to see corruption. Soul and body, though going
respectively to the place of departed spirits and the place of
corruption, would not be left in the one or see the other. Jehovah would
show Him the path of life through, but beyond, death. How blessedly He
did so! It led up to brighter joys than Israel's blessing, among whom He
had come to sojourn. There indeed the excellent of the earth could not
follow Him ([Joh 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#033); [Joh
13:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036); [Joh
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#019)). He must first dry up the
waters of Jordan for them, and make it the path for them also where He
was gone. For that path, since it led through death, must lead, if it
was indeed the path of life, to what was beyond it the presence of Him,
in whose presence there is fullness of joy and at whose right hand are
pleasures for evermore.

Such is the blessed issue and result of the Lord's path across this
world, where He took His place among the saints, and trod, in confidence
on Jehovah (into whose hands He committed His spirit), the path which,
if He took us up, must lead through death, and then found the path again
in resurrection, and so as man up to Him with whom is fullness of joy.
The Spirit of holiness marked the life of the Son of God all through. He
was declared to be such, with power, by resurrection; but, being man,
passed up into the presence of God. The holy confiding life found its
perfect joy there. He is (blessed be God, and the name of that blessed
One who has trod this path!) our forerunner. \[See Note \#2\]

Let us dwell for a moment on the connection of this with other
scriptures, partially referred to. It is of importance, as showing
Christ's position in the midst of Israel, and the difference of their
associations with Him, from those of the saints of the assembly. And
besides that, we get the divinely perfect feelings of Christ Himself in
this position: He is in association with the saints in Israel; only He
voluntarily takes it (that is, that into which they are called out in
witness of their return to God). We see ([Heb
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#013)) that this association is with
those that are sanctified. He makes one company with that pious remnant
manifested thus for God. He is not ashamed to call them brethren, having
taken up their cause and consequently become man, become flesh and
blood, because the children whom God had given Him partook of it.

We see that He really became man, but to identify Himself with the
interests, and to secure the blessing of the saints, \[See Note \#3\] of
the remnant, of the children whom God was bringing to glory, and who are
distinguished from the mass of Israel, to whom they were to be a sign
(see [Isa 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018)). In this passage the
condition of this remnant and the expectation of better days are
considered. Leaving aside the assembly which is not the subject of
prophecy, the passage passes, as we often see, from Christ's personal
connection with the saints in Israel to this position and portion of
these saints in the last days. This is with sufficient distinctness
given us in this passage of Isaiah to help us much in understanding the
way in which the Spirit of God does pass from the previous history of
the saints in Israel over to the last days, leaving out the assembly
altogether. Christ, in spirit, contemplates these only His connection,
that is, with the remnant of Israel, and so far with the nation, and
thus passes over the whole history of the assembly, to Himself again in
the same connection with the nation in the last days.

"Bind up the testimony," He says ([Isa
8:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)), "seal the law among my
disciples, and I will wait \[See Note \#4\] upon Jehovah, who hideth his
face from the house of Israel, and will look for him." This was when He
had become the rejected sanctuary and the stumbling-stone.

It continues to the final glory, when Israel shall possess Him as the
Son born to them ([Isa 9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)). If we
do not abstract the assembly, it is impossible to understand the
prophecies of the Old Testament. The assembly has her heavenly portion,
but Christ can consider His relationship with His earthly people
separately.

To return to Psalm 16, the reader will remark the reference to idolatry
(one of God's great controversies with Israel) in the fourth Verse ([Psa
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004)). From [Mat
12:43-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043), and Isaiah 65 we learn that
the Jews will fall into idolatry in the latter days. Jehovah alone is
acknowledged by the prophetic Spirit of Christ. It is after this is all
done away that He will rejoice, in the days that are to come, in the
portion which Jehovah has given Him with the excellent of the earth. The
certainty of this hope is connected with the resurrection (which is a
necessary condition to its fulfillment, and which the favor of Jehovah
secures to His Anointed) in all the virtue of that power which will not
suffer His Holy One to see corruption. Hence the apostle refers to the
sure mercies of David; that is, to the accomplishment of all God's
promises to Israel, as a proof that Christ was to rise from the dead now
no more to return to corruption. Nothing can be more beautiful (if it be
not His death) than the expression of the Lord's feelings given us in
this psalm the expression by Himself of the place He has taken, and that
with the saints. Jehovah is His own portion. How truly was it so! What
other had He? Yet His delight was in the saints. Do we not see it in His
disciples? With the first step of spiritual life in the remnant, shown
in their going to John's baptism of repentance, He identifies Himself
who surely had no need of repentance. So, as a faithful man, an
Israelite, He sets Jehovah always before Him. So, even in death, He
rests, in confidence, on Him for resurrection, that path of life
through, and in spite of, death (and which He has opened for us), and
there Jehovah, God, His Father's presence, is (He knows) the fullness of
joy; at His right hand pleasures for evermore. This is the highest
proper joy of the mind and Spirit of Christ; not glory, but the presence
of God.

Note \#1

The quotation in Hebrews 2 is literally from the LXX of Isaiah 8.

Note \#2

Compare as to a special aspect of this, [Joh
12:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023); and the Lord's consequent
place, in chapters 11, 12, 13, as we have seen, had given testimony to
His place according to Psalm 2. See note on Psalm 8.

Note \#3

Thus, becoming man, and through glorifying God in His work as man, He
has also title under God's gift over all flesh.

Note \#4

This is the passage quoted in Hebrews 2 "I will put my trust in him."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 17](psa017)

</div>
