<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa025)  [Next](psa027.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001.md)

Psalm 26 is especially the pleading of integrity and trust in Jehovah.
Having trusted Him, the godly would surely not slide. He invites Jehovah
to search his inmost heart, as Peter did even though fallen. Here, still
the goodness of Jehovah was his first motive. Then the separation of the
godly from the ungodly body of the nation is fully brought out and taken
as a plea that they might not have their souls gathered with the
ungodly. Still, though integrity was pleaded, redemption is sought, and
mercy. The end would be blessing. Their foot stood in an even place.
They would, in the full assembly, bless Jehovah. This is substantially
the entire separation of the godly from the nation, and the former
becoming the congregation of God.

Thus in these two psalms we have the confession of sins and the pleading
of integrity, both marking the real renewal of mind. Though the
possibility of government in forgiveness and mercy is founded on the
atonement which has been presented in Psalm 22, and is owned fully in
Isaiah 53 by Israel subsequent to the period of these psalms; yet the
aspect in which all is viewed by the remnant in these two psalms is the
known character and government of Jehovah in Israel; and the feelings of
a renewed heart are expressed in reference to that government to
Jehovah's ways. His name is the key to their thoughts, and awakens their
best and truest affections. It is the faith of a godly Israelite in the
last days. The moral state of the remnant is especially brought out in
all this part, and more especially their own with Jehovah, circumstances
comparatively little; though the enemies without and the transgressors
around form necessarily the occasion of those feelings in respect of
deliverance and redemption. The heart of the godly one has the key to
all Israel's history and Jehovah's dealings with them, because grace is
looked to, and sin confessed. This it is that ever gives understanding.
And so it is here. Jehovah's ways have been are perfect. He is called
upon to remember His own mercies, and not the early sins of His people.
The enemies of His people are presented to Him. The hope of forgiveness
is founded on Jehovah's name (it is, as we have seen, connected with His
government; they have not yet looked on Christ, and understood
atonement); the faithful looks to be guided in the way, and Jehovah's
faithfulness to him is reckoned on. His sins, sorrows, and enemies are
all presented to Him with an open heart. Covenant mercies can be seen,
looked to, because Jehovah is, in truth by an upright confessing sinner.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 27](psa027.md)

</div>
