<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa030)  [Next](psa032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001)

Psalm 31 is a proof how Jesus could use devout and holy expressions of a
psalm, and indeed pass through all in spirit, without its having a
literal application to Him. Here is found the expression He used, "Into
thy hand I commit my spirit," which was in the fullest sense true. But
the psalm continues, "For thou hast redeemed me, O Jehovah God of truth.
"He added Father. Yet I doubt not that His spirit had got into the
comfort of divine delight again. Still the words, "thou hast redeemed
me," cannot apply. \[See Note \#1\] So the whole complaint of the psalm
is, besides David, the complaint and confidence of the remnant
connecting the two principles, trust and righteousness, and looking for
guidance for Jehovah's name's sake, and deliverance when surrounded by
enemies. The godly man had called on Jehovah. His name was in question.
On His goodness, laid up for them that trusted in Him, he counted; and
this in the midst of a life spent in sighing. Distress pressed upon him,
and drank up his strength. Yet, tried for faithfulness, friends and
acquaintances fled from him. Such will be the condition of the remnant.
How truly Christ entered into it, I need not say. But the time of
deliverance, and of all that in any time the saint should be under and
pass through, were in God's hand not the enemy's, though he might rage.
And in the adversities Jehovah knew his soul, for he walks in the
knowledge of covenant-relationship. The presence of Jehovah was a
tabernacle and a hiding-place. In the pressure of his spirit, the godly
thought himself cast off; but when he cried, Jehovah heard. In all the
rage around ([Psa 31:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#013)) he cried
to Jehovah as his God. The result he now celebrates, and encourages the
saints in the last two verses, and all that hope in Jehovah. Whatever
sorrows they are in, Jehovah helps the faithful and judges the proud.

This, in a certain sense, closes and sums up the experimental expression
by the Spirit of the state of the remnant? and fully unfolds it. In the
psalm that follows, forgiveness in grace is spoken of. Then there is a
clearer apprehension and more objective confidence and judgment of all
around, till we come to Psalms 38, 39, which have a peculiar character
of their own. Of course, deliverance is not yet come; but the sentiment
expressed is become more that of favor in light than confidence out of
the depths. How fully this Psalm 31 is the expression of the Spirit of
Christ must be obvious to every divinely-taught reader. Yet His own
relationship was different. He was Son, and commends His spirit to His
Father in death, not to Jehovah to save Him from it; and, as we have
seen in the preface, prays for His enemies who crucified Him, instead of
demanding vengeance upon them. This demand of His Spirit in the remnant
is according to His mind in that day. In Him personally it must have
been otherwise; for He came in grace, and was giving His life a ransom
for Israel and for many. Hence He passed through all in perfection with
His Father in Gethsemane, and gives Himself up then, as being His will,
to death. Yet, as to the sorrow and trial, He went through all. And the
prophetic Spirit in the Psalms expresses in the denunciatory words what
will certainly be accomplished as the consequence of the wicked enmity
of the Jews and heathens too at the close; and will become living
demands in the mouth of the remnant, whose only and necessary
deliverance these judgments will be.

Christ did ask life, and it was given in resurrection and glory, as
Psalm 21 shows; but not, as we know, in His being spared here. The path
of life led for Him through death in the accomplishment of redemption,
though He could not be holden of it. Thus in spirit He entered into all
their affliction. The literal application in the writer's mind was to
his own feelings; the prophetical is to the godly remnant in the latter
day. The word translated "iniquity," in Verse 10 ([Psa
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010)), should, I doubt not, be
"distress." But the fullness of the various motives and feelings brought
together in this psalm require a further brief notice. I have already
remarked how the two grounds, so frequently found, of the appeal of the
saint's trust in God, and righteousness as the motive and ground of it,
are both brought together here. The name's sake of Jehovah is also added
here. In Verses 3-6 ([Psa 31:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#003)) we
have His utter rejection of the followers of idolatrous vanities. In
Verse 7 ([Psa 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#007)) Jehovah's goodness
is recognized as mercy. He has known the soul of the believer in
adversities a sweet thought, how dark soever all may have been. And
deliverance was granted (([Psa
31:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009))) He pleads his extreme
present distress. The first eight Verses ([Psa
31:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001)) are a kind of preface of
general principles; now it is the pressure of his present state. He was
a reproach to enemies, specially to neighbors a fear to his
acquaintance; so mean, despised, and yet hated and rejected, was he. It
is the portion of a divine character, of God Himself, to be both. Man
neglects a despised person; but he never does God, or what is of Him.
\[See Note \#2\] They will bring Him low if He puts Himself low, or
those that are His; but will fear and hate Him too. He is forgotten, yet
slandered, and the active enemy plotting against his life. Thus Verses
9-13 ([Psa 31:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009)) give the condition
the Spirit of Christ, or Christ Himself, holds in the world.

It is a most striking picture in Verse 14 ([Psa
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#014)). He trusts in Jehovah. All that
is to befalll him is, after all, in His hand. Another motive now is
pleaded. He has called on Jehovah. It is the lying lips which should be
put to silence (([Psa 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#018))).
Confidence in goodness laid up for them is there, and the hiding in
God's presence for the time of evil (([Psa
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020))). Verse 21 ([Psa
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#021)) celebrates the faithfulness of
Jehovah. Verses 23, 24 ([Psa
31:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023)), encourage the saints by it.
Thus, with the extremist distress, all the pleas of the faithful are
beautifully brought together here. All these past psalms have been the
feelings of Israel under the pressure of distress, and sought
deliverance from it. And this Israel will do.

Note \#1

The only possible sense it could have as to Him was the deliverance of
His soul at that moment as a fact, from the curse He bore for us, in
which He had perfectly glorified God as to our sins, and as made sin for
us. But the Lord does not use it. But though He had as a fact yet to
die, its bitterness and sting were past.

Note \#2

What thief would, if hung, revile another thief hung by his side? But
the condemned thief did so to Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 32](psa032)

</div>
