<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa016)  [Next](psa018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001)

The key to Psalm 16 was in the words, "In thee do I put my trust"; to
Psalm 17, "Hear the right." In Psalm 16 we have seen the blessed path
and working of that spirit of confidence. It is, though the same spirit
works in the remnant, essentially applicable to Christ Himself in
Person. Psalm 17 doubtless applies to Him also, but not so entirely so.
It is on somewhat lower ground, though one on which the Spirit of God
speaks. We see distinctly that it contemplates others, though not
without Christ, in Verse 11 ([Psa
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#011)). "They have now compassed us in
our steps." Still, Christ is found here: without Him none really could
say to purpose, Hear the right. It is an appeal to the judgment of
Jehovah, God, coming forth to vindicate the righteousness of Him that
cries to Him. The godly remnant will be, in the main, delivered from
their deadly enemies. Jehovah will arise and disappoint them.

Still, some will fall, even of the wise ([Dan
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#035)) Christ Himself, the perfect
One, though for more glorious reasons, still in sympathy with His
people, did. Hence the righteousness goes higher up than the present
deliverance by God's government of the godly remnant on earth, to a
result true of Christ, and a comfort for the faith of all those who may
fall under the oppression of the enemy. "I will behold thy face in
righteousness; I shall be satisfied when I awake up after thy likeness."
This is fully true of Christ, who is before His Father in righteousness,
and is the very image of the invisible God He in whom He is displayed in
glory. But He traces the path He trod as the righteous One on earth, in
the midst of evil, and where He underwent the temptations of the enemy.
First, there was perfect integrity of heart, and that in the most secret
thoughts of it. There was purpose not to transgress. In obedience the
words of God's lips guided Him; and thus the paths of the destroyer were
never an instant entered on; the words of God's lips never lead there.
This the Lord showed in His temptation in the wilderness. In the paths
of Jehovah He looked to Him to hold up His goings. This is a part of
righteousness in man dependence. He called on God, sure that He would
hear Him. This is the confidence we have. Such was His path.

He applies it then as the ground of looking for the intervention of
God's power to protect Him as He does those that trust in Him from the
wicked that oppressed Him. Prosperous and lifted up as they were,
Jehovah was His refuge when He did not yet interfere. But He looked to
His openly doing so. Remark that the perfectness of moral character
gives nearness of confidence and sense of preciousness to Jehovah. Even
in us God would have this. We are of more value than many sparrows the
very hairs of our head counted. Here it is perfect, and He looks to be
kept as the apple of the eye that which is most preciously guarded by
him whose it is.

After all, these prosperous oppressors were but the hand of Jehovah men
of this world, who got all heart could desire from the outward
providence of God. But what a lesson among Jews, whose legal portion was
blessing in basket and store and children! (Compare the parables of
Dives and Lazarus, and of the unjust steward). Here then the breach with
this world, and a place in glory in the next, are fully contemplated.
Jehovah's face in righteousness, and likeness to Him when thus woke up
into another world, were well worth the portion of the men of this
world. But here, mark, death and another world are contemplated, though
deliverance is also (the remnant being more distinctly brought in). It
is the same as we have seen in Matthew 5, where also both are
contemplated. We have thus, in this first book, the Jews at the end of
days, but in circumstances analogous to what Christ's life was, that is,
moving as godly ones in the midst of the wicked people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 18](psa018)

</div>
