<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa001)  [Next](psa003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Psalms 1 and 2.

In Psalm 1, however, we have simply the godly remnant on the earth. I
say remnant, for the subject of the psalm is spoken of as characterized
by individual faithfulness. The ungodly, sinners, and scornful, are
around him. The law is his delight. He is a godly Jew, keeping apart
from the ungodly, and is blessed, and prospers. Such is the principle of
the psalm. But to make it good the earthly judgment must come in. There
the ungodly shall not stand, nor sinners in the congregation of the
righteous then left free from the pressure of those who cared not for
God. The psalm gives us the general character of the godly man, and the
result under the judicial government of God.

Another element is then brought in. Jehovah knows the way of the
righteous the way of the ungodly shall perish. It is a judgment on one
side, and a moral approbation before that judgment come on the other,
which is connected with the covenant-relationship of Jehovah with
Israel. We have seen that Christ was on earth this godly man, and took
His place among the faithful remnant, these excellent of the earth was
perfect in that place. So far this psalm takes Him in; but that is not
yet directly spoken of. Its subject is the character of the godly, and
the result under the government of God, Jehovah, in the midst of His
people. It is not yet suffering because of this. That is a circumstance
which will come out in its time. It is the character of the godly man in
presence of the wicked, and the result measured by the abiding
principles of God's government. Jehovah knows the righteous others shall
positively perish. Psalm 1 is the moral character of the remnant, their
position in the midst of the ungodly, and the general government of God,
and the connection of Jehovah and the righteous.

Besides this, remark that the psalm places both in presence of a
proximate judgment, by which the wicked are driven away like chaff, and
the righteous form the congregation; that is, it refers definitely to
the remnant in the last days. The principles of this psalm, the
character of the persons spoken of in it, and their position, are clear
enough, and important as laying one great part of the basis of the whole
superstructure of the Psalms God's government, and the trials of the
remnant which seemed to deny the government here spoken of, which is
only to be made good in judgment when the mystery of God shall be
finished. We are on the ground of Israel's place and of God's government
according to the law, but the righteous distinguished from the wicked,
and blessing, not the portion of all Israel as a whole, but of the
righteous who will form the congregation when judgment is executed.
Blessing is on the righteous, but these shall be the people when the
ungodly shall be driven away as chaff. It is just the doctrine of the
end of Isaiah (see [Isa 48:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#022); [Isa
57:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020); Isaiah 65; Isaiah 66). Only in
the last passage the judgment reaches the nations also.

A godly remnant of the people, delighting in the law, and the judgment
of God, resulting in the congregation of the righteous, according to the
true character of Jehovah, the wicked being driven away such are the
first truths presented to us, the moral government of God on the earth
made good by judgment in Israel. \[See Note \#1\] Hence the last days
are clearly in view.

The next great element of the condition of Israel and the government of
God, is Messiah the counsels of God concerning His Anointed. Here the
heathen are brought in, and form the principal subject of the psalm; and
again we find ourselves in the last days, when Christ's rights will be
made good against the kings of the earth and all opposers. But Israel is
again here the center and sphere of the accomplishment of these counsels
of God. The Anointed is to be King in Zion. The adversaries are the
great ones of the nations, the evil reaching alas! to the heads of
Israel who, as we shall find, "shall die like men, and fall like one of
the princes" "an ungodly nation" (Psalm 43) and as Peter also himself
has taught us in applying this psalm.

I have said that the counsels of God as to Messiah are the element here
introduced to us of the ways of God treated of in the Psalms. But the
psalm opens with the rising up of the nations to cast off His authority,
and Jehovah's who establishes it, the apostate Jews, as we have seen,
being engaged in this great rising alas! against God. The nations rage,
the peoples imagine a vain thing the kings of the earth, and the rulers
would break the bands of Jehovah and His Anointed together. But this
rising only brings in wrath and displeasure, against which all
resistance will be vain. He that sits in the heavens shall laugh, Adonai
\[See Note \#2\] has them in derision; Jehovah, in spite of all, has set
His King upon His holy hill of Zion. Such is the sure counsel of God
made good by His power. Man's presumption in resistance only brings his
ruin.

But more is then brought out. This King, who is He? Jehovah has said to
Him, "Thou art my Son: this day have I begotten thee." It is One who
begotten on what can be called "today," that is, begotten in time is
owned Son by Jehovah. It is not then here the blessed and most precious
truth of eternal sonship with the Father, though it is not to be
dissociated from it, as if it could be without it, but One who the
Anointed Man, and that holy thing born into this world with the title,
by His birth there also, of Son of God is owned such of Jehovah. Thus,
Paul tells us, this raising up Jesus (not raising up again) is the
accomplishing the promises made to the fathers, quoting the psalm in
confirmation. He quotes another passage for His resurrection and
incorruptibility. Thus we have Christ born into the earth, owned Son of
God by Jehovah.

But large counsels flow from this title. He has only to ask of Jehovah,
and the heathen are given Him for His inheritance and the uttermost
parts of the earth for His possession. He will rule them with a rod of
iron and break them in pieces like a potter's vessel break with
resistless power, ruling in judgment all that impiously and impotently
rise up against His throne. But this execution of judgment is not yet
accomplished. The psalm itself invites the kings and judges to
submission and humbly owning the Son, lest they perish if His wrath be
kindled but a little. He is Himself to be trusted; and who can claim
this but Jehovah?

This summons to the kings of the earth is founded, remark, on the
establishing the title of Christ to royal judgment and power on the
earth. But is Christ set King in Zion? He was cast out of it and hung
upon the cross for better blessing and higher glory, even that He had
with the Father before the world was, yet cast out of Zion, to which He
presented Himself as king. And as to the heathen and the earthly
inheritance, He has not yet asked for it; when He does, in the Father's
time, He will surely give it, and so His foes be His footstool. He
declares (John 17) that He did not ask about it, but about those given
Him out of it. The kings of the earth reign on, many bearing His name to
be found yet in rebellion when He shall take to Him His great power, and
the nations be angry, and His wrath come. No rod of iron has yet touched
them the potter's vessel, broken as nothing, is not now their image. The
Lord is not yet awakened to despise it. They reign by God's authority.
But there is no king yet in Zion. Christ has been rejected. Meanwhile we
know He is Adonai in the heavens.

We have now the great elements of latter-day history, a Jewish remnant
awaiting judgment, the wicked being still there, the heathen raging
against Jehovah and His Anointed, He that sits in heaven laughing at
their profitless rage, Jehovah setting Christ surely king in Zion, yea,
upon His asking, giving Him all the nations for His inheritance (the
submission of all to be enforced by resistless judgment). No sorrows
here, not even as to the remnant in Psalm 1; but the counsels and
decrees of God, and power such as none can resist. In a certain sense
the kings of the earth did stand up and the rulers take counsel
together, and as to earthly power and scenes succeeded. Christ was
rejected and did not resist.

Where then is the remnant viewed in the Jewish scene of this world's
history? What place have they? The great principles on which they stand
are unfolded in the Psalms 3-7. It will be easily seen now how the first
two psalms form the basis of the whole book, though the great body of
its contents are the consequences of their non-fulfillment in the time
to which those contents apply. Indeed in this the structure of the book
resembles that of a great multitude of psalms the thesis stated in the
first or few first verses, and then the circumstances, often quite the
opposite, through which the saint passes to arrive at what is expressed
at the beginning of the psalm. The five following psalms then unfold to
us, in general and in principle, the condition of the remnant and the
thoughts and feelings produced by the Spirit of Christ in them, in the
state of things consequent in Israel upon His personal rejection. The
circumstances in which they find themselves are not historically alluded
to till Psalms 9 and 10. Hence these psalms give the working of the
Spirit of Christ in them in the suited moral fruits, so as to display
the state of the godly remnant, the holy seed that is in Judah when all
is ruined. The principles of their state, the elements of feeling
unfolded in it, are brought before us. There is not the strong
expression which flows from the pressure of circumstances; but each
moral phase is exhibited, the different feelings to be produced by the
Spirit of Christ in relationship to God.

Note \#1

More specifically in the Jews. The remnant of the Jews are spared and
pass through the tribulation when two-thirds are cut off in the land
(Zechariah 13). The judgment of the ten tribes is outside the land, and
the rebels do not enter into it (Ezekiel 20). Israel is the general term
of promise as applied to the nation.

Note \#2

The Lord, but not the word LORD which represents generally Jehovah in
the English version; but that which gives the Lord as an official
relative title.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 3](psa003)

</div>
