<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa024)  [Next](psa026.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001.md)

Christ has been introduced, not indeed yet in glory, but associating
Himself with the remnant, and suffering even unto death for them. Hence
their whole case can be prophetically gone into. And here for the first
time we meet the confession of sins. It is not merely positionth at we
had from Psalms 3-7; nor the sense of circumstances which Psalms 11-15
gave, founded on Psalms 9, 10; but the whole case of the remnant, as
they will feel, entered into. The first word characterizes them: "Unto
thee, O Jehovah, will I lift up my soul." The godly man expresses his
trust in his God, and prays that he may not be ashamed, but that those
may that are willfully wicked. The remnant are distinguished thus in
Verse 3 ([Psa 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#003).md). There is the
desire to be shown Jehovah's ways, to be taught in His truth, for He was
the God of their salvation: they always waited on Him.

Next, Verse 6 ([Psa 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#006).md), he casts
himself on what God is in mercy, as He had shown Himself, and pleads
that He may not remember Israel's past sins, but himself according to
His mercy. He knows Jehovah, that He is good and upright, and will
therefore teach sinners in the way. His dealing with them is according
to His own nature and character where He works in grace, goodness, and
uprightness. This is an all-important point. Next, we get the present
character of the remnant: they are the meek of the earth; these Jehovah
would guide in judgment. All Jehovah's ways were mercy towards such; and
faithfulness to promises and righteousness infallibly marked them. In it
we have the fullest confession by the godly man of his own sin, not
merely the former sins of Israel. He looks only for mercy, his iniquity
is so great, and founds his hope on Jehovah's name. This is exceedingly
beautiful. Jehovah's name, as revealed in Israel, had in the previous
Verses of this psalm been fully entered into; His ways of mercy and
truth in Israel. The answer to this cry, in the effectual work of
Christ, though testified of in the prophets, and forming in God's sight
the ground-work of all, is not, I apprehend, at this time known by the
godly remnant, nor till they look on Him whom they have pierced; but
they have the ways of God, His promises, and the abundant declarations
and invitations, yea, pleadings, of Jehovah in the prophets, that if
their sins had been as scarlet, they should be as white as snow. All
this revelation was Jehovah's name to them; and to this they look,
something in the state, though not exactly, of the poor woman in the
city that was a sinner before she received the Lord's answer of peace.

In Verses 12-14 ([Psa 25:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#012).md) we get
the prophetic answer of the Spirit in hope; in Verses 15-21 ([Psa
25:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#015).md), the meek one. He lays his
whole case before Jehovah. The great result and true application is seen
in the last verse. This psalm lays the whole case of the remnant before
Jehovah in the expression to Him of a heart attracted and taught by
grace. It is a very full and distinct expression of their place and
pleadings before Him, and according to what He is. Some very definite
points are brought out: the confession of Israel's past sins, the
confession of his own by him who speaks. Mercy is looked to as the only
resource. Yet from so gracious a God they can count on His teaching
sinners. But these sinners are the meek of the earth who are to inherit
it. Integrity of heart characterizes them, and they trust in and wait
for Jehovah. Compare with this the incomparable picture of the remnant
in the beginning of Luke. The psalm is both beautiful and very fully
characteristic.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 26](psa026.md)

</div>
