<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa061)  [Next](psa063) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 62](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001)

In Psalm 62 confidence is more expressed. It is not looking from an
overwhelmed heart, but a free looking up, so that one is not
overwhelmed. His soul waits on God, has none else indeed, but does not
desire any other. There is a "how long? as well as a waiting. God will
certainly come in at the right time, and then it will be known to whom
power belongs. The psalm is spoken individually and may be in the mouth
of any one of the godly remnant. How long would they imagine mischief
against a man? What was their object? Why have him thus in hatred, and
by falsehood seek to root him out of his placethe place of God's
blessing, in which He had placed the godly in Israel? But this, I doubt
not, has special application to Christ as the One who was indeed in this
place, and against whom all their malice was directed to cast Him down
from His excellency. He invites also the people (Jewish) to trust in
God, to pour out their hearts before Him, and, putting Himself with them
in this place, says, not only, "my refuge is in God," but He is "a
refuge for us." In saying "my" He shows that He had it; but these
maschilim (the wise) shall instruct the many and turn to righteousness
many of them. \[See Note \#1\] Above all did that truly understanding
One do so. They were not to trust in the great and violent ones of the
earth. Power belongs to God, and with Him is mercy. They may trust in
Him as a God of righteousness, and walk uprightly and not be turned
aside by the prosperity of the wicked; for the Lord (Adonai) will reward
every man according to his works. It is the desire to cast down the poor
of the flock (because the wicked after all have the consciousness that
the excellency of God is with them, and specially with Christ), which
draws out this psalm, which expresses the faith of the saint, and the
warning to the people to trust God and not the mighty. They are exalted
in the earth; but true elevation from God is with Christ, and those who
thus walk, who fear God and obey the voice of His servant.

Note \#1

Compare [Dan 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003) and [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011); not "justify many," but turn to
righteousness, and bear, etc.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 63](psa063)

</div>
