<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa079)  [Next](psa081.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 80](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001.md)

In Psalm 80 it is remarkable how we are upon the ground of Israel here,
their past or future historical associations, not Christ (though all
depends on Him, of course) or the godly Jew in the midst of the apostate
assembly. We may have Jerusalem taken, confederacies, ancient
deliverances of Israel, in a word, national history or prophecy
concerning national circumstances; but all is external, not trials
within so that Christ should come personally on the scene, save when He
receives the congregation, though the godly in Israel are distinguished.
Jehovah also is not referred to, save prospectively, when they enter
into the new covenant, until the judgment of the last confederacy, which
makes Jehovah known as Most High over all the earth. These psalms do
not, I apprehend, exclude the Jews they are part of Israel; and then in
Judah, Jehovah will be revealed: only all Israel, including Joseph, is
historically brought in the nation. In this psalm God is addressed as
the Shepherd of Israel, who leads Joseph like a flock, and dwells
between the cherubim. This is, again, historic Israel. It is not God
calling from heaven, nor coming. He is seen by faith only when He is
there, having taken His place in Israel.

The psalm is a remarkable one. It sees God in Israel His throne of right
there, and looks to His shining forth, stirring up His strength to help
them; but still, as in Israel of old in the desert, Ephraim, Benjamin,
and Manasseh were immediately next the ark behind the tabernacle, and
the sanctuary went immediately before them on the march of the camp
(Numbers 10) This was Jehovah, God of hosts. Faith looks for His
presence in power with His people as it was then. The touching inquiry
is, How long the urgency of faith wilt thou be angry against the prayer
of thy people? This is also viewed in faith. The vine brought out of
Egypt was laid waste; its hedge (as, indeed, Isaiah had threatened them)
was broken down. Tears were the drink of Jehovah's people. They beseech
God to look down from heaven and visit the vine, the vineyard, and the
branch made strong for God HimselfDavid's family, I suppose. Still it
was God's rebuke; but further, it looks that the divine hand of power
should be upon the man of that power the Son of man whom God had made
strong for Himself. We can understand from this, and not merely from
Daniel 7 (which merely gives a peculiar place to the Son of man), why
the Lord gives Himself habitually the title of Son of man. He is the
One, then, indeed rejected, but upon whom God's right hand is to be in
power. To this the Lord refers, [Luk
22:69](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#069.md) (only reading "henceforth" for
"hereafter"). Come down in grace, His mission there was closed; from
that hour they would only know Him in exalted judicial power. It gives
large importance to the name, and taking in Psalm 8 brings the
deliverance of the remnant of Israel into the wide scope of His power;
for as Son of man He takes manhood up in His own Person according to the
counsels of God, only is over all the works of God's hand. He is Lord of
all, but as such, and in virtue of His own work for them, effectuates
this deliverance of the remnant of Israel. Thus the people of Jehovah
would be kept. Such is the cry of this psalm the coming in of power from
Jehovah, the God of Israel power laid upon the Son of man. The cry is
occasioned by the great distress in Israel; still Jehovah is looked for,
and faith sets Him in Israel. When He thus visited them, they would not
go back from Him; when He quickens them out of the dust, they will call
on His name (compare Psalm 2, Messiah).

Verses 3, 7, 19 ([Psa 80:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#003.md); [Psa
80:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#007.md); [Psa
80:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#019).md) give the theme of desire: still
outward deliverance is looked for. Verse 17 ([Psa
80:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#017).md) demands special attention in
the point of view already noticed, as showing what was in the Lord's
mind when presenting the immense anomaly that this Son of man should
suffer. Psalm 8, of course, gives the key, in the purposes of God, as to
both humiliation and exaltation, and man's place. It was this
humiliation the Lord pressed upon His disciples. Now they look for the
display of divine power in Him. The assembly, and its union with Christ,
and adoption individually known, are the only things I am aware of not
revealed in the Old Testament; all as to Christ was. Perhaps we may add
His present position as priest. Neither of these is mentioned in the
titles given to Christ in the first chapter of John's Gospel, nor His
being the Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 81](psa081.md)

</div>
