<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa078)  [Next](psa080.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 79](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#001.md)

Psalm 79 refers, in the plainest terms, to the inroad of the heathen,
especially the northern army (Joel 2 refers to a second attack, in which
the cry of the psalm is answered; Isaiah speaks of both), who had laid
waste Jerusalem and the temple, and shed the blood of the servants of
Jehovah. There is the owning of former sins, and mercy looked to tender
mercies. The plea is the plea called for in Joel 2, and referred to in
previous psalms (42 and 43), "why should the heathen say Where is their
God?" and it demands that He may be known by the avenging the blood of
His servants. Thus His people and the sheep of His pasture would give
Him thanks for ever. Jehovah's anger is seen, and so far there is faith
to say How long? That is, though covenant mercies are not enjoyed by the
remnant (yea, quite the contrary), yet faith looks to them, and sees
Jehovah angry with His people; hence if such, and He thus in
relationship with them, He cannot give them up. It is only "How long?"
Yet the direct cry is to God, even here, not Jehovah. Israel is not
restored to his covenant place. There he will be in known covenant
relationship, and then in grace, nor will this ever be lost sight of.
Here they were not, but cast out on their failure under a conditional
covenant, and though faith in promises sustained them, the new covenant
was not entered into; they stood outside blessing, looking backward and
forward, having nothing now. This is never the Christian's state. In
applying it to himself he makes himself a Jew. For while Christ is
hidden on high as to them, the Holy Ghost is come down to us while He is
there, and we know that He is accepted and glorified as having stood for
us, and that we are in Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 80](psa080.md)

</div>
