<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa085)  [Next](psa087) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 86](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001)

Psalm 86. This psalm is the meek yet confiding and confident appeal of a
soul conscious of its godly feelings towards Jehovah and looking to the
results of relationship with Him. We have had Jehovah since Psalm 84,
which is founded on these covenant relationships in which the remnant
feel themselves to be, though awaiting full blessing in the land. Still
it is yet in distress, for the people are not revived nor set in their
covenant blessings in the land. Holy ([Psa
86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)) is pious or gracious (chasid,
not kodesh, "holy"). The three requests of the psalm are, "Bow down
thine ear and hear me" ([Psa 86:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001)).
The gracious attention of Jehovah is called for to give ear to the
prayer of the suppliant; then to attend to the voice of his supplication
([Psa 86:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#006)); that is, he looks for his
request being granted; thirdly, to be taught in the way of truth ([Psa
86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)). Jehovah's mercies in the
terrible conflict of the remnant are then owned; but he who thus cried,
still looked for His interference in his behalf, that they that hate him
may be ashamed, because Jehovah has helped and comforted him. How the
state of the remnant, like Job, brings out the great conflict between
the power of Satan and divine deliverance, but in which, however low he
may be brought, the godly soul owns the source of all to be Jehovah,
though his feet may well nigh slip in seeing the prosperity of the
ungodly! It is not a psalm of complaint nor bitterness of soul, but of
one who is yet poor and needy, but has tasted the comfort of Jehovah's
goodness.

It is to be remarked that, save the cases noticed, Lord is Adonai, not
Jehovah. This is not the same as Jehovah, that is, the covenant name of
God with Israel in eternal faithfulness here Adonai, one who has taken
power and is in the relationship of lordship to those who call. Hence in
fact we own Christ to be in this place "our Lord Jesus Christ"; and so
it will be for Jews, though, till they see Him, they will not own Him
fully thus. This Adonai is Elohim. Death and human power were before the
thoughts of the godly, but the comfort of a known Jehovah as a support.
They had found deliverance, but it was not complete in blessing. The
psalm is essentially the pious appeal to Jehovah of the returned.
remnant of Israel in the land; but in the main its spirit is that into
which Christ fully entered, but it is not directly applicable to Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 87](psa087)

</div>
