<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa062)  [Next](psa064.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 63](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001.md)

If Psalm 61 has been the cry of depression, Psalm 62 the confidence and
encouragement of trust in God, Psalm 63 is the longing of the soul,
still as cast out and far from the sanctuary (so we can speak of heaven,
for we have seen the power and glory there by faith); but having, by
faith in the lovingkindness itself, praise as its portion even in the
wilderness, marrow and fatness to feed upon. It is a beautiful psalm in
this respect; for it knows God; praise is thus begotten in the soul and
for all times. There are two points: first, a most sweet word because
God's lovingkindness is better than life, his lips praise God, though
life in the wilderness be sorrow; secondly, because He has been his
help, therefore he will rejoice in His protection. Verse 8 ([Psa
63:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#008).md) describes the practical
resulthis soul followed hard after God, and God's right hand upheld him.
There was the longing to see the power and the glory as he had seen it;
the present satisfying of the soul as with marrow and fatness, and that
in the silent watches of the night, when all outward excitement was
hushed and the soul left to itself. Those that sought the soul of the
righteous to destroy it should go down into Hades, but the king shall
rejoice in God. Those that own His name should glory, but the false ones
who departed from Him should be put to shame. It is again the king, and
applies to Christ in a higher sense than to the remnant. For Him it was
the desire to see the glory from which He was descended; for the Jew it
was in the temple; for us, a Christ who has been revealed by faith to
us, who have seen the glory and sanctuary into which He is entered.

There is a difference between Psalm 84 and this psalm:that is the desire
to revisit the sanctuary of God; this, desire after God Himself. There
the tabernacles of Jehovah, a covenant God, are amiable; here God
Himself is a delight when there are no tabernacles to go to. \[See Note
\#1\]

Note \#1

For Christ and for the new man, the world is a desert, without anything
in it to refresh the soul. But divine favor being better than life, we
can praise while we live; our soul is satisfied as with marrow and
fatness. The saint is not in the sanctuary, but has seen God in it. His
desire is after God Himself. Christ could literally say this. "He hath
seen the Father": we have seen Him in Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 64](psa064.md)

</div>
