<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa067)  [Next](psa069.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 68](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001.md)

Psalm 68 follows on these psalms, being the celebration of the
introduction of Israel into the position spoken of in them. Still it has
a complete and individual character of its own. It begins with the
formula employed when the camp broke up in the wilderness under the
guidance of God, the pillar rising up and going before them. So it is
now. God takes this place at the head of His people. It is thus
introduced suddenly with great majesty. Let God arise so His enemies are
scattered before Him: as wag before the fire, the wicked perish at His
presence. The righteous may be glad and rejoice before God, yea,
exceedingly rejoice. He shall appear to the shame of the mighty wicked,
and the righteous poor will be glorified. Thus the purport of this psalm
is most clear. But the character of Him who thus interferes is further
most beautifully unfolded. He is a father of the fatherless, a judge of
widows. He makes the solitary to dwell in families, the rebellious in a
dry land. Judgment is the true and gracious deliverance of the blessed
God. And now His people can celebrate this goodness.

History is then recapitulated ([Psa
68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007).md). Such was He when He brought
forth Israel from Egypt. At Sinai the earth shook at His presence. But
He refreshed the heritage of His weary people, when He had prepared of
His goodness for the poor. But now present facts told that tale still
more to their hearts. Adonai's word went forth. The glad tidings were
chanted by Israel's daughters in a great company ([Psa
68:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011).md). Kings fled apace. What a
sudden and complete deliverance it was! The quietest home-stayer divided
the spoil, for it was the Lord's doing. Then Israel came out in all her
beauty, though they had been lying in poverty and wretchedness. \[See
Note \#1\] In all the pretensions and striving of the nations, this is
God's will. God challenges these pretensions of human power; "Why leap
ye, ye high hills?"the seats of human power. Zion was God's hill, He
would make it His perpetual abode. For the sake of His remnant He
scattered the kings. In the midst of them He would dwell. But whence all
this deliverance? The Lord had ascended on high, received gifts as man
and for men; yea, even for rebellious Israel, who was now in question,
that Jehovah might dwell among them.

This brings out praises to the God of their salvation; for their God was
the God of salvation. Oh! how could Christ witness that? But they were
still mortal men down here. The deliverance was earthly and temporal,
though of saints. But He would be their guide always, even unto death.
But He would destroy the wicked. What was really the occasion of all
this burst of joy (of which the heart was too full to tell quietly the
occasion) is now however drawn out; yet the exultation still casts its
light and joy over it. Israel was set up again in power; her enemies
destroyed; the beauty of her temple-order restored. The tribes would
come up, the kings bring presents. God had commanded strength, and they
look to His strengthening what is wrought. The subjection of every enemy
or mighty one follows. Princes would come out of Egypt, and Ethiopia
stretch out her hands to God. The kingdoms of the earth are all called
upon then to sing praises to Adonai. Strength is to be ascribed to God;
but His excellency, that in which He is exalted, is over Israel, and, in
the clouds of His dwelling-place is power, His strength watches over His
people. It is the full restoration of Israel's blessing and glory, and
indeed much more than restoration; and this consequent upon the
exaltation of the Lord to receive gifts as man.

But, while it is the intervention of God in the power of judgment, for
the blessing of the remnant and putting down human power and every
haughtiness of man's will "God's arising" before His earthly people and
His enemies fleeing there are some points in it, which are brought out
by this, which it is well to notice. First, the use of Adonai. His name
Jah is introduced ([Psa 68:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004.md) and [Psa
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018).md), but it is always Adonai as
spoken of. It is not the covenant name of relationship, though Jah
recall it, but power in exercise, Lordship divine Lordship but still
Lordship. It is what Thomas owned when he saw the Lord, it would seem;
not, tell my brethren "I ascend unto my Father and your Father," etc. It
is God; but as the Lord manifested here in power as [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004.md); only there He is not redescended.
Hence here we have His ascension as a past fact. It is not that God
gives, but He who is Adonai has gone up and received gifts as, and in
respect of, man. In His Adam (last Adam) character He has received them,
having led the enemy captive ([Act
2:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033).md); here clearly the ascended
man, though much more, and as head having received the gifts "in Man"
the human head of glory He shed forth the gifts (Acts 2, Ephesians 4).
But though as, and for, and in, man, yet there was also a special object
added, yea, even for the rebellious, that Jah Elohim might dwell among
them. Here the remnant, the Israel of our psalm, comes in. Hence the
apostle does not quote it, but stops half-way at His receiving them for
man.

In the following psalms we find the humiliation of this blessed One.
What a contrast! Yet how far indeed from being less glorious or of
feebler interest in the eyes of us who have learned and know who He is.

Note \#1

The force of the word is much disputed; its sense, I suppose, is
evident. It is used for the stables of sheep or cattle.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 69](psa069.md)

</div>
