<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa089)  [Next](psa091.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 90](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001.md)

BOOK 4 - Psalms 90-106

The fourth Book is not so markedly separated from the third, as the
preceding three from one another; and specially the third from the first
two, because the third, while prophetically announcing the blessing,
describes a state of things which leaves the expectation of divine
interference to bring in the blessing in full play. The first had given
the great principles of the position of the Jewish remnant in connection
with the history of Christ; in the second, they are viewed as outside
Jerusalem; the third turns to the condition of Israel as a nation
restored to their land, but not yet in the full blessing of Jehovah; the
fourth, as I have said, completes this by the coming of Messiah. This
connects the nation and Christ, as well as the nation and Jehovah. Thus
the book is introduced with the nation's connection with Jehovah,
looking to His returning and finally blessing them, that His beauty may
be upon them. The second psalm of the book (91) shows Christ's
connection with the nation as man in this world; the third psalm (92)
gives, in prophetic celebration, the great result, into the whole
establishment of which the Psalms 93 to 100 enter; then some deeply
interesting details as to Christ (Psalms 101, 102); while the general
result, as displaying Jehovah's ways, is treated in the praises of
Psalms 103, 104, as to Israel and the earth; Jehovah's dealings from the
beginning, and Israel's ways, on the contrary, with Him, in Psalms 105,
106, which close the book.

The first psalm (90) of the book places the people that is, the godly
believing part of it on the ground of faith in Jehovah, and expresses
the desire of deliverance and blessing from His hand. First, the godly
Israelite owns Jehovah to have been the dwelling-place of Israel for all
generations, their shelter and their home; next, He was the everlasting
God before the world was, and turned and returned man in a moment, as
seemed to Him good: time was no time to Him. Now Israel was consumed by
His anger. But this was not all. Though His power was absolute, its use
was not arbitrary. It was true and holy moral government; and unfeigned
confession is made, not merely of open faults, but of that holy
government of God which sets secret sins in the light of His countenance
(for so, blessed be God, He does). Their days were passed in this wrath.
They look that the pride of their heart may be so broken, their feeble
mortality remembered, that the self-sufficiency, so natural to our
heart, might be done away with, and that heart applied to wisdom the
fear of God. This putting of man in his place and God in His, connected
with faith, as Israel's in Jehovah, is full of instruction as to the
moral position suited for the remnant in that dayin its principle ever
true. Thus Jehovah is looked to to return for deliverance, with the word
of faith how long? and, as regards His servants, that His work might
appear, as the affliction came from Him; and that the beauty of Jehovah
their God might be upon them, and their work established by Him. It is
the true faith of relationship, but of relationship with the supreme God
in His holy government upon earth. But, if so, Jehovah is the God of
Israel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 91](psa091.md)

</div>
